S/PV.7052

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7052nd meeting

Tuesday, 29 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Musayev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council Working Methods
Letter dated 16 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/613)

13-53502 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1353502*

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council Working Methods
Letter dated 16 October 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/613)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt,
Estonia, Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine
and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/613, which contains a letter dated
16 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Azerbaijan addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thanks the presidency of Azerbaijan
for having convened today’s important open
debate — important not only for the members of the
Security Council but also for the general membership.
Argentina has historically advocated that efforts
to improve transparency, inclusivity, openness,
democratization and efficiency in the work of the
Security Council should be ongoing. Argentina is
therefore honoured to have the responsibility of chairing
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
It is fundamental to recognize the positive
developments that have taken place in recent years,
2/33

29/10/2013

including the holding of debates such as today’s, which
provide an opportunity to all Members not members of
the Council to make proposals to improve our working
methods and democratize our decision-making
mechanism. Those developments are attributable to
the commitment of Council members, whom we thank,
and to their continuing responsibility to improve the
Council’s working methods. However, that shared
responsibility to improve our working methods is also
a response to the ongoing support and initiatives of the
general membership, which appreciate all opportunities
to engage in a more interactive dialogue with the
Council so as to air the concerns of all Member States.
Argentina has engaged with enthusiasm in
its chairmanship the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as
it has always done during its previous chairmanships
of the Working Group. We acknowledge that the other
members of the Council have consistently supported our
efforts to seek practical ways of making the Council’s
work more transparent and of improving its dialogue
with the general membership, the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), and other bodies.
In August, we adopted note S/2013/515 on Security
Council dialogue with the broader membership and
other bodies in response to a commitment undertaken
years ago by the Council. Some of its elements are
reflected in note 507 of 2010. The note contains
provisions on open meetings, interactive dialogues,
Arria Formula meetings, invitations to the President
of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairs of
country-specific configurations to informal dialogues,
the need for subsidiary bodies to submit substantive
information to the wider membership and to add
momentum to their work, and the modalities of wrapup meetings.
The last item on that list must be stressed.
Several members of the Council acknowledge that its
methodology should and must be improved. Argentina
recognizes in particular the commitment of the Working
Group to take up the issue of wrap-up meetings so as
to develop them to their full potential for providing
summaries of the Security Council’s monthly activities
and for highlighting for the general membership the
varying approaches and priorities of Council members
on agenda items. The wrap-up meetings are very
valuable, and we therefore urge all members to convene
them at the end of their respective presidencies and to

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

raise in the Working Group the issue of how to enhance
their interactive aspects and effectiveness.
Yesterday, 28 October, we adopted presidential note
S/2013/630, concerning consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries. With respect to the note,
the Working Group was always aware of the fact that
consultations with TCCs and PCCs are critical because
they improve the Council’s ability to take effective and
timely decisions in exercising its responsibilities. Like
many other aspects, consultations with TCCs and PCCs
must be improved on an ongoing basis, as reflected
in the fact that in every debate on working methods,
the issue of dialogue with TCCs and PCCs is noted by
many members.
In note 630, the members of the Security Council
acknowledge the need to fully utilize all existing
options and to continue to improve consultations. The
note, which complements resolutions and presidential
notes on this matter, addresses two major aspects:
consultations with TCCs and PCCs and the provision of
information to those countries. It calls for consultations
with TCCs and PCCS, including at their request, with
respect to urgent situations that affect their operations,
in particular regarding the security of their personnel in
the field. It also calls for consultations in other important
circumstances in a peacekeeping operation, such as
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
drawdown, an increase or decrease in personnel, and
termination.
I note that in addition to the meetings organized
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Council could convene informal meetings with a view
to engaging in an interactive dialogue with TCCs and
PCCs. With respect to the provision of information, the
note indicates that the Secretariat will provide potential
TCCs and PCCs with all the information they require
to take the decisions to participate in a peacekeeping
operation. The note addresses a variety of issues, and I
reiterate that it answers all of the concerns of the general
membership, which have been heard and heeded. The
note points out that, with respect to the renewal of
mandates, the Secretary-General shall provide a copy
of his reports to the TCCs and PCCs sufficiently in
advance of meetings.
To conclude, as on previous occasions when
Argentina has chaired the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, we are
convinced that, without impact on its decision-making

S/PV.7052

abilities, the Council could and must be more transparent
in its its relations with the general membership. I am
grateful for the support I have received from all the
other members of the Working Group, who have without
exception worked in a constructive spirit, which I trust
we will continue to enjoy.
I also thank the group of members that are engaged
in an analysis of the concerns of general membership in
respect of this issue, as well as all members taking part
in today’s debate. Their views assist in the ongoing task
of improving our working methods.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Azerbaijani presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and for providing a very useful
concept paper to guide our discussions (S/2013/613,
annex). This open debate has become an established
annual tradition. It is a good tradition, since it allows
non-members of the Council to share their views on
improving the working methods of the Council.
This debate can feed the discussions in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Matters. Since the beginning of the
year, the Luxembourg has actively contributed to the
Working Group, which is chaired with competence and
commitment by Ambassador Perceval of Argentina. I
thank my colleague and her team for their efforts to
improve the efficiency and enhance the transparency of
the work of the Council.
Thanks to these efforts, this year we have adopted
presidential notes S/2013/515 and S/2013/630 to
strengthen exchanges and dialogue with non-member
States, in particular countries that contribute troops
and police to peacekeeping missions. The two notes
strengthen the provisions of note S/2010/507. They give
the body to the commitment undertaken by our Heads of
State and Government on participation, accountability
and transparency at the World Summit of 2005.
Tangible progress has been made in recent years.
I note the increased use of new technologies, such
as video-teleconferencing, the improvement of the
Security Council web site, the more frequent resort
to Arria Formula meetings and interactive informal
dialogues, for example to address issues related to
the International Criminal Court. Upon accession to
Security Council membership, Luxembourg also took
stock of the efforts made to consult with newly elected
members about the leadership of subsidiary bodies. We

13-535023/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

hope that this process will be made ​​more inclusive in
the future, on the basis of note S/2013/937, adopted in
December 2012.
In our view, however, there is still room to improve
the working methods of the Council, particularly in
five areas.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission can provide
additional information useful in situations of transition
and thereby facilitate informed decision-making by
the Council. I would therefore reiterate our suggestion
that the chairs of the Commission’s country-specific
configurations to participate, on a case-by-case basis,
in the informal consultations of the Council.
Secondly, we must continue to ensure the best
possible interaction between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union, in the context of crisis prevention.
The Council should seek to make the best use of the
expertise available to these organizations and other
stakeholders, such as the European Union.
Thirdly, the Security Council should further
employ the means at its disposal to prevent conflicts.
We of course welcome the more regular holding, since
the beginning of the year, of meetings summarizing
the month’s work, which allows us not only to draw
lessons from the concluding month but also to look into
situations that could potentially require the Council’s
attention in future. Nevertheless, we are convinced that
greater recourse to horizon-scanning briefings from
the Secretariat will make it possible for the Council
to more resolutely take a preventive approach and,
ultimately, to better assume its responsibilities.
Fourthly, the Security Council would benefit from
further utilizing the various sources of information
available in the United Nations system. The light shed
by special committees on the prevention of genocide
and the responsibility to protect could be useful when
populations are at risk of mass atrocities. The regular
contributions of the Special Representatives on children
and armed conflict and on combating sexual violence
in armed conflict also seem to us to be important.
Lastly, we support the proposals and considerations
under way for the right of the veto not be used to block
a decision by the Council to prevent or halt genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. In our view,
such progress would make it possible to strengthen the
Council’s credibility and its ability to act.

4/33

29/10/2013

In conclusion, I would like in advance to thank the
many Member States that will put forward proposals
in the course of this open debate. In particular, I
am grateful for the efforts of our colleagues in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which, in line with the work of the group of five small
nations, are committed to strengthen the responsibility,
coherence and transparency of the Security Council. We
count on everyone’s suggestions to help the Council to
rise to the level of the task that the Member States have
conferred upon it by virtue of the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, to take the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and to act on behalf of Members to carry out the
duties incumbent upon the Council by virtue of that
responsibility.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States welcomes today’s open debate, and we
thank Ambassador Perceval for her diligent work as
Chair of the Council’s Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions.
Our discussions of the working methods of the
Council are important to ensuring that this body
remains able to address the challenges of the twentyfirst century. On behalf of the membership of the United
Nations, the Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is essential that, in carrying out that role, its work be as
effective, efficient and transparent as possible. Article
30 of the Charter mandates the Council to adopt its own
rules of procedure. In doing so, we must recognize the
need for other Member States, which play a vital role in
supporting and enforcing our decisions, to be informed
of and appropriately involved in the Council’s work.
Peacekeeping is one of the most important tools
that the international community has at its disposal, and
we recognize the importance of close cooperation with
troop- and police-contributing countries. We therefore
welcome the fact that the Informal Working Group
recently considered ways in which such cooperation
could be strengthened. We continue to urge both
Council members and troop- and police-contributing
countries to take full advantage of the private meetings
the Council holds in advance of each mandate renewal.
In addition to formal meetings, the Council may
need at times to meet informally with troop- and
police-contributing countries to discuss urgent issues
that may arise. The Council did just that in May when the
troop contributors to the United Nations Diseangement

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Observer Force (UNDOF) met with Council members
to discuss the deteriorating security environment in
UNDOF’s area of operations and threats to United
Nations peacekeepers there. That productive exchange
contributed to the development of solutions to overcome
the new challenges that UNDOF peacekeepers faced.
We should consider such meetings in future for other
peacekeeping operations, when appropriate.
Increased cooperation with regional and other
relevant organizations has been a hallmark of our work
during the past 12 months. Yesterday’s ministerial-level
meeting on strengthening cooperation with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see S/PV.7050)
marked a deepening of the Council’s ties with that
important organization. On Yemen, the SecretaryGeneral of the Gulf Cooperation Council briefed
the Security Council on the implementation of the
transition plan at a high-level meeting in September
(see S/PV.7037). Finally, the open debate in August
presided over by President Fernández of Argentina
(see S/PV.7015) allowed Member States to discuss the
Council’s cooperation with a range of regional and
subregional organizations. The presidential statement
adopted during that meeting (S/PRST/2013/12) is a
useful compilation of the Council’s practice in this area.
The Council has continued to welcome the Chairs
of the various country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in Council
meetings. The United States has consistently pushed
for greater transparency in the work of subsidiary
bodies. The Counter-Terrorism Committee has held
more open meetings and has increased its interaction
with civil society during the past year. Sanctions
Committee Chairs have also organized open briefings
for the broader United Nations membership to discuss
sanctions regime objectives and committee activities.
The Council’s continued use of Arria Formula meetings
and its extension of invitations to non-governmental
organizations and expert briefers, such as the important
meeting in July with the members of the Syrian
opposition coalition, are an important tool for us to
better hear views beyond those of Member States. We
should take advantage of opportunities to make greater
use of that format.
As President of the Security Council in July,
the United States was responsible for preparing the
Council’s general report to the General Assembly
(A/68/2), which is scheduled for adoption tomorrow. In
summarizing the Council’s work over the course of the

S/PV.7052

year, we aim to strike a careful balance to maintain a
useful amount of substance while also keeping the report
as concise and legible as possible. We hope the report
will be a useful tool for those interested in reviewing
the Council’s work. In the same vein, my delegation
organized a briefing at the end of our presidency to
share the highlights of the month with Member States.
We believe that such informal briefings offer the
greatest opportunity for a meaningful discussion of the
Council’s work with the broader membership.
A more effective Security Council must remain our
collective goal. Increased transparency by the Council
and engagement with the broader United Nations
membership can support that goal. But proposals must
be carefully assessed to ensure that transparency and
effectiveness are mutually reinforcing and not at crosspurposes.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
building on our recent practice by holding this meeting
as an open debate to enable Member States not on the
Council to participate. The number of those inscribed
on the speakers’ list reflects the high level of interest
on this issue and its importance to all Members. An
efficient and transparent Security Council is in the
interests of all Member States as we confront new and
different challenges to international peace and security.
There have been many positive developments in
recent years, including more open meetings, Arria
Formula meetings, the use of video conferencing,
meetings with troop-contributing countries and
horizon-scanning and wrap-up meetings. In many ways,
the Security Council has proved the most adaptable of
all United Nations bodies. But today I want to focus
on just two aspects of this issue. The first concerns
the procedural aspects of the Council’s work, and the
second examines how our working methods allow us
to exercise our responsibilities in the area of conflict
prevention. The Councl is regularly engaged on matters
that are current threats to international peace and
security. But if we engage and exert influence at the
right moment, we could prevent those situations from
becoming threats. Then we will be fully exercising our
responsibilities.
On the first issue, the imperative for an efficient
Council is indisputable. The Council agenda is already
full and it is growing. The time for meaningful
discussion and exchange within the Council is being

13-535025/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

squeezed as a result. A larger Council, which we fully
support, would redouble that pressure. Those points
alone make a clear case for ensuring that the work of
the Council is made as efficient as possible.
There are a number of ways in which we can achieve
a more efficient Council, as we demonstrated during
the presidency of the United Kingdom in June. Simply
by starting meetings promptly and fully observing the
guidelines set out in presidential note S/2010/507 with
regard to the length of interventions, we concluded a
substantial amount of business in June.
But we should go further. I, for one, would support
implementing in the Security Council the African
Union Peace and Security Council practice of turning
off the microphones of speakers who have exceeded
their allotted time. That would expedite business and
allow more speakers to be heard. It is entirely possible
to keep to short interventions without limiting the
ability of Member States to fully express their views. I
am sure that this would also be the case if we adopted
the African Union practice.
I congratulate Ambassador Perceval, as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, for restating and building
on established measures for conducting business
efficiently and transparently. Presidential note 507 has
been an important reference point in that regard, as have
the two notes issued earlier this year (S/2013/515 and
S/2013/630). We should make sure that we implement
their contents fully.
My second point, with regard to maintaining
international peace and security, is as much about
conflict prevention as it is about conflict management
or resolution. The Council should take full advantage of
mechanisms at its disposal, such as horizon scanning,
to exercise a preventative function. Horizon-scanning
meetings are an opportunity for the Secretariat to brief
on issues of concern. Discussions on any other business
or requests for urgent Council meetings can also be
held on rapidly evolving and emerging situations.
Many Council members have used those mechanisms
in recent months.
In the past week, Council members used those
tools to discuss the situations in the eastern part of
the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo (see
S/PV.7046) and the Sudan (see S/PV.7048). It is very
welcome that Council members are approaching our

6/33

29/10/2013

conflict-prevention responsibilities in that proactive
way.
Prior to that, such discussions have covered Egypt
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
We also welcome the Secretariat’s readiness to bring
troubling situations to the attention of the Council,
as was recently done with the Maldives and Guinea,
making Article 99 of the Charter an active tool for
conflict prevention.
Horizon-scanning briefings have covered Syria and
its neighbouring countries, the Sahel and the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, among many other issues.
The Council issued a press statement following
the discussion of Guinea (SC/11159) in the past week,
and we hope that the parties in Guinea will act on it,
because elsewhere we have seen that positive responses
to Council products following those forward-looking
discussions are possible.
The parties in the Sudan and South Sudan have
been made fully aware of the Council’s views on the
various issues in urgent need of resolution, including
Abyei.
The
presidential
statement
on
Yemen
(S/PRST/2013/3), issued in February, sent a clear
message to would-be spoilers seeking to undermine the
National Dialogue and transition in Yemen.
Adopting a conflict-prevention mind-set and using
such mechanisms of working practices gives the Council
a powerful tool kit to examine and respond to emerging
crises. We should not be afraid to use it. Early effective
responses from the Council can go a long way towards
preventing further deterioration. We have only to look
at the situation in Syria to see how a lack of action over
many months allowed the conflict to escalate, with the
horrific consequences that we see today.
A modern, transparent, efficient Council is plainly
in the interests of all Member States. The risks of not
achieving that goal are equally plain, particularly in the
area of conflict prevention.
As I said in June at the end of the presidency of
the United Kingdom (see S/PV.6992), improving the
working methods is not merely desirable, it is essential.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this open debate
on the working methods of the Security Council, as well
as for the concept paper (S/2013/613, annex) that was

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

circulated to that end. We hope that our deliberations
today will help renew the commitment to make
progress in improving the efficiency, transparency and
interactivity of the Security Council.
Similarly, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, Mrs. María Cristina
Perceval, for her presentation and her outstanding
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
In recent years, the working methods of the Security
Council have evolved in a positive direction thanks
to several factors, including the contributions and
proposals that have been made both by the members of
the Council as well as those outside it. While sometimes
the rhythm of those changes is not at the pace many
of us want, they continue to demonstrate the primary
importance that Member States attribute to the matter.
First, we acknowledge the progress made in
improving some practices and measures, which are
reflected in note S/2010/507 and the successive notes
of the presidency. In that regard, the progress that has
been achieved in the Informal Working Group this year
and the measures taken to improve the internal aspects
of the Council’s work are commendable.
Secondly, we note that the access to information
by delegations of Member States that do not belong
to the Council has been improving over time. That is
due, in part, to the growing call for member countries
to inform their counterparts on all matters that, for
obvious reasons, do not deserve confidentiality owing
to their sensitivity. I must say that our delegation has
contributed to that practice.
In the same vein, the improvements to the Council’s
website, which contains abundant and valuable
information, have been moving in a positive direction.
It is also worth mentioning the work undertaken by
some non-governmental organizations seeking to give
greater access to the Council’s work to delegations,
academics and even the general public. Among those,
Security Council Report deserves special mention.
However, Guatemala believes there is still room for
progress in certain areas. In that regard, we would like
to highlight some of the practices that can be improved
or implemented systematically.
First, we believe it is important to maintain the
Council’s trend of holding public meetings with some
regularity. Including the entire membership when

S/PV.7052

it comes to issues affecting international peace and
security undoubtedly contributes to achieving an
understanding of the seriousness of conflict situations.
Secondly, we believe it is essential to further
promote interaction between the Security Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries. Guatemala
believes that strengthening the flow of information can
broaden the base of countries that participate in that
important work of the Organization. We also recall the
importance of maintaining the interaction between the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and troopand police-contributing countries. We commend, in
this regard, the work done this year by the delegation
of Pakistan as Chair of the informal working group on
the issue.
Thirdly, we would give priority to continuing
to improve interaction between the chairs of the
subsidiary bodies with all Member States. For example,
the briefings in which all Council members participate
have proved very useful and facilitate the exchange of
information on the work of the subsidiary bodies. In the
same vein, we highlight the importance of continuing
to consider the question of the selection criteria for
experts of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
in accordance with the note by the President contained
in document S/2006/997.
Fourthly, we believe that closer cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations is necessary for crisis management
in armed conflict, and that, among other things, the
number of consultations between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations that play
an active role in crisis resolution and the resolution of
armed conflicts should be increased.
Fifthly, we have found that the practice of holding
wrap-up meetings — a practice that has been resumed
this year — to be useful, as are the briefings on the
work of the Council held at the end of each presidency,
as mechanisms to increase the transparency of its work.
In conclusion, we believe that we must continue
to innovate and adopt other measures to improve the
working methods of the Security Council, and that,
with the political will of Member States, particularly
the permanent members, this can be achieved.
Transparency, accountability and coherence are key
elements that the Security Council should observe in
all its activities, approaches and procedures.

13-535027/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Azerbaijan for convening today’s meeting. This
is the sixth time that the Security Council has held
an open debate on its working methods. This fully
demonstrates the importance that the Security Council
attaches to improving its working methods.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. As the core of the United Nations collective
security machinery, the Security Council has major
responsibilities in responding to threats and challenges
of all kinds to international security. Following the Cold
War, the Security Council has conducted preventive
diplomacy efforts, resolved disputes through mediation
and good offices, and made important efforts and
obtained positive results in peacekeeping, post-conflict
rebuilding and peacebuilding.
In recent years, the broader United Nations
membership has been asking the Security Council to
improve its working methods and transparency so as
to better fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it by the
Charter of the United Nations. China fully understands
that concern and pays sincere attention to the broader
membership. China has been making sincere efforts,
with other members of the Council, to push for
positive results in improving the Council’s working
methods. There has been an increase in the number of
open meetings held every year. The President of the
Council holds monthly briefings to non-members on
the progress of the Council’s work, and this has now
become Council practice. The Council also attaches
importance to informal interactive dialogues and
Arria Formula meetings, inter alia. In that way, the
Council can strengthen its exchanges and interaction
with Member States, regional organizations and civil
society.
This year, the Security Council has adopted
presidential statements on improving the efficiency of
the open meetings of the Security Council, maintaining
regular communications with the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations,
and increasing its exchanges with regional organizations
and troop-contributing countries.
The Charter of the United Nations provides that the
Security Council formulate its own rules of procedure.
China earnestly supports the full implementation of the
2010 note by the President of the Council (S/2010/507)

8/33

29/10/2013

on improving the Council’s working methods, which
sums up experiences and explores specific measures
and recommendations for improving the working
methods of the Council, increasing its transparency and
improving its authority and efficiency so as to facilitate
the Council playing a greater role in maintaining
international peace and security. I would like to make
the following points.
First, in order to better fulfil its responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, the
Council should focus its resources and efforts on dealing
with major and pressing issues that are significant for
international peace and security. In recent years, the
number of thematic debates in the Council has been
on the increase. Some of these debates have even
exceeded the mandate of the Council and eroded the
scope of work of other United Nations bodies. The
Security Council and other United Nations bodies
have their respective functions and they should use
their comparative advantages and expertise and avoid
duplication of efforts.
Secondly, broad consensus should be reached
through full negotiations and patient consultations
during the Council’s decision-making process. It
should be ensured that all members of the Council have
sufficient time to study the relevant draft resolutions or
draft presidential statements. The Council should avoid
forcibly pushing for drafts on which there are major
differences of opinion in order to preserve the unity of
the Council.
Thirdly, the Security Council should heed
the opinions of the Member States, especially the
ideas of the countries involved. China supports the
strengthening of the Council’s coordination and
cooperation with regional organizations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
so as to fully utilize the comparative advantages of
regional organizations in dealing with issues in which
they have advantages.
Fourthly, the Security Council should endeavour
to strengthen its communication and interaction
with troop-contributing countries. We support the
Security Council in fully utilizing the working groups
on peacekeeping and troop-contributing countries
and other mechanisms to strengthen communication
and exchanges and take into account the ideas of
troop-contributing countries. The concerns of troopcontributing countries should also be heeded in
peacekeeping deployments and mandate adjustments.
13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Fifthly, the Security Council should, through an
increase in its open debates, allow Member States to
better understand the work of the Security Council.
We can also use the Arria Formula and other types of
meetings to listen to the ideas of other countries so as to
strengthen the Council’s interaction and dialogue with
States that are not members of the Council.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to join my other colleagues in thanking you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on a topic that is
of particular importance to all States, members and
non-members of the Security Council alike, given the
mission entrusted to the Council by the Charter of the
United Nations as the main agent in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We believe that
our well-established practice of holding this annual
debate, in which many delegations participate, is an
important achievement that confirms — as if it were
necessary — the particular importance that Member
States give to the activities, work and decisions of
the Security Council. We remain convinced that the
Council will continue to be attentive to the views and
proposals expressed during these debates to further
improve its working methods.
I also wish to congratulate our colleague Mrs. María
Cristina Perceval, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
and her whole team for their dedication, perseverance
and vigorous activities, which have already allowed
for specific measures to be adopted, as contained in
notes S/2013/515 and S/2013/630, aimed at strengthen
relations between the Council and its various partners.
The growing number of items on the Council’s
agenda as a result, in particular, of the growing
threats to international peace and security, has given
rise to a pressing and persistent need to re-examine
our working methods with a view to improving the
Council’s effectiveness, enhancing its transparency and
strengthening its cooperation with other institutions and
concerned parties. It cannot be denied that the Council
has made a great effort by taking specific steps towards
improving its working methods. We continue to believe
that this is a work in progress that will continue in the
years to come.
We welcome the fact that over the past two years of
our Council membership, we were able to contribute,
together with other Council members, to the adoption
of a package of measures, through five presidential

S/PV.7052

notes, to strengthen the implementation of the note in
document S/2010/507, dealing with a broad range of
issues, including the utilization of resources and the
management and organization of Council meetings and
of cooperation with other United Nations bodies, troopand police-contributing countries and other actors. All
this notwithstanding, we are convinced that Council
members and, more generally, other Members of the
United Nations, must continue working to improve
working methods.
I will permit myself in this regard to make the
following remarks and observations.
First, we noticed improvement in the organization
of and preparations for open debates to allow for broader
participation by Members of the United Nations. In our
view, their contributions must be taken into account in
Council discussions. Moreover, the choice of topics for
open debates must be diversified, while ensuring that
their scope remains within the mandate entrusted to the
Security Council by the Charter.
Secondly, the trend towards holding ever more
meetings in public is in itself positive. However, the
Council must retain full leeway to meet under other
formats when it deems it useful and appropriate for the
topic under discussion.
Thirdly, it is important foster greater interaction
among Council members during informal consultations.
In practice, this allows for discussions to be more
focused and better structured and to take fully into
account the information provided by the Secretariat
and Council members during consultations. I know that
in practice it is difficult for consultations to be made
genuine interactions, but it is possible, for example, for
the President, at the very beginning of consultations, to
propose organizing the discussion around two or three
points. I think that that would enhance the interactive
nature of consultations.
Fourthly, while we note the improvement since last
year in the process of assigning chairmanships of the
subsidiary organs, we believe that more must be done
to ensure that elected Council members can be fully
consulted and involved in that process and that their
points of view are taken into consideration as far as
possible.
Fifthly, the work of Council’s subsidiary bodies is
of the utmost importance and is attracting ever greater
interest. More regular interaction between those bodies

13-535029/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

with the broader membership and other actors, such as
United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations, would be beneficial. As Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, we worked, with the
agreement of the Council members, to hold as many
open meetings as possible, with the participation of
other Member States and other actors.
Sixthly, we welcome the recent adoption of note 630,
on cooperation between troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Council. It provides for specific
measures to make the most out of such interactions. It is
clear that the complementary roles of those two partners
in maintaining international peace and security calls
for ongoing consideration to strengthen the means for
cooperation between the two entities.
In the same context, the Council should step up its
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission and its
country-specific configurations, which have become
major actors in maintaining civic peace and promoting
development in post-conflict situations. While we
welcome the provisions in note 515, there is a need for
more creativity to ensure optimal coordination and
cooperation between the Council and the Commission
in the interests of peace and stability. Over recent years,
we have had the chance in our personal and national
capacity to appreciate the invaluable contribution of
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations to our
debates, and we continue to believe that there should be
more possibilities for such interaction with the Council.
Since we are only a few weeks away from the
end of our mandate, I could not conclude my remarks
without paying particular tribute to the staff of the
Security Council Affairs Division and its Director,
Movses Abelian, for their unwavering dedication and
the professionalism with which they interact with
Council members, in particular when members assume
the presidency. I thank them for their availability and
commend their perfect mastery of procedural and other
aspects of the work of the Security Council and their
preservation of its institutional memory.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on the implementation
of note S/2010/507, on the working methods of the
Security Council, which is, in itself, an exercise of
transparency and accountability. I would also like to
thank Ambassador María Cristina Perceval of Argentina
for her able leadership of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and

10/33

29/10/2013

for her unique talent in advancing important reforms
for the benefit of the United Nations membership as
a whole. I commend in particular the Ambassador of
Argentina for the concept paper contained in document
S/2013/630 on the enhancement of consultations
between the Security Council and troop- and
police-contributing countries adopted yesterday,
which, as Ambassador Perceval stated, will enable
those countries to effectively contribute to decisions
regarding peacekeeping operations.
It is clear that there have been efforts over the past
few years to improve the Council’s working methods.
However, the recent positive trends should not obscure
the underlying need for more reforms that match the
realities. We still have a long way to go to achieve the
milestones set by our Heads of State and Government
during the 2005 World Summit on the working methods
of the Security Council, mainly to make it more broadly
representative, increase its efficiency and effectiveness,
enhance its transparency and accountability, improve
the implementation of its decisions and reinforce its
legitimacy.
Indeed, Rwandans yesterday and Syrians today can
attest to the danger of being abandoned by the Security
Council in times of need. Gridlock and ineffectiveness
within the Council caused by the political interests
of some members have cost millions of lives. For
Rwanda, the veto or even the threat of veto calls for
all of us to give it due attention. In that regard, we
regret the frequent abuse of that privilege and call on
the permanent members to refrain from using the veto,
particularly in the case of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Our country is also concerned by the trend of
continued infringement on the right to equal and
timely participation by all members of the Council in
negotiations and processes. We deplore the worrying
trend to divide the Council into two different bodies, one
being more equal than others, that could even receive
separate briefings by the Secretariat on important
issues on the Council’s agenda. We also note with
regret the continued practice whereby draft products
of the Council, mainly resolutions and presidential
statements, are shared between permanent members
ahead of time but circulated among the elected 10
only a few days — or even a few hours — before their
adoption.
Cooperation between the Security Council with
regional and subregional organizations is another
13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

critical area as far as working methods of the Council
are concerned. We have witnessed tremendous
achievements over the years on that issue, but we still
believe that interaction with regional and subregional
organizations should be further streamlined. It is
important to hold regular consultations between
political organs and the secretariats of the concerned
organizations. In that regard, we wish to stress
once again the need for respect for decisions of the
African Union, as well as for timely and meaningful
consultations with the continent on decisions related
to African conflicts, which unfortunately constitute
70 per cent of the Council’s agenda.
Consultations with other organs of the United
Nations should also be strengthened. One of them, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), is the ideal partner
of the Security Council, as it deals with post-conflict
situations and consolidation of peace. In that regard,
Rwanda is of the view that the members of the PBC
that are also members of the Security Council have
the primary responsibility to ensure that the Council
can draw on the advice of the PBC in a timely and
meaningful manner, and that the PBC is able to meet
the Council’s expectations.
Like the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,
we wish to reiterate our belief that the contribution
of configuration chairs can be valuable in close
consultations with the Council as well as in drafting
resolutions on countries on the PBC’s agenda.
Yesterday, we had a private meeting with
representatives of the International Court of Justice,
and we believe that the Security Council could also
consider requesting advisory opinions of the Court on
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Before concluding, Rwanda expresses its
appreciation to Pakistan for reviving the wrap-up
sessions in January 2013. We have all witnessed how,
over the past months, this type of meeting has become
useful both to the general membership of the United
Nations and to the Council members themselves. I hope
that more Council members, particularly the newly
elected countries, will embrace the practice. In the
same vein, we support the holding of more interactive
dialogues, Arria Formula meetings and open debates,
particularly on country-specific situations, to allow the
general membership to contribute to the discussion and
share their experience.

S/PV.7052

I would conclude by stressing that enhancing the
legitimacy of the Security Council will ultimately
require deep reforms, including the expansion of its
membership in both the permanent and non-permanent
categories, with the same rights and privileges as
constantly requested by the African Group and the
L.69 group, of which Rwanda is a member. But for the
immediate term, we the States Members of the United
Nations request a responsive, engaging and accountable
Security Council that is up to the complex task ahead
of it.
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, we thank the Azerbaijani presidency
for organizing today’s debate. We also commend
Ambassador Perceval for her leadership as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Today’s debate provides an opportunity to assess the
status of our collective efforts to improve the working
methods of the Council and to allow non-members of the
Council to share their observations and proposals. We
believe that any effort to improve the working methods
of the Council must focus on three goals — enhancing
transparency, strengthening interaction with the wider
United Nations members, and increasing efficiency.
Such efforts are essential for the Council to effectively
meet its task of maintaining international peace and
security.
In recent years, we have seen some improvement
in the realization of those aims. More open debates
are being organized, and meetings with troop- and
police-contributing countries now take place on a more
regular basis. Further measures to improve interactivity
have been duly reflected in note by the President of the
Security Council adopted in August 2013 (S/2013/515).
Presidencies have also promoted useful practices
aimed at increasing efficiency, such as the strict
application of the five-minute rule when making
statements and holding video-teleconferences in
briefings in order to have updates from the field.
However, we believe more can be done. Allow me to
point out some areas that require further concerted
efforts.
First, with regard to enhancing transparency, the
Republic of Korea supports the Council’s holding
of more meetings and briefings that are open to the
entire membership of the United Nations. The increase
trend of holding wrap-up sessions and briefings by

13-5350211/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the presidencies is a step in the right direction. Such
efforts should be coupled with meaningful measures to
enhance the effectiveness of such meetings, including
through having specific scope and focus and pursuing
necessary follow-up measures. That openness should
apply to the work of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council as well. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation, I would mention
that we plan to convene an open interactive briefing
for all Member States on the current status and future
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We will
continue our efforts to keep the membership informed
of the work of the Committee and seek valuable input
from it.
Secondly, the Council should make additional
efforts to enhance interaction with the United Nations
membership and other relevant stakeholders. We
support enhanced interaction between the Council
and other organs of the United Nations. It is important
to ensure that regular meetings are held between the
Presidents of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The Council’s interaction with the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
on cross-cutting issues such as conflict prevention and
peacebuilding are also of great value. That will help us
to have a more integrated approach to methods related
to peace and security.
Given the increasing importance of the role of
regional and subregional organizations in dealing with
challenges to peace and security, we also support the
enhanced consultations with regional organizations,
as was the case in yesterday’s high-level meeting
(S/PV.7050). Cooperation with regional institutions
can complement the work of the Council and, through
those efforts, create synergy. In addition, informal
interactive discussions and meetings with troopand police-contributing countries for peacekeeping
operations should also continue to be an important
part of the Council’s activities. The President’s note
contained in document S/2013/630, adopted last week,
can serve as an important basis to further the Council’s
efforts to that end.
Thirdly, to deal with the ever increasing volume
and diversity of its workload, it is imperative that the
Council undertake more efforts to increase its overall
efficiency. In that regard, the Council should continue
its efforts to implement the measures laid out in
documents S/2010/507 and S/2012/402. Better planning

12/33

29/10/2013

of its work, by adjusting mandate renewal periods and
the timing of reports, and more focused and concise
statements are among the areas that could be improved.
Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is indeed an important component in enhancing
the effectiveness and overall legitimacy of its work.
The Council should therefore continue to pursue that
objective collectively and vigorously.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Azerbaijani presidency for organizing this
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
Efforts have been made since 2010 to improve the
Council’s working methods. The periodic revision of the
note of the President to the Security Council (S/2010/507)
has provided useful codification and clarification for
our way of working, enabling it to evolve towards
greater transparency and better information flow. In
that regard, I would like to thank the successive Chairs
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, who have promoted
those efforts. The recent adoption under Argentina’s
chairmanship of two notes concerning the dialogue
with troop-contributing countries and interaction
with non-Council member States is testament to that
(S/2013/515 and S/2013/630).
Among the measures taken recently that have
subsequently become part of the Organization’s
practices we should mention the immediate
dissemination of the Council’s programme of work to
the Secretariat, the President of the General Assembly
and the general membership of the United Nations, and
the opening up of Council meetings, with some of them
wholly or partly open to the wider membership. France
shares the opinion that debates on matters of general
interest should be open.
While codifying its way of working by
implementing note 507, the Council has also shown that
it is able to adapt to new demands. The Council meets
more often for thematic debates that enable it to refine
its approach to issues related to peace and international
security, while seeking the expertise of regional
organizations, specialized international agencies and
non-governmental organizations. The use of videoteleconferencing to interact with various United Nations
missions has also enabled it to streamline information
and react faster to realities on the ground. Regular
exchanges between the Council and the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as the Special Representatives

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

of the Secretary-General, enable it to better anticipate
crises and therefore react more effectively.
Finally, creating a website has enabled the
Council to quickly and ubiquitously disseminate all its
communiqués, reports and other working documents.
In that regard, the multilingual nature of the Council’s
activities should be observed by ensuring that
documents posted on the site are reproduced in every
official language. We must continue our efforts within
the Informal Working Group, which will be taking into
account the proposals made in this open debate. We base
our preparation of the Working Group’s programme
every year on consideration of the suggestions made
here.
The Syrian crisis has highlighted the impasse that
the Security Council has come up against in dealing
with the use of the right of veto. A few weeks ago, the
President of France spoke in the General Assembly on
the importance of creating a code of conduct for the
permanent members that would establish guidelines for
the use of the right of veto. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs also spoke on the subject. What would be
involved would be for the five permanent members of
the Security Council to collectively and voluntarily
suspend their right of veto when a situation involving
crime on a massive scale is considered to have occurred.
Clearly, the criteria for such self-management must
still be defined by the Council’s permanent members
themselves. A voluntary step such as this would not
entail revising the Charter of the United Nations. But we
can work together on a series of questions. First, we have
to agree on a definition of mass crime; the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
and numerous international conventions, including the
1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide and the Rome Statute, can guide
us. An alert mechanism or mechanisms that can trigger
such self-management would also have to be defined.
France is considering, for example, the possibility of a
central role for the Secretary-General, in the spirit of
Article 99 of the Charter.
Finally, France has proposed that 50 Member States
could challenge the Security Council when they believe
that a crime on a massive scale has occurred. That
would give us the opportunity to consider the terms
whereby the five permanent members could initiate and
implement the code of conduct on the use of the veto.

S/PV.7052

France’s proposals — and they are only
proposals — should enable us to begin to debate. To
do that, my country would involve all the possible
stakeholders, particularly research institutions,
universities and non-governmental organizations
that are working on this issue and could share their
thinking with us. The Security Council should take
this opportunity to thoroughly review its working
methods in order to meet the challenges of the twentyfirst century. The world is changing and the threats
have changed. Let us be the actors who are willing to
deal with that change and show that we are capable of
innovating in order to be more effective but also more
just.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We believe that today’s Security Council
meeting on the subject of the Council’s working
methods is very significant. This is now the sixth
year in a row that the Council has discussed the issue
in an open format with the participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations, and it is testament
to our continued attention to Member States’ proposals
on how to improve the procedural aspects of our
work — in the understanding that those very working
methods and decisions on how they might be modified
belong to the Council itself, that the issues relating to
them are by nature highly sensitive in the context of
Council reform, and that no populist attitudes should be
tolerated in their discussion.
By definition, the purpose of reforms and
improvements in the work of the Security Council should
be to make it function more effectively and efficiently
in the interests of more completely accomplishing its
tasks in the business of maintaining peace and security,
which is the primary responsibility of the Council.
Much has been said about transparency in the Council,
and it is of course important if the members of the
United Nations and the international community are
to achieve the broadest possible understanding of the
Council’s actions and the thinking behind its decisions.
We believe that transparency, in its good form, is
exemplified in the Security Council’s interactive
briefings for United Nations members at the beginning
and end of each month, along with the corresponding
press conferences. But transparency cannot and should
not cross the line beyond which it would interfere with
Council members’ frank, substantive discussions.
Discussions of the working methods of the Security
Council often raise issues relating to the broader topic

13-5350213/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

of how successfully the Council handles its fulfilment
of the tasks entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations. But this is more a question of politics.
Measuring its success by the number of decisions taken
or not taken would be a simplistic approach. We have
heard the critique that the Council sometimes usurps the
prerogatives of other organs of the United Nations. We
share those concerns. In that regard, our colleagues on
the Council are well aware that we maintain a reserved
attitude to initiatives that seek the consideration of
generic subjects in the Council. When practically the
entire membership of the General Assembly is in the
Chamber, the Assembly — or other relevant United
Nations bodies — is where such problems should be
discussed. We believe that the Council should focus on
country-level subjects and issues on which it can and
should make concrete decisions.
I would like to emphasize that all of these are
important topics, but in our opinion they do not belong
under the heading of the working methods of the
Security Council. And, of course, such fundamental
positions as the right of veto have nothing to do with the
working methods of the Council. The suggestion that
weakening the right of veto would help to improve the
Security Council’s effectiveness is deeply deluded and
would in fact have the opposite effect. The result would
be the rubber-stamping of points of view reflecting the
opinions of only one group of States. That is not why
the United Nations was created. In order to make the
Security Council more effective and responsive to the
realities of our time, it is essential that a thorough job be
done of improving its working methods. That is the aim
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. We note that the work of
the Informal Working Group runs, with characteristic
precision, in harmony with the substantive and
constructive action of all interested Member delegations
of the Organization.
In our opinion, an example of a key area of
improvement in the Council’s working methods would
be its interaction with other United Nations bodies on
matters that lie beyond its remit. A current challenge
is to further improve effective forms and methods of
dialogue with the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, other United Nations entities, regional
organizations and international partners.
We must develop the practice of operational
consultations among the Security Council membership,
troop-contributing countries and peacekeeping

14/33

29/10/2013

operations. We favour a reasonable increase in the
number of open debates, in the understanding that
closed consultations are highly important. In that
context, the Arria Formula is helpful.
With respect to so-called horizon-scanning, we
must not confuse it with the Council’s consideration of
topical questions not on its agenda that concern specific
members. The Russian delegation continues to do so,
as do others. The Secretariat is capable of the same.
In sum, the methodology could be used more often.
As has been shown in practice, the horizon-scanning
sessions have evolved into provisional discussions of
issues that Council members themselves plan to discuss
at a later time, or that are beyond the Council’s purview
but are being discussed for the sole purpose of using
a modern format. When the Council’s programme of
work is extremely busy, as it is, and international life is
replete with unpleasant issues, such conduct becomes
unnecessary.
The Council’s working methods are subject to
ongoing improvements and adaptation to contemporary
life. Only a few years ago, we launched the practice of
holding video-teleconferencing briefings, which have
become very popular. Further such examples include the
use of information and communications technologies in
the context of the Council’s consideration and adoption
of documents and decisions. These have accelerated
the Council’s response timing, which is very important
in view of the fact that the Council is extremely busy
and holds 10 meetings per week, such technology is
helpful. We can also intensify international relations
and increase the number of items on the agenda.
The Russian delegation is convinced that the
Council would gain from democratizing its work, which
could lead to a better distribution of the responsibilities
of so-called penholder institutions. Individual Council
members should not view specific countries or regions
as their own purview. We believe that the prevailing
view that penholders on topical matters have the right
to speak first is not correct. In our view, that is justified
only in the case of draft decisions and when delegations
introduce those to the Council.
With respect to other situations, discussions should
benefit from greater flexibility and be free of dogma. The
draft version of presidential note S/2013/630 was before
the Council yesterday, seeking to provide increased
democratization in the Council’s working methods and
increased discipline in terms of participation in the

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Council’s meetings. We do not consider it normal when
some Council members participate in consultations or
even official meetings only at the expert-level, rather
than at the level of Permanent Representative or Deputy
Permanent Representative. Such conduct lowers the
political significance of the discussion.
My delegation is prepared to participate in
constructive discussions on this and other initiatives
under the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions with a view to further
improving the working methods of the Security Council,
the ultimate goal of which is to support maximum
effectiveness and efficiency of the Council’s work.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes
the opportunity to review progress in enhancing the
working methods of the Security Council. We appreciate
the concept paper (S/2013/613, annex) prepared by
your delegation, Sir, to facilitate the discussion. Let
me also thank Ambassador María Cristina Perceval of
Argentina for her effective leadership of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
The debate has generated considerable attention
because the work of the Council is of interest to the
Council’s members and non-members alike. Enhancing
the efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of the
Council’s work and inclusive decision-making are
important issues for all of us. Today’s debate should
help Council members to further improve procedures
and working methods. The Council has agreed on new
measures complementing the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document S/2010/507,
but clearly there is room to do a lot more. Our focus
should be on effective follow-up and implementation of
the measures.
In December, the Council took decisions on
appointing chairpersons of subsidiary bodies in a
balanced, transparent, efficient and inclusive manner.
That has already made a difference as, perhaps for
the first time, there was a sense of consultation
surrounding the process, especially among the newly
elected members. It is my delegation’s hope that the
practice and trend will be reinforced in future. There
is also a need to ensure that selection and appointment
processes involving various expert panels and groups
are more transparent, balanced and representative.
The President’s August note S/2013/515 prioritizes
enhanced interaction with non-members of the Council.

S/PV.7052

We are pleased that the practice of holding wrap-up
sessions, which was revived during Pakistan’s January
presidency of the Council, has been supported and
appreciated both inside and outside of the Council.
In that regard, I thank all Council members that
have mentioned that today, especially the Rwandan
delegation.
We welcome the recent adoption of note
S/2013/630, on enhancing consultations with troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), which are important stakeholders in
the Council’s work. Pakistan, as Chair of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, has organized a
number of meetings with the participation of TCCs and
PCCs to address diverse, cross-cutting peacekeeping
issues. In that context, I express our deep gratitude to
Ambassador Rosenthal for recognizing that.
We should now make additional efforts to increase
the number of the Council’s public meetings, as
compared to closed consultations. It would serve the
Council well to fully implement Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations in order to enhance
access and participation by non-members of the
Security Council in the work of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies.
We have seen the increased use of the informal
interactive dialogue, which has been useful in enabling
the Council to interact and engage with greater candor,
with important interlocutors. Video-teleconferencing
technology has enhanced flexibility and provided more
options in terms of ways to brief the Council frequently
and upon short notice.
Cooperation with regional organizations has
increased in recent years. It merits further strengthening,
including by improving coherence and consistency in
approaches.
Pakistan believes that the Council should rely more
on diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes
under Chapter VI of the Charter. Excessive reliance on
Chapter VII can lead to impasse on several issues and
create an erroneous impression of the sanctity and force
of non-Chapter VII resolutions. The Council also needs
to discuss from time to time its implementation of its
resolutions, especially those on long-standing issues.
The Council’s effectiveness, after all, will be judged
by its performance in dealing with the core issues of
international peace and security.

13-5350215/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The Council’s work is a collective effort. Enhanced
cooperation and consultation between the permanent
and non-permanent members is of fundamental
importance in that regard. We have seen that dialogue
between the permanent and non-permanent members
works reasonably well in normal circumstances, and
the Council is then seen to be functioning as a whole.
But in crisis situations, there are at times gaps and
breakdowns in communication. Sometimes the media
are ahead of members of the Council in obtaining
information. Instead of waiting to hear from the
Council, people learn about the latest developments
from Tweets. In fact, intra-Council dialogue and
communication should be enhanced, not cut down,
during crisis situations.
This could be done in two ways. First, we understand
that a sensitive and fast-evolving issue requires
confidentiality and sufficient time for consultations
between the primary interlocuters. After their internal
discussions, the permanent five members may choose to
brief non-permanent members in closed consultations.
Second, the President, especially if the presidency is
held by a non-permanent member, should be taken into
confidence about various developments. The President,
as deemed appropriate, may be authorized to brief the
entire Council, the general membership and the media.
Council presidencies are well placed to promote such
dialogue and communication.
As part of a comprehensive reform, the Council’s
working methods are closely linked to accountability
towards the general membership. Past practice indicates
that elected members, being accountable to regional
groups and to the entire United Nations membership,
are keener to improve working methods. The best way to
enhance the representative and democratic character of
the Council is to reinforce the norms of accountability
and transparency. This, coupled with the cooperation of
the permanent members, would lead to more synergy in
the Council around the common objective of improving
its working methods.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this sixth open debate on
the Council’s working methods. This is a persuasive
interest of all Member States, and our working methods
must enhance the Council’s engagement with the broader
membership. Increased transparency and consultation
enhance the legitimacy and thus the effectiveness of the
Council, which is always necessary but doubly so when

16/33

29/10/2013

reform of the Council’s membership is at a standstill.
We have many of the necessary tools. The key, as usual,
is implementation, and that requires a genuine will to
change practices.
Opening up the working methods of the Council
has been a slow and, let us be frank, tortured process.
but we have made some real progress. Portugal did
a pioneering job during its Council membership
through its chairing the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Argentina — Ambassador Perceval and her team — has
continued this influential leadership through their
chairmanship. We also recognize and value the strong
voices outside the Council, pressing us to do better.
We welcome the establishment in May this year of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and the active role it is playing. Its contributions have
informed our recent work.
The adoption of the note by the President on
28 August (S/2013/515) was a significant advance. That
note focuses on enhancing the Council’s transparency
and dialogue with non-Council members, and it
captures many of the themes identified in a concept note
circulated by Azerbaijan for today’s debate (S/2013/613,
annex). We must now ensure its actual implementation.
If the Council is to be effective, it must, by definition,
be informed. Regular open debates that enable the
Council to reflect on the membership’s inputs are
critical. Informal and Arria Formula meetings, which
engage non-governmental organizations and other
actors — including, on a regular basis, special advisers
to the Secretray-General — are also important. The
Council should also keep itself informed through more
briefings by regional and subregional organizations.
An informed Council can also better anticipate
and respond quickly to threats to peace and security.
We see great benefit in the Council receiving regular
horizon-scanning briefings from the Department of
Political Affairs on situations of emerging concern.
As President of the Council in September, Australia
convened a horizon-scanning briefing — regrettably
only the second this year, although we thank the
Department of Political Affairs for its own initiatives in
bringing many issues to our attention. We also welcome
the Council’s renewed commitment, through note 515,
to invite the chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configurations to brief the Council.
We believe this is intrinsic to our work.

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The Council can discharge its responsibility
to the broader membership only if it is keeping the
whole membership informed of its deliberations. In
September, my own delegation conducted substantive
briefings at the beginning and end of our Council
presidency to ensure that non-members were informed
of important developments. We think this practice
should be institutionalized. Regular press stakeouts are
also important, particularly following closed meetings.
Much of the Council’s work takes place in its
subsidiary bodies and therefore is seldom visible to
the membership. It is unfathomable, frankly, that the
Council has allowed a situation whereby only five of
its 21 subsidiary bodies are mandated to openly brief
the Council on their work. Transparency is particularly
important in those subsidiary bodies that administer
binding obligations on all States, including the sanctions
regimes. While that is captured in note 515, much more
needs to be done to make it a reality.
Australia, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) — the Iran sanctions
Committee — initiated in June an open briefing to all
Member States on that Committee’s work. As Chair
of the 1737 (2006) Committee and of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, on 18 November Australia will provide a joint
briefing to the broader United Nations membership
with the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) Counter-Terrorism; the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on non-proliferation; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and the President of
the Financial Action Task Force. The effectiveness
of the work of those Committees depends on the
implementation efforts of all Member States, and it
seems obvious that all Member States should be more
engaged in that vital aspect of the Council’s work on
peace and security.
Troop- and police-contributing countries are at the
forefront of implementing many decisions by the Council.
The security environments in which peacekeepers
operate, especially in an era when the Council has
mandated historically robust operations, require that
we ensure a level of information, communication and
consultation that enables us to put together sustainable
operations. The voices of contributing countries
need to be heard prior to key Council decisions. That

S/PV.7052

is why the Council’s presidential note S/2013/630,
issued yesterday, is so important. The note goes
further than previous measures to enable troop- and
police-contributing countries to better engage with the
Council, including at their own request.
Even when the Council is informed, transparent
and accountable — even when it is — there are times
when it is unable to act. The Council has at times come
under widespread and, frankly, justified criticism for
its inability to discharge its responsibility to maintain
peace and security. Much of this revolves around the
use of, or the threat of, the veto. As a long-standing
proponent of limiting the use of the veto — Australia
has historically opposed it — we welcome France’s
recent call for permanent members to renounce their
veto powers voluntarily in instances of mass-atrocity
crimes. The French Permanent Representative’s
comments this morning are very encouraging. This is
an important discussion we need to have.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): Mr President,
I thank you for having convened this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. I congratulate
you on the thorough concept paper (S/2013/613, annex)
that is guiding our discussions. This is the sixth open
debate on the matter, and it gives us a real opportunity
to evaluate the road covered in implementing the
note by the President in document S/2010/507, which
reviewed and completed note S/2006/507.
I welcome the substantial progress made since
2006 on a number of topics to respond to the concern
over ensuring the transparency and effectiveness of the
work of the Council and its interaction and dialogue
with non-member States.In this context, I welcome
the remarkable ongoing work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the excellent chairmanship of
Argentina since the beginning of this year.
The points covered in note 507, and those adopted
since then, are numerous and are all equally important.
But in the framework of this debate I will focus on just
four points, since during the debate on the same subject
on 26 November 2012 (see S/PV.6870), we presented
our position at length on many of them.
The first point is the open debates. Open debates
take place in a formal setting that allows States not
members of the Council to express their views on issues
of major importance, for the settlement of which the
United Nations has delegated the power of decision to

13-5350217/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the Council. Even if we acknowledge, after two years
in the Council, that only a quarter of non-members take
an active part in these debates, we nonetheless consider
that their usefulness is such that the Council should use
them more in order to promote more interaction with all
Members of the Organization.
These open debates have often ended with the
adoption of resolutions or presidential statements that
have been cleverly negotiated beforehand, solely by
members of the Council. However, note 507 suggested
that interested non-members, particularly countries
directly or indirectly affected by the issue, should be
consulted in order to get their views and contributions.
Therefore it is important — as numerous non-member
States expressed during previous debates — for the
documents that result from these meetings to be adopted
later in order to allow the views expressed by States and
interested bodies to be incorporated.
My second point concerns open briefings and
consultations. Open briefings provide an opportunity
for countries and other bodies affected by the topic to
share their views and intentions with Council members.
Closed consultations, on the other hand, take place
just among members of the Council, and do not offer
this opportunity. Therefore, those countries and other
bodies have perforce to wait around in the immediate
environs to collect, by any means they can, information
on the Council’s deliberations.
To remedy that state of affairs, we would like
the members of the Council to agree systematically
on the information content to be delivered by the
President to the media in order to provide the same
level of information to all the interested States on the
result of such consultations. That would enable their
Governments to determine their position on those
matters. Moreover, needless to say, the consultations
are private in name only, since non-members know
shortly after the meetings the content of deliberations,
with precise details, and sometimes the views expressed
by each member.
Third is the interaction with other organs of the
United Nations and with regional and subregional
organizations. This issue is of major importance. My
country welcomes the various initiatives that have
been taken to date in this framework by the Council.
With regard to the General Assembly in particular,
the presentation of the annual report of the Security
Council does meet the concern about transparency, in

18/33

29/10/2013

that it allows the sharing with all Members of the United
Nations the work carried out on their behalf during
the year. Therefore, it is important that all countries
actively participate, not only in drafting the report but
also during its presentation by giving statements and
suggestions. Greater cooperation with the Economic
and Social Council should also be encouraged.
During past debates, some delegations also stressed
the need for greater interaction between different
stakeholders in peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, we would like to commend the establishment
of an annual meeting with the commanders of different
missions around the world. We would like this sort of
meeting to be also organized with the Peacebuilding
Commission and with country teams in order to
evaluate their work on the ground .
In addition, regular meetings with troop- and
police-contributing countries are opportunities to
exchange views on existing problems and to report on
new measures, in the context of the harmonious and
coordinated implementation of mandates in order to
achieve the desired results. We welcome those excellent
initiatives and would like the time spent in these
meetings to really enable us to go through the item
on the agenda. Moreover, we would like cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations to be
strengthened and supported, because they enable us to
attain positive results in the maintenance of peace and
security.
The fourth point concerns Arria Formula meetings
and informal interactive dialogues. The usefulness
of such meetings is clear. In those meetings Member
States, international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society can exchange opinions
on specific issues that are on the agenda of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council and that have a
real impact on the maintenance of international peace
and security. Their consideration enables us to better
understand them and to propose appropriate solutions.
Since those meetings promote a dialogue with
experts and specialists, we believe that they should be
encouraged. We commend the efforts of the Secretariat
to encourage their convening. In order to reduce costs
of participation of people are invited to participate, we
could perhaps use videoconferencing.
As mentioned earlier, the points of understanding
in the Informal Working Group, which were the subject
of the presidential notes, are as important as they

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

are varied. The note of 28 August 2013 (S/2013/515)
expresses the points of view. We welcome the agreements
reached within the Council, but we think that the
hardest thing to do remains their implementation. Too
many decisions have already been taken without being
effectively implemented.
We express the strong hope, since we are discussing
this as an outgoing member, that the permanent
members will show themselves much more willing to
undertake a real reform of the working methods. They
have long experience of Council’s working, and they
know better than anyone the limits of current working
methods. This internal reform will enable the Council
to successfully carry out the mission that the Charter
of the United Nations has conferred upon it, namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security. A
successful reform of the working methods could augur
a promising future for the discussions, which have
been going on for nearly two decades in the General
Assembly, on the question of the reform of the Security
Council.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to
take the floor in my capacity as the coordinator
of Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT), a cross-regional group of 22 States. ACT is
currently composed of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Hungary, Ireland, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania and Uruguay.
ACT was launched in May 2013 as a new initiative
to improve the working methods of the Security
Council. The name is an acronym - accountability,
coherence and transparency — which stands for our
common conviction that these qualities are needed
in all the Council’s activities. ACT is convinced that
the Council, whatever its composition, can and should
improve its working methods through a set of pragmatic
and concrete measures.

S/PV.7052

Let me be clear: ACT is independent of the
negotiations on the comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. ACT takes no position on the reform,
composition and enlargement of the Council, and it will
remain outside of that process. ACT intends to work
constructively with members of the Security Council
and with the broader United Nations membership to
increase the involvement of non-Council members and
the accountability of the Council to the entire United
Nations membership.
Today’s meeting is an opportunity to enhance
that dialogue, and ACT welcomes today’s open debate
organized by Azerbaijan and the excellent concept note
(S/2013/613) distributed.
ACT encourages all States Members of the United
Nations to dedicate their energy and their knowledge
to the improvement of the Security Council’s working
methods. Under the Charter of the United Nations,
Member States confer on the Security Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council acts on behalf of all
Member States, and all Member States agree to accept
and carry out those decisions. Therefore, all of us have
a fundamental interest in the Council’s decisions and
the process leading to them.
Recently, the Council’s responses to activities in
different areas have shown how much support is needed
from Member States. Member States have been ready to
join their efforts together, to take risks and, sometimes,
to grieve the loss of nationals engaged in missions. That
is valid for the domain of peacekeeping operations, but
it is also true in regard to special political missions and
to economic and/or other sanctions. In the latter case,
all Member States are obliged to implement measures
in connection with listed individuals and entities. In all
domains, the effectiveness of all decisions — mandatory
or not — greatly depends on the support and level of
implementation by the Member States.
It is therefore crucial for every country to be
more involved in the Council’s decision-shaping and
decision-making. It is our right and our responsibility.
The Security Council itself would benefit from the
full support of the wider membership. Moreover, the
relationship of the Council with other organs can and
should be strengthened, for instance, with regional and
other international organizations. Concrete action is
also needed to improve the Security Council’s practice
of referring situations to the International Criminal

13-5350219/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Court. Dynamics should be improved between the
Council and the peacebuilding configurations, too, in
order to maximize the impact on the ground.
ACT recognizes past efforts of the Security
Council to improve and adapt its working methods.
ACT also commends former and present chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and acknowledges the note by
the President of the Security Council (S/2013/515) on
working methods issued in August, which detailed ways
to improve the Council’s dialogue with non-Council
members and bodies.
ACT takes note with appreciation of the greater
level of interactivity achieved in recent months through,
for instance, horizon-scanning sessions and interactive
wrap-ups. In 2013, wrap-ups have taken place regularly
and in different formats. We are seeing greater interest
on the part of Member States, with steadily increasing
attendance being a clear demonstration of the value,
relevance and demand for such mechanisms.
While ACT warmly welcomes resolution 2118
(2013), aimed at destroying Syria’s chemical weapons,
we should not forget the Council’s long paralysis in
addressing other aspects of the Syrian crisis, which
is a particularly vivid illustration of the need and the
imperative to make progress in the field of working
methods.
ACT welcomes the proposal made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs for France, Mr. Laurent Fabius, that
the five permanent members themselves voluntarily
regulate their right to exercise a veto in the case of
mass atrocity crimes. We are convinced that this
pledge indicates the need to find new avenues in order
to respond efficiently to crises and to live up to the
responsibilities deposited in the hands of the Council.
ACT encourages the other permanent members to
further explore that proposal.
ACT has organized itself in subgroups that
have started their work and have already developed
concrete ideas on issues ranging from accountability,
transparency, follow-up to the note S/2010/507,
and improvements in working methods relating to
peacekeeping and conflict prevention. During today’s
debate, various ACT members will inform the Council
about the practical work under way in the subgroups.
As our work continues to gain momentum, ACT may
broaden the scope of its efforts according to needs and
relevant developments.

20/33

29/10/2013

We are aware that many of our suggestions are
already included in the past commitments assumed by
the Security Council in existing President’s notes. We
encourage the Security Council to ensure the full and
consistent implementation of the commitments in the
President’s notes, and indeed other existing and future
recommendations on working methods. Moreover, ACT
will monitor the Council’s existing commitments in all
aspects in order to promote transparency and improve
the accessibility of information.
Our suggestions and interests cover a wide range
of issues, but ultimately have one goal — a Security
Council that carries out its duties in the maintenance of
international peace and security in a more effective and
open manner. All Member States, including members of
ACT, have a responsibility to support the Council and
to hold it accountable for the consistent and effective
implementation of its resolutions and decisions.
Today’s debate on working methods is the fourth in
what has become, since 2010, an annual practice. It is
an important milestone for all of us and one that we
strongly encourage Council members to uphold.
ACT pledges to continue to carry on that important
dialogue with all Member States, and in particular with
the members of the Security Council, constructively
and openly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Azerbaijan for its
initiative in organizing today’s important open debate
on the Council’s working methods.
Improving working methods is a continuing
task. Indeed, there is always room to improve the
transparency of the Council’s work and to enhance its
relationship with the broader membership, the General
Assembly and other United Nations organs, as well as
with regional and subregional organizations. That is
what brings us to the Council today.
We welcome the recent measures the Council has
taken to improve its working methods. We also commend
the continuous efforts in the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
led by Argentina. On our part, we continue to support
all efforts within and outside the Council to improve
working methods with the sole aim of strengthening

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

and enabling the Council to better discharge the role
entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations.
As a member of the recently established
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, Portugal aligns itself with the statement just
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of ACT members. Portugal has considered particular
aspects related to the implementation of note S/2010/507
and subsequent notes by the President of the Security
Council. I would like, therefore, to concentrate on four
of those aspects and to suggest concrete measures for
improvement.
The first aspect concerns open debates. Open
debates have become regular features of the Council’s
monthly programme of work. We welcome them as they
fit into the trend we expect the Council to follow, which
is to have more open meetings with greater participation
by the broader United Nations membership. However,
open debates are meant to allow the Council to listen
to the broader membership. That is why we suggest
that whenever an open debate is expected to have an
outcome, the Council should consider adopting the
outcome statement at a later time so that it can reflect
on the input of non-Council members, as the Council
deems relevant.
Greater interactivity in open debates could be
encouraged by alternating the statements of Council
members with those of non-members and by promoting
the use of a summary at the end of a debate. The Council
has done the latter in the past, and we think that it could
be a useful practice to revive, such as in certain open
debates in which the Council launches discussions on
new themes.
Allow me to point out something that we all, not
only non-Council members, should do. We should
follow note 507 and not exceed five minutes in making
our interventions — a point also stressed by the
representative of the United Kingdom this morning.
That is an effort we encourage all to make for the sake
of efficiency in all open debates.
Secondly, with respect to wrap-up sessions, we see
the practice resumed since January as very positive.
I commend the delegation of Pakistan for kicking off
so promptly and effectively the implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2012/922. Wrap-up meetings have
since been organized as formal private meetings, with
the attendance of interested non-Council members.

S/PV.7052

Alternatively, some presidencies have opted for
informal briefings to the broader membership at the
end of their respective presidencies. Those have also
proved very useful and have allowed for an informal
exchange of views between non-Council members and
the presidencies on the work done. We strongly suggest
the continuation of such practices. However, with
respect to formal wrap-up meetings, we believe that
they would benefit from being more future-oriented,
more concise or else focused on specific issues of
relevance and timeliness in the Council.
Such formats — both wrap-ups and informal
briefings — should have two aims, namely, more
information and more interactivity. Those two goals
could be usefully combined. For instance, nothing
prevents presidencies, after convening a private wrapup meeting in which only Council members speak,
from inviting interested non-Council members to
an informal briefing in another room on the same or
the following day, where interactivity can then take
place. Alternatively, may we suggest that the Council
periodically open up wrap-up meetings for genuine
participation and interventions by non-members. That
would hardly be a first: the Council has done that
successfully before on several occasions.
My two next remarks concern aspects of the
Council’s internal work, although they remain relevant
to the implementation of note 507, since they relate to
the transparency, inclusiveness and effectiveness of the
Council’s work.
First, with respect to the issue of penholders, which
was touched upon by the representative of the Russian
Federation this morning and on which the Informal
Working Group initiated a reflection last year, the
question here concerns the implementation of note 507,
in particular how to give real meaning to the notion of
participation in the preparation and drafting of Security
Council decisions, as called for in paragraph 42 of the
note.
One decisive step in the right direction would be
to introduce the practice of joint-penholdership or
co-penholdership to initiate and chair the drafting
process. Such a practice, in our view, would help
promote broader participation by Council members in
the decision-making process, in particular those from
the same region as that of a particular situation under
consideration who are willing to raise their level of
participation, or those with a special interest in it, for

13-5350221/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

instance those who Chair the Sanctions Committees or
subsidiary bodies directly related to a given situation.
At the same time, such joint-penholdership would
help share the burden of keeping all Council members
informed about initiatives from the earliest possible
stage.
Finally, with respect to the appointment of
the chairpersons of subsidiary organs, a point just
mentioned by the representatives of Morocco and
Pakistan moments ago, it is important for the Council
to give concrete meaning to the consensus reached
in December through the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2012/937,
that is, to establish an informal process with the
participation of all Council members and in consultation
with the newly elected members.
The current practice would gain if such a process
of facilitation were made more participatory and
inclusive. Instead of relying on a single facilitator in the
outreach to and consultation with Council members,
including incoming ones, the Council should usefully
involve other co-facilitators in the process, including
outgoing chairpersons, in order to take advantage
of their experience. That would allow for a more
transparent, inclusive and participatory process leading
to the appointment of chairpersons. Building on last
year’s consensus, that could be the next concrete step
towards improving the upcoming process of appointing
chairpersons with respect to transparency and the
participation of all Council members.
Those are just a few concrete ideas. We are
convinced that they would serve to strengthen the
Council’s effectiveness by improving its relationship
with the broader membership and by promoting
enhanced participation in its decision-making.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Kumar (India): Let me, at the outset, thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the working methods of the Security Council. I also
thank your delegation for authoring the concept paper
(S/2013/613, annex), which gives a perspective on the
various issues being discussed under the broad rubric
of working methods. I would also like to put on record
our deep appreciation of Ambassador María Cristina
Perceval’s stewardship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
during the year 2013.

22/33

29/10/2013

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), Heads of State and
Government supported an early reform of the Security
Council and recommended that the Council should
continue to adapt its working methods to the exigencies
and imperatives of a vastly altered global order. It is a
matter of regret that so far very little has been done to
achieve either of those mandates.
As the primary organ of the United Nations system
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the working methods of the Council are of interest to the
entire international community, and not only to Council
members or the permanent members. As your concept
paper has rightly mentioned, Mr. President, issues of
transparency and interaction with non-members of the
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
relevant United Nation bodies are important for the
overall efficiency of the Council and urgently need
to be addressed. I would like to briefly share India’s
perspective on how the Security Council could improve
on its performance.
Let me start by quoting the famous writer and poet
Victor Hugo, who said, “There is nothing more powerful
than an idea whose time has come”. The reform of the
Security Council in tune with contemporary realities
is an idea whose time has come. The permanent
members of the Council must recognize, not only
individually but also collectively, that the Council
must be reformed to make it reflect the contemporary
realities of the international system. It is self-evident
that the expansion of the Security Council to reflect
contemporary geopolitical realities would improve its
representative character and grant greater legitimacy
and credibility to its decisions. Also, the improvement
of the Council’s working methods would enhance its
effectiveness and efficiency. We strongly believe that
real improvements in the working methods need change
in both processes and approach, which requires a reform
in the composition of the Council.
The most important change required in the working
methods is to make them transparent and inclusive.
The Security Council needs to increase access to
documentation and information and curb the tendency
to hold closed meetings that have no records. Even
worse is the practice of taking decisions among the five
permanent members to the exclusion of other Council
members, as was seen just last month on an important
issue of international peace and security.

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

During the past few years, my delegation has
strongly supported efforts within the Informal Working
Group aimed at improvements in the Council’s working
methods. I will offer a few specific suggestions in that
regard.
First, the Council should amend its procedures so
that items do not permanently remain on its agenda.
Second, the reporting cycle should be practical
and results-oriented, so that issues do not come up for
consideration simply as a matter of routine, putting
pressure on the limited time the Council has at its
disposal.
Third, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter must
be fully implemented through consultations with
non-Security Council members on a regular basis,
especially members with a special interest in the
substantive matter under consideration by the Council.
There is a need to strengthen the trend of meeting
more often in public, including through holding public
briefings and debates.
Fourth, penholders should allow greater and
systematic participation of elected members as
co-penholders.
Fifth, non-members should be given systematic
access to subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
including the right to participate. Furthermore,
the participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in decision-making concerning peacekeeping
operations must cover the establishment, conduct,
review and termination of peacekeeping operations,
including the extension and change of mandates, as
well as for specific operational issues.
Sixth, there is a need to ensure more informative
annual Security Council reporting to the General
Assembly. The Council should also concentrate its
time and efforts on dealing with issues concerning its
primary responsibility concerning international peace
and security, as mandated by the Charter of the United
Nations, rather than encroaching upon the mandate of
the General Assembly and other United Nations organs.
Seventh, before mandating measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter, the Council should first make
serious efforts for the pacific settlement of disputes
through measures under Chapter VI.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s considered
view that genuine reform of the working methods of

S/PV.7052

the Security Council requires comprehensive reform
in the membership of the Council, with expansion in
both permanent and non-permanent categories, and not
only improvement in its working procedures. This is
essential both for the Council’s credibility and for the
continued confidence of the international community
in this institution. It is our sincere expectation that
these ideas will be pursued by Council members so
that the views expressed by the wider United Nations
membership find resonance in the Council’s work and
working methods.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this important open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council and for
circulating the concept note that guides our discussions
today (S/2013/613, annex). Allow me to also take
this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador María
Cristina Perceval on Argentina’s leadership in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Brazil welcomes the adoption of presidential note
S/2013/515 and the commitments of Council members
therein to increasing the efficiency and the transparency
of the Council’s work, as well as to improve dialogue
with non-Council members and other bodies. We also
welcome the adoption of presidential note S/2013/630,
which encourages a more interactive dialogue between
Council members and troop and police-contributing
countries. It is of utmost importance that the views of
the troop- and police-contributing countries be fully
taken into account by the Council. For this to happen,
consultations with them should be held as early as
possible in the negotiation of mandate renewals of
peacekeeping missions.
My country has long advocated for a Security
Council that is more transparent, efficient, inclusive,
accountable and accessible to the broader membership.
The Security Council acts on behalf of all United
Nations Members and has the political responsibility
to maintain a permanent and meaningful dialogue
with the whole membership. Therefore, we welcome
the fact that the holding of wrap-up sessions at the
end of each presidency is becoming a regular practice
among Council members. We expect that those sessions
can gradually become more open to the effective
participation of non-members. Monthly discussions of

13-5350223/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the Council’s work are a valuable tool for the broader
membership to have a better understanding of its
deliberations and of the issues on its agenda.
Since it is of utmost importance to enhance the
transparency of the Council’s work, Brazil believes
that the Security Council should meet as often as
possible in public. We reiterate our understanding
that private meetings should be reserved for
exceptional circumstances. Furthermore, it is our
belief that the Security Council should consult
more regularly — formally or informally — with
non-members. It is disappointing that, although binding
on all Member States, Security Council decisions
seldom are discussed with the openness desired by the
majority of the membership.
In line with the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is important to allow all United Nations
Members to express their views and to influence
decisions whenever they may have a special interest in
substantive matters under consideration by the Council.
Encouraging the wider participation of the membership
in the Security Council’s deliberations is the path to
enhancing the legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness
of its decisions. Greater transparency is also much
needed in the activities of the Council’s subsidiary
organs. Substantive and interactive briefings with
Member States offer an opportunity to all interested
delegations to provide inputs to the work of those
bodies.
It is imperative to strengthen the relationship
between the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies. Closer cooperation is needed not only with the
General Assembly, but also with the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Brazil believes that the PBC’s advisory role
to the Security Council has not been explored to its
full capacity. Greater interaction between the two
bodies could be fostered. We once again encourage
the participation of the Chairs of PBC configurations
in the Council’s debates and consultations. We also
welcome the expansion of consultation and cooperation
with relevant regional and subregional organizations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
As we have stated in the past, the interpretation and
implementation of Council decisions is an important
part of the discussions regarding working methods. The
establishment of objective parameters, especially when

24/33

29/10/2013

the use of coercive measures is contemplated, would
clearly contribute to increasing the accountability and
effectiveness of Council decisions, and to avoiding the
loose interpretations of mandates. We also encourage
the Security Council to dedicate more of its time and
efforts to preventive diplomacy.
The Council’s exercise of its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
should be informed by the principle that prevention
is always the best policy to reduce the risk of armed
conflict and the human costs associated with it.
Let me take this opportunity to welcome the
launching of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. Brazil shares with the
group the understanding that reform of the working
methods of the Security Council is much needed and
commends the pragmatic and concrete approach that is
being pursued by ACT.
Since we are speaking of accountability, I must
reiterate that when matters of the utmost interest to
this Council are dealt with outside this body, the least
we can expect is regular reporting. Such reporting has
been seriously inadequate in situations such as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where a more forthcoming
approach and regular briefings by the Quartet are
clearly due.
We commend France for presenting a proposal
regarding the use of veto. We believe that this is a
clear demonstration of the necessity and urgency of
considering substantive decisions to update the organ.
The decision of Saudi Arabia not to take its seat
on the Council until the organ is reformed is also very
relevant to our discussions. It only reinforces the widely
held view that the more we protract the unavoidable
reform, the more often the Council will be confronted
with the serious limitations that jeopardize its capacity
to maintain international peace and security.
In conclusion, Brazil would like to underline that
the working methods of the Security Council cannot
be entirely improved without a comprehensive reform
of the body that brings the Council in line with today’s
geopolitical realities and make it truly capable of
addressing the challenges of the twenty-first century.
In this context, we welcome the initiative taken
by the President of the General Assembly to establish
an advisory group to draft a text that would serve as
a basis for the intergovernmental negotiations in the

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

General Assembly. This initiative has the potential to
overcome the artificial delays imposed on negotiations
and materialize the existing widespread political
support for Council reform. As the General Assembly
nears its seventieth session in 2015, concrete outcomes
should finally be achieved on this important matter.
We remain convinced that such reform is the only way
to achieve a more representative, legitimate, efficient,
effective and accountable Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
I would also like to associate myself with the statement
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, as well as that to be delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The international community’s attention is focused
on the Council more than ever before. Innocent people
throughout the world yearn for the Security Council to
save them from the scourges of war by implementing
its mandate for the maintenance of international peace
and security without further delay, which will make
the world a safer place. On that basis, the process of
reforming the Security Council and its working methods
must be inclusive, comprehensive and designed to
strengthen the Council’s ability to fulfil its mission,
reflect contemporary realities and the diversity of the
international community, and take into consideration
the interests of the entire United Nations membership.
The change in the Security Council’s structure
should reflect the current situation, as well as new
developments in the international arena. It should
reflect the equitable geographic distribution of Member
States and preserve its ability and effectiveness in
fulfilling its duties, including in preventing conflicts
and international disputes before they escalate and lead
to grave consequences. The Security Council should
benefit from the expertise of regional and subregional
organizations in solving and preventing conflicts.
We emphasize the need for all States to abide by the
Council’s resolutions equally and without selectivity.
The Middle East has long suffered from continuous
violations of international peace and security without
effective and efficient intervention. That has led to
calamities in the region and within the international

S/PV.7052

community. We are perplexed by the double standard
applied to the Middle East. Instead of the Council
preserving the prestige of the United Nations and
safeguarding its efficiency and credibility, that double
standard will definitely lead to a loss of confidence
among the peoples of the region in international
institutions, in particular in the Security Council.
With regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian Arab territories, the Security Council
has considered that issue almost since the day it was
established. It is unable to maintain international peace
and security or restore the rights of the legitimate
holders. Israel persists in violating international law
and in changing the situation on the ground.
The Syrian crisis has festered without being
addressed in a manner conducive to achieving the
aspirations of the Syrian people and reflecting the
will of the international community, as represented
in the resolutions on the issue adopted by the General
Assembly, which have not been appropriately translated
into reality by the Council. That confirms once again
the gravity of delaying the adoption of appropriate
resolutions at the right time to achieve peace in the
region and the world. Those delays lead to the spread of
anarchy, wars, killing and destruction.
My delegation emphasizes the need for the Council
to consider the aspirations and hopes of the peoples of
the world and the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
Let me, first of all, thank Azerbaijan for organizing
today’s debate and for providing a very good concept
note (S/2013/613 annex). We appreciate that these
debates are turning into yearly events, since the working
methods of the Council indeed concern the membership
as a whole.
Since last year’s open debate (see S/PV.6870), the
attention to this matter has increased further. Argentina
has continued the excellent leadership of Portugal of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. The adoption of note S/2013/515
during the presidency of Argentina in August was a
welcome step in which the Security Council committed

13-5350225/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

to a number of measures for increased transparency and
consultations.
Outside the Council, the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group has joined together in order
to push for a reform of working methods. We welcome
the establishment of the group and fully support the
statement made on its behalf made by the representative
of Switzerland.
The two most central aspects of the discussion on
working methods continue to be transparency and the
possibility of non-members to interact with the members
of the Council in a substantive way. That is why note
515 is important and encouraging. With the Council’s
commitment to enhancing its interaction with Member
States, as well as with other United Nations entities
and regional and subregional organizations, it is our
hope that more concrete steps will be forthcoming. The
issue now is the implementation of the commitments
contained in the notes that have been adopted over the
past years.
We continue to underscore the need for regular,
informative briefings to non-members of the Council,
and welcome the wrap-up sessions that have been held
so far. As the Council continues to review the concept
of wrap-up sessions, we would suggest an interactive
model whereby non-Council members are invited to
participate. That relates to a number of situations, in
particular to discussions on peacekeeping missions in
which troop- and police-contributing countries should
be involved to the greatest extent possible. We welcome
the most recent note S/2013/630 in that regard.
There is also room for improving the quality of
open debates by ensuring that concept papers and
outcome documents reflect the input of all participating
countries. The adoption of note S/2012/922 on ways to
improve open debates is welcome in that regard.
The Nordic countries welcome all efforts to
enhance transparency. Therefore, we continue to
support the work of Security Council Report, which
provides valuable insight and knowledge about Council
activities, including working methods, to the wider
membership.
Given the ever-increasing workload of the Council,
let me also stress the importance of efficiency. We
encourage the continued implementation of note
S/2012/402, including technical improvements, such
as the more frequent use of video-teleconferences.

26/33

29/10/2013

Efficiency also relates to the internal distribution of
labour among Council members. We welcome the
adoption of note S/2012/937 focusing on the selection of
chairs of the subsidiary bodies. We still encourage the
Council to be more forthcoming with the scheduling of
those meetings in order for the broader membership to
be better informed.
The discussion on penholding should also continue.
In our view, elected members of the Council could have
a greater role in drafting and presenting products of the
Council.
Nothing is more important for the Council than
to prevent and respond to conflict. The Council
should continue to actively seek ways to improve its
ability in that regard. We would therefore encourage
the Council to return to horizon-scanning briefings
at the beginning of every month. That concept offers
the Council a chance of early warning, and thus the
possibility of acting before a conflict erupts. A broader
approach to prevention and conflict resolution also
relates to the connection between thematic issues and
country-specific situations. The Council could do more
to integrate those perspectives.
In closing, the Nordic countries call on the Council
to continue on its path of reforming its working
methods. There is still plenty to do.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
holding of this debate shows the Council’s openness
to considering improvements in its working methods,
and that is why we welcome Azerbaijan’s initiative.
In addition, Mexico welcomes and is grateful for the
work carried out by Ambassador Perceval and her
diligent leadership of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The progress that has been made in recent years
on some of the practices of the Security Council is
undeniable. The larger number of open debates and
public meetings and the increasing interaction between
the Council and police- and troop-contributing
countries are the direct result of the adoption of the note
by the President contained in document S/2010/507.
Unfortunately, progress has been uneven, and
questions remain concerning the holding of monthly
wrap-up meetings and whether that should become the
norm — an idea that has met with resistance among

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

some members of the Security Council. The rejection
of such simple proposals reinforces the stereotype of a
Security Council characterized by secrecy and prevents
a more dynamic and transparent relationship between
those who sit at this table, whether for two years or
forever, and those — like ourselves — who simply
observe as spectators.
Mexico would like to take this opportunity
to highlight the excellent information that the
representatives of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean Countries provide to the rest of the regional
Group on a monthly basis.
The elected members of the Security Council are
those who have historically promoted and continue to
promote reforms to the working methods and those
who are more conscious of the value and importance of
transparency in their work. However, on many occasions,
those countries are marginalized in negotiations and
only included in the process once decisions are already
agreed. The democratic principles that rightly motivate
the Council should begin at home.
We express our satisfaction with the recent
establishment of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. We hope that the work
of the group will help make the work of the Security
Council more efficient, transparent, inclusive and
legitimate.
We also believe that it is crucial to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations on issues of armed conflict
and crisis management, in particular when the Council
is acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
We must also foster greater interaction with
other Security Council bodies, in particular the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, when considering
decisions with financial implications, such as the
establishment or renewal of the mandates of special
political missions.
Every day, the importance of changing the way in
which the Council ensures peace and security becomes
more apparent, as already mentioned by previous
speakers. The paralysis that has for prevented any
action on the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic for
more than two years now is a reminder that the current
composition of the Security Council and its functioning
need to be restructured in order to respond in an

S/PV.7052

effective and democratic way to the challenges on the
international agenda.
Mexico welcomes the recent proposal by France
to develop a code of good conduct among the five
permanent members of the Council, so that when the
Council is considering war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide, the five permanent members
collectively renounce their right of veto. We are willing
to work together to advance that initiative.
In conclusion, allow me to say that such realistic
improvements in the working methods of the Security
Council, the one proposed by the French delegation
and the ACT group, will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening the Council’s ability to maintain
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil (Egypt): Egypt
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I would like to commend the
Azerbaijani presidency of the Security Council for
convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. I would like also to take
this opportunity to congratulate the countries that
were elected this month as members of the Security
Council for the next two years and to thank Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo for their
efforts during their membership during 2012 and 2013.
Today’s open debate is the sixth debate on the
Security Council’s working methods. We hope that the
views expressed by non-members of the Council will
be reflected in any outcome of this debate in order
to enhance the transparency and inclusiveness of the
Council’s work. We also expect the Security Council to
add to its upcoming annual report — which the Council
is to adopt tomorrow — more detailed information on
the measures taken to improve the Council’s working
methods in order to properly assess the progress
achieved in this regard.
The effective functioning of the Security Council
has a direct impact on the maintenance of international
peace and security. Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations indicates that the Council acts on behalf of the
entire membership of the United Nations. Therefore,
the Council’s working methods do not belong only to

13-5350227/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

its 15 members; they are the collective responsibility of
the general membership. For that reason, reforming the
Security Council’s working methods is one of the five
inextricably linked items to be negotiated in the overall
reform and expansion of the Council in accordance
with General Assembly decision 62/557.
Egypt appreciates the efforts by the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions under the chairmanship
of Argentina to improve the Council’s working methods.
Yet, more efforts should be exerted to promote the full
implementation of the note by the President contained
in document S/2010/507 and subsequent notes.
We must also be more ambitious and advance our
discussions beyond those notes. For example, reaching
an agreement on the Security Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, which have been in force for over
60 years, would be a major step towards improving the
working methods of the Council.
The working methods of the Security Council will
not be improved unless we effectively address the use
of the veto. In that regard, we note with interest the
proposal by President Hollande of France, which was
reflected in his statement in the general debate of
the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session (see
A/68/PV.5): that the permanent members collectively
refrain from using the veto in cases of mass atrocities.
Let me recall here that Africa is opposed to the veto
as a matter of principle. We believe that it should be
abolished. However, as long as it continues to exist, and
as a matter of common justice, it should be extended
to all permanent members of the prospective enlarged
Security Council, in full application of the principle of
equality between current and new permanent members.
Private meetings, informal consultations and
closed meetings should be kept to a minimum. Issues
to be covered at any briefing by the Secretariat should
be determined in coordination with the concerned State
and after the approval by all members of the Security
Council. Interventions after such briefings should not
be restricted to Council members. The concerned party
should be given the opportunity to express its views on
such briefings. Any decision by the Security Council to
initiate formal or informal discussions on a situation in
any Member State or other issues that do not constitute
a threat to international peace and security is contrary
to Article 24 of the Charter. We urge the Council to
strictly follow its mandate in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter.

28/33

29/10/2013

Through note S/2013/515, Council members agreed
to make more effective use of public meetings, informal
interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings.
These meetings should be used effectively by providing
for real opportunities and more meaningful exchanges
of view to take into account the contributions of
non-Council members, in particular those that may
be directly affected by decisions of the Council. A
mere quantitative increase in such meetings without a
qualitative benefit or outcome would be a waste of time
and resources.
The participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in decision-making concerning peacekeeping
operations must cover their establishment, review
and termination, including the extension or change of
mandates. We welcome as a step forward the recently
adopted note by the President S/2013/630 on enhancing
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries.
Wrap-up sessions have proven useful in taking
stock of the activities of the Security Council at the
end of each month. We thank those Council members
that have held wrap-up sessions at the end of their
presidencies. This practice complements that whereby
Council Presidents brief the wider membership on the
programme of work at the beginning of each month.
Monthly assessments are important in providing
a more coherent account of the main aspects of
the work of the Council during that month. In note
S/2012/922, Council Presidents were encouraged to
submit the monthly assessments soon after the end of
their respective presidencies. We note, however, that
the latest monthly assessment posted on the Security
Council’s website relates to April, under the presidency
of Rwanda.
We appreciate the continued efforts of the
Secretariat in developing the Security Council’s
website, making it more informative and user-friendly,
as well as in publishing its programme of work and the
monthly forecast in a timely manner.
Finally, there is still much room for improvement.
We count on all members of the Council, in particular
its permanent members, to make greater progress
in improving the Council’s working methods so as
to strengthen its ability to carry out its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): Hungary, as a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, aligns itself fully with the statement made on the
group’s behalf by the representative of Switzerland. Our
statement in full written form will be made available to
all Member States. In order to save time, I would like
to focus here on six concrete proposals, all of which
are related to the interlinkages between the work of
the Council and questions of accountability for major
international crimes.
First, the open debate on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) held under the Guatemalan presidency in
October 2012 (see S/PV.6849) was a crucial initiative in
examining the important link between peace, security
and accountability. We hope that such debates will be
held on a regular basis in the future.
Secondly, the question of accountability in general
is an issue that concerns not only the Security Council
but other bodies within the United Nations. Interaction
between the different bodies should be regular, and
developments in other forums should be taken into
consideration by the Security Council.
Thirdly, in cases where the Security Council has
to act to maintain international peace and security,
we encourage the Council to develop a coherent
accountability strategy with clear criteria to guide its
future decisions and to send an important message to
Member States.
Fourthly, the work of the Council in the field
of accountability deserves better reflection on the
Council’s website. In that regard, we note that at
present there is no information on the reasons and basis
for the establishment of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda by the Council, and not a word
is devoted to the role of the Council in ICC-related
proceedings, as set forth in the Rome Statute.
Fifthly, when the Council uses its prerogative to
refer cases to the ICC, it has the responsibility to do
so in a predictable and even-handed manner, and then
to provide support by setting up appropriate follow-up
mechanisms and procedures. So far we have seen only
partial results in this area.
Last but not least, Hungary appreciates and very
much supports the repeated initiatives of France

S/PV.7052

proposing that the permanent members of the Council
voluntarily refrain from using their veto power in
situations of mass atrocities. Hungary believes that
any and every proposal that brings the Council closer
to its ultimate raison d’être and the fulfilment of its
responsibilities in a flawless and predictable manner
merits serious consideration.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, Sir, I would like
to thank you for organizing today’s open debate on the
Security Council’s working methods — the sixth of its
kind — and for the very comprehensive concept paper
(S/2013/613, annex). As a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, we fully
support the statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on the group’s behalf. In order to respect
the time constraints, a longer version of our statement
has been distributed.
As set out in the Charter, the Members of the United
Nations have conferred the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security to this 15-member body. It is therefore hard
to overestimate the role of its working methods. How
the Council works and how its decisions are taken is of
the utmost importance to every single country in the
Organization. Let me focus today on the transparency
and accountability of these processes.
Estonia attaches great value to transparency in
all decision-making processes and therefore highly
praises any steps taken with that as a consideration.
As the Council’s decisions affect all of us, we expect
to be involved in that process. Therefore, the greater
the transparency that accompanies them, the easier
their implementation will be. Through enhanced
engagement with the interested parties, transparency
can be improved on all levels.
The Council has demonstrated responsibility
to the wider membership by adopting presidential
note S/2010/507 and more recently, in August, note
S/2013/515, committing to closer collaboration and
engagement with non-members. Estonia considers the
implementation of those decisions to be instrumental
for the future. Many of the incorporated commitments
have already been implemented. We have witnessed
a growing trend in open debates and other public
metings. That trend should continue: open meetings
should become the norm, rather than the exception.

13-5350229/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

In that regard, we would like to recall, as an excellent
example, the open debate organized a year ago by
Guatemala on peace and justice, with a special focus
on the role of the International Criminal Court (see
S/PV.6849). That was the first thematic debate focusing
on the relationship of the Council with the Court, and it
was, we believe, a timely and fruitful exercise. Estonia
therefore strongly encourages members of the Security
Council to organize a follow-up debate on the topic.
We would also like to commend the Council for
organizing informal interactive dialogues and Arria
Formula meetings with other interested parties. The
informal introductory briefings on the Council’s
programme of work, as well as the recently reintroduced
wrap-up meetings, are also of the great value to the wider
membership. Estonia encourages both the Council’s
current and newly elected members to continue that
practice during their presidencies, so that it can become
an integral part of the Council’s work.
Transparency is a multilayered issue. It should
be enhanced both horizontally and vertically. In a
decision-making process, the wider membership’s
involvement should start at an early stage and continue
through to the end of a decision’s implementation.
On the other hand, an even wider range of different
stakeholders, including civil society, should be involved
in the work of the Council. We believe that exclusion
creates frustration, while participation increases
ownership — and thus responsibility and accountability
as well.
A great deal has in fact been done, but there is
still room for improvement. An example of the lack of
transparency in the work of the Council was the process
that led to adoption of the long-awaited resolution
2118 (2013), on Syrian chemical weapons, which for
the first time in history determined that the use of
chemical weapons anywhere constituted a threat to
international peace and security. We certainly welcome
the resolution, but the process of making the decision
showed that transparency could be enhanced.
With respect to accountability, which is another
important goal that the Council should pursued, we
again cannot overlook Syria, the most tragic ongoing
conflict. The Council has been paralysed for too long,
and the international community has therefore not been
able to assume its responsibility to protect the people
of Syria, who have been systematically attacked and
killed by their own Government, a Government that

30/33

29/10/2013

has not lived up to the rightful expectations of its own
people to a peaceful and stable living environment. We
would call upon the Council to reflect on its working
methods — on how such a situation has occurred and
how it could be avoided in future.
One of the issues to explore is the veto and its use.
Estonia would call on the permanent members of the
Council to seriously consider refraining from its use
in cases of genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity. In that regard, Estonia welcomes the French
proposal to define a way the permanent members of the
Council could decide to collectively renounce their veto
powers in the event of a mass crime.
Finally, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, Estonia is ready
to work closely with the Council in order to identify
further ways to increase transparency and interaction
between all States Members of the United Nations and
the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
important open debate. I would also thank you for your
concept note highlighting the need to further deliberate
on ways to improve the Council’s work (S/2013/613).
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
It is encouraging that, as reflected in the Council’s
presidential note of 28 August (S/2013/515), the Council
will strive to improve dialogue with non-members of
the Council and representatives of other bodies, as part
of its commitment made in 2010 to enhance Council’s
efficiency and transparency and to increase its
interaction and dialogue with external stakeholders. In
undertaking the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security in an effective manner,
the Security Council must take actions and decisions
that garner support and cooperation from the greater
United Nations membership. Accordingly, greater
communication, understanding and input from the
Member States is vital to enriching the Council’s
decision-making capacity and to the achievement of its
aims.
As the Council is entrusted with its responsibilities
on behalf of the entire United Nations membership,

13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

its meaningful engagement with the non-members of
the Council reflects its intention to heed and voice
the aspirations of the whole of the United Nations,
and not just those of a privileged few. The Council
should therefore show a greater degree of transparency,
accountability and efficiency and democratic values.
In order to help enhance the working methods of the
Council and increase inclusiveness therein, Indonesia
would like to share its views as follows.
First, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter of the
United Nations should be implemented in an effective
manner by consulting with non-members of the
Security Council on a regular basis, especially those
with a special interest in the substantive matters under
consideration by the Council. The Council should
also seek those countries’ views in order to ensure
that countries are able to implement the Council’s
decisions. Furthermore, Member States particularly
affected by sanctions should be given an opportunity, at
their request, to participate in meetings of the relevant
Sanctions Committees. The Council should also grant
affected non-members access to its subsidiary bodies,
including the right to participate and give substantial
input.
Secondly, the Council should hold regular, timely
and meaningful consultations with troop-contributing
countries, financial contributors and other countries that
are directly concerned or affected by a peacekeeping
operation before and during the decision-making
process for establishing, conducting, reviewing and
terminating a peacekeeping operation, including for a
change of mandates and specific operational issues.
Thirdly, draft resolutions, presidential statements
and other documents submitted at informal consultations
of the whole of the Council, if so authorized by authors
of the drafts, should also be promptly made available to
non-members of the Council.
Fourthly, the reasons for exercising a veto should
be explained at the time of doing so, and a copy of the
explanation should be circulated to all Member States.
Fifthly and lastly, as a general rule, the Council
should meet in a public forum that is open to all
Member States. It could decide to meet in private on an
exceptional basis.
Accordingly, we welcome the Council’s enhanced
engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries,
relevant
regional
and
subregional

S/PV.7052

organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission. The
constructive steps taken should be maintained and
enhanced.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Indonesia’s
commitment to supporting the Council in its work
and in its efforts to incorporate greater transparency,
inclusiveness, accountability, efficiency and democratic
values as it carries out its responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I shall deliver a shorter
version of my statement, while the full text is being
circulated in the Chamber.
I wish to commend the Azerbaijani presidency on
its initiative to convene today’s meeting on the working
methods of the Security Council.
Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Malaysia welcomed the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2010/507,
which remains a landmark document aimed at
developing and improving the work of the Council.
Malaysia recognizes that the Council’s working methods
have continued to evolve. The most recent note on its
working methods, issued on 28 August (S/2013/515),
focuses on ways to improve the Council’s dialogue with
non-Council members and bodies. The note continues
the series of commitments on the part of the Council
that include making more effective use of public
meetings, expanding consultation and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, providing
opportunities to hear the broader membership’s views
on the Council’s working methods, including in open
debates, maintaining regular communication with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and its countryspecific configurations, convening wrap-up meetings
and informal briefings and improving consultations
with police- and troop-contributing countries (TCCs).
One critical issue that has marked much of the
discourse on working methods between the Council and
the membership at large is the debate concerning Article
30 of the Charter of the United Nations, which stipulates
that the Council shall adopt its rules of procedure. On
the other hand, Article 10 of the Charter states that the
General Assembly may make recommendations to the

13-5350231/33

S/PV.7052

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Council on its powers and functions. A key to resolving
that debate is whether all Members are willing to ease
that tension and work together to help make the Council
function more effectively. Members must be prepared
to leave their entrenched national interests behind in
order to enable the matter to progress and make the
Council an organ that serves the wider membership.
In taking steps to increase transparency and improve
the efficiency of its working methods, the Council
must also address shortcomings raised by non-Council
members, as it has done with such past issues as the
early distribution of draft Council documents to
non-members, the convening of more public meetings
and increases in the frequency and types of formats
used for informal interactions with non-members.
Malaysia appreciates the practical measures the
Council has taken to provide frequent dialogues and
exchanges between it and non-members. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of Arria Formula meetings as
a means to ensure closer interaction with non-Council
members and regional and subregional organizations.
We also commend the Council for its ongoing briefings
and consultations with TCCs. The Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations should involve TCCs more
frequently in its deliberations through timely and
regular interaction. The Council’s request, in resolution
2076 (2012), that the Secretary-General consult with
countries contributing troops to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, is a clear example of the benefits of
consulting TCCs.
Malaysia is of the view that given the linkages
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the Council
has benefited tremendously from its increased
interaction with the PBC. Due to the advisory nature
of the PBC’s role, its views should be duly considered
when the peacekeeping mandates are discussed.
In conclusion, Malaysia believes that more steps
will have to be taken to improve the Council’s working
methods, and will require Member States, particularly
the permanent members of the Council, to display
the necessary political will. It is incumbent upon all
of us to put aside our individual political agendas and
work for practical, attainable changes. The reform of
working methods is part of a larger, comprehensive
reform. What is required is structural reform of the
Council — reform that makes it more representative
of the United Nations membership, thereby ensuring
greater effectiveness and legitimacy in its work.
32/33

29/10/2013

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would first like to thank
the Azerbaijani presidency for convening today’s open
debate.
Slovenia is a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group and aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the ACT.
Ensuring the legitimacy, efficiency and strength
of the Security Council, as the body entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
should be based on transparent, accountable and
coherent procedures in order to address the concerns
of the entire international community and involve all
Members of the United Nations. Open briefings and
debates have been an opportunity for States to share
their views and actively engage in the work of the
Council. We also warmly welcome the practice that
some of the permanent Council members, as well as
those from non-permanent-member States, have begun
of distributing concept papers, and we call on the other
members to follow their example.
We should consider further improvements relating
to the order of speakers and the adoption of outcome
documents, which present an opportunity to help
strengthen the Council. Drafts of presidential statements
and resolutions should be made available before they
are adopted, and non-Council members should be
consulted about them — when, of course, appropriate.
The availability of modern technologies makes such
action possible in a variety of ways. Decisions should
be adopted at the end of debates, not the beginning.
Transparency should be a core element of the
Council’s working methods and can serve as a way to
engage non-members in its work. When mandates are
being drafted, we would welcome early participation
in the process on the part of all Council members, as
well as consultations with the regional organizations
concerned. For the sake of transparency, we would
encourage the Council to open meetings for briefings
by United Nations officials and relevant special
rapporteurs to all United Nations Members, while
allowing for the possibility of holding consultations
privately afterwards.
Every Member of the United Nations has had
to deal with an increasing number of decisions by
the Council. Since all States Members of the United
13-53502

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Nations have a responsibility to support the Council
and hold it accountable for the consistent and effective
implementation of its decisions, we believe that each
and every resolution or decision of the Council should be
accompanied by an action plan for its implementation,
which should, of course, be regularly monitored. In
recent decades, we have witnessed the evolution of
new areas of conflict and issues of concern to the
international community, an evolution that the Security
Council should reflect by reviewing its agenda.
States that have been entrusted with membership
in this body must uphold and promote international
law and ensure that their own decisions are firmly
rooted in that body of law. Accountability and the fight
against impunity must be a foundation for their work
when dealing with breaches of international peace and
security. In that regard, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) should be perceived as an effective mechanism,
one that is based on firm respect for the rule of law,
the protection of civilians and the punishment of grave
atrocities regardless of the perpetrator in a conflict.
We encourage Council members to refer cases of the
most serious crimes of concern to the international

S/PV.7052

community to the ICC and to establish an effective
follow-up mechanism for such actions.
In addition, we repeat our call to the permanent
members to refrain from the use of the veto in situations
involving genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
or serious violations of international humanitarian law.
We welcome France’s initiative condemning the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities and encourage the
other permanent members of the Council to address the
issue seriously and in good faith.
To conclude, it is crucial to ensure that the Security
Council continues to regularly assess how its practice
matches the goals as outlined in presidential note
contained in document S/2010/507 and all its updates,
and that it continues to collect and build on the valuable
input from the United Nations membership as a whole
on ways to further improve its working methods.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on the list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

13-5350233/33
