A /77/PV.30

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

30

th plenary meeting
Monday, 7 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda items 123 and 124
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President: We face multifaceted, complex
and interlinked crises. The General Assembly, which
is the central platform and main vehicle for multilateral
diplomacy, must respond. Crisis management and
transformation are urgently needed. The question is:
are we up to that dual challenge? My answer would
be — not yet. In order for our work to make a difference
to the peoples outside the General Assembly Hall and
the Member States, we must further revitalize this
institution. Our ability to retain the relevance of the
General Assembly depends on our ability to adapt its
work to the challenges of the twenty-first century. As
Charles Darwin once said, it is not the strongest or the
most intelligent who will survive but those who can
best manage change.
The 2023 Sustainable Development Goals Summit
and the 2024 Summit of the Future will be two
milestone events, not just for the General Assembly
but for the entire world. The Assembly needs an
integrated approach so that it can make the best of
those important opportunities. For that purpose, I have
decided to utilize the General Committee as the body
for coordinating and streamlining the various processes
mandated by the General Assembly. As members of
the Assembly know, I recently held the first informal

meeting with the members of the General Committee
and the co-facilitators of those processes. I was
pleased to listen to the discussions, and I plan to build
on them. I hope that initiative will become a part of
our concerted efforts towards making the work of the
General Assembly more synchronized and impactful so
that it can cater to the needs of the world.
While the goal of revitalizing the General Assembly
is a broad and general one, the actual work involved is
often technical. The work is sometimes time-consuming
and frustrating, but it can and does change the Assembly
in a very concrete manner. Resolution 75/325 — the most
recent resolution adopted on this item — biennialized
its consideration, which allowed for more consultations
and deeper examination of specific key topics. Our
further work on revitalizing the Assembly should help
it to better focus on the most burning issues, become
more impact-oriented in conducting its business and be
more able to reach concrete solutions that are relevant
to the world. To that end, we can use solidarity and
science-based decisions to shape and improve the
impact of our work. That is the approach I would like to
continue taking with regard to revitalizing the work of
the General Assembly.
My special thanks go to Ambassadors Fifield
of Australia and González López of El Salvador for
once again taking on the responsibility of leading this
process as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
We expect a draft resolution on the revitalization of the
General Assembly to be adopted at this session.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-67676 (E)
*2267676*

A/77/PV.30

Two years ago, Member States decided that the work
of the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventy-seventh
session should focus on the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General, as well as strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly.
One of those two topics is directly connected to my
Office, and I am willing to offer views and input to
contribute to the work of the Working Group. I trust that
Member States will also extend their full support and
cooperation to the co-Chairs throughout this session. I
look forward to hearing solutions-oriented discussions
among everyone and seeing creative ideas put forward
to make our Assembly even better suited to tackling the
challenges of this new era we have reached.
Members will address practical and technical
matters in the discussions to come, but I ask them
to please always keep in mind the larger, broader
strategic objective of this exercise, which is to serve
the 8 billion people who count on our help. By making
the General Assembly work and focus better, we can
make multilateralism stronger. And by strengthening
multilateralism, we can bring more peace, human rights
and sustainable development to our constituents all
over the world.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
At the outset, ASEAN would like to thank
Ambassadors Egriselda González López of El Salvador
and Mitchell Fifield of Australia for their stewardship
as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
at the seventy-sixth session and congratulate them on
their reappointment for the seventy-seventh session.
We commend the co-Chairs for their commitment,
look forward to productive discussions under their able
leadership and would like to reassure Member States of
ASEAN’s full support and cooperation to that end.
ASEAN welcomes the continuity and momentum of
the work of the revitalization of the General Assembly
following the adoption of resolution 75/325 in 2021. We
appreciate the convening of the four formal meetings of
the Ad Hoc Working Group, which will allow Member
States to engage broadly, guided by the thematic issues
on the role and authority of the General Assembly and
its working methods. We reiterate the important role
of the Main Committees in complementing the work
2/31

07/11/2022

of the Working Group towards further revitalizing the
General Assembly. Building a multilateral system that
remains relevant for responding to emerging challenges
continues to be one of ASEAN’s focuses. Our common
goal is to protect the primacy and credibility of the
General Assembly, which is underpinned by its ability
to function effectively and efficiently within the
parameters set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
Taking that into account, we support the suggestion
that the Ad Hoc Working Group remain focused on
specific clusters at the seventy-sixth and seventyseventh sessions.
ASEAN would also like to highlight two additional
points with regard to the two clusters slated for
discussion by the Working Group at the seventyseventh session.
First, with regard to strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the Assembly,
ASEAN attaches great importance to enhancing the
effectiveness of the Office of the President in serving
the best interests and aspirations of all Member States.
In that regard, ASEAN welcomed the successful
conclusion in September of the second transition
workshop for the Office of the President, which aimed
at strengthening institutional memory, preserving best
practices and working methods and supporting smooth
transitions between presidencies. We also commend
the invaluable briefings on the revitalization process
delivered by the previous co-Chairs to members of
the Office of the President during the workshop. The
General Assembly is the main deliberative — and the
most representative — organ of the United Nations. In
that context, ASEAN strongly feels that the Office of the
President of the General Assembly should not continue
to be mainly dependent on voluntary contributions and
the secondment of officers from Member States and
the sending country of the President. In that regard,
ASEAN fully supports the call for the Office of the
President of the General Assembly to be strengthened
with adequate human and financial resources through
the regular budget.
Secondly, with regard to the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General and other executive
heads, their crucial role in leading and managing the
United Nations and its bodies merits attentive judgment
and careful selection. ASEAN continues to call for a
transparent and open selection process for the position
of Secretary-General and the other executive heads of
22-67676

07/11/2022

the United Nations system, with due consideration for
equitable geographical distribution and representation,
as well as gender balance. It is incumbent upon us to
ensure that the General Assembly remain the most
democratic organ to represent our collective voice. On
that note, ASEAN believes that Member States need
to find ways to reinvigorate and further revitalize the
work of the Assembly.
Let me conclude by reaffirming ASEAN’s
commitment to engaging with all delegations in the
revitalization process in the spirit of inclusivity,
transparency and constructive dialogue.
Mr. Bouchedoub (Algeria): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM), one of the largest cross-regional
groups, which consists of 120 Member States.
At the outset, allow me to express our appreciation
to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
Mr. Mitchell Fifield, Permanent Representative
of Australia, and Mrs. Egriselda González López,
Permanent Representative of El Salvador, for their able
leadership and dedication to the process of revitalization
at the seventy-sixth session of the Assembly.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement
affirms
its
commitment to multilateralism and continuing to work
to revitalize the Assembly. We consider it important
to sustain momentum on this issue, which remains a
crucial priority. It is also an occasion to uphold the
universal values and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and ensure that our Organization is fit
for purpose. In its statements at the informal meeting
of the Ad Hoc Working Group, the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterated that the revitalization of the
General Assembly is indeed a critical component
of the comprehensive reform of the United Nations.
A revitalized Assembly significantly contributes
to strengthening the wider United Nations system,
improving global governance and reinvigorating
multilateralism. In that respect, the Non-Aligned
Movement considers it important to acknowledge that
building on the previous achievements and resolutions
of the General Assembly on the revitalization of its
work helps to enhance its role, authority, efficiency
and effectiveness.
We believe that there have been sustained efforts and
important progress in making the General Assembly’s
work more focused and relevant. Those efforts should

A/77/PV.30

be continued with the support and political will of
all Member States in order to achieve even greater
progress and overcome the persistent differences
regarding the various issues relating to the four clusters
on the agenda of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
A full evaluation of the status of the implementation
of the Assembly’s resolutions and a clear identification
of the underlying causes behind any lack in that regard
remain important if we are to gradually eliminate
the continuing constraints that prevent the process of
revitalizing the General Assembly from living up to
its potential.
In that connection, we look forward to focusing
the discussions at the current session on strengthening
the accountability, transparency and institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly and on the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General and other executive heads, as
outlined in resolution 75/325, which was adopted by
consensus. The Non-Aligned Movement welcomed
the progress made in the resolution, which reflects
Member States’ commitment to a more efficient and
revitalized General Assembly by taking forward a
number of important issues in support of a stronger
Organization and a reinvigorated multilateralism.
We appreciate that concrete steps were agreed and an
action-oriented approach was adopted in the resolution,
as well as the shift towards its biennialization. That
approach offers an opportunity to focus more on
implementation and advance the goals of efficiency and
effectiveness — goals that we are all aiming for. We
acknowledge the important elements of the resolution,
including those pertaining to the improvement of
the General Assembly and its Main Committees, the
rationalization of side events and high-level meetings
held on the margins of the general debate, the initiatives
to strengthen the work of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly and the enhancement of the
Assembly’s role in the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General.
With regard to the role and authority of the General
Assembly, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms
the importance of preserving the intergovernmental,
inclusive and democratic nature of the United Nations,
as well as the need for strict respect for the Charterbased prerogatives of the Organization’s principal
organs, in particular the General Assembly. We also
continue to call for improving the relationship and

22-676763/31

A/77/PV.30

interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council, which are mutually reinforcing
and complementary. The Non-Aligned Movement is
of the view that working methods are only one step
in making more substantive improvements aimed at
restoring and enhancing the role and authority of the
General Assembly. We continue to stress the need to
rationalize its work. The number of high-level and
side events organized in parallel with the general
debate should therefore be kept to a critical minimum
in order to preserve and strengthen the sanctity of the
general debate.
In recognizing the role of the use of information
and communication technologies in the work of the
Organization under exceptional circumstances, we
would like to once again underscore the exceptional
nature of the working methods adopted by the General
Assembly during the coronavirus disease pandemic, as
well as the need to maintain strict compliance with the
Assembly’s rules of procedure, which must continue to
guide its work. We appreciate the fact that the resolution
consolidates the achievements made with regard to the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General,
including through the circulation of a joint letter, as
well as the holding of informal dialogues guided by the
principles of transparency and inclusiveness. We also
welcome the reference to the fact that we have still not
seen a woman Secretary-General. The Non-Aligned
Movement considers it equally important to firmly
support the further enhancement of the efficiency and
effectiveness of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly and recognizes the necessity of conducting
an in-depth review of the Office’s functioning at the
seventy-seventh session.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement remains
convinced that we should all collectively continue to
build on what has already been achieved and identify
areas in which we may achieve further tangible progress
so that we can improve the overall work and role of
the General Assembly. The Non-Aligned Movement
remains fully engaged in contributing to that common
endeavour. We therefore reaffirm our commitment
to participating constructively in the process of
revitalizing the General Assembly’s work at the current
session with the aim of strengthening its role as the
chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter. NAM reaffirms the role
and authority of the General Assembly, including in
4/31

07/11/2022

addressing questions related to international peace and
security. The Movement wishes to express its objection
to the increased encroachment of the Security Council
on matters that clearly fall within the prerogatives and
powers of the General Assembly and its subsidiary
organs. NAM reaffirms the importance of preserving
the intergovernmental, inclusive and democratic
nature of the United Nations, as well as the need for
strict respect for the Charter-based prerogatives of
the United Nations principal organs, in particular the
General Assembly. We will continue to provide support
towards achieving inclusiveness, transparency and
efficiency in the United Nations.
In that context, the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms its commitment to continue contributing
effectively and constructively to the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly. In addition, NAM stands ready to
cooperate with the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, as well as Secretary-General
António Guterres, in order to strengthen the role of
the General Assembly. The Non-Aligned Movement
stresses the importance of preserving the inclusive
intergovernmental nature of future negotiations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this session’s first
plenary meeting on the issue of the revitalization of the
General Assembly.
I deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The countries
Türkiye, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
We feel reassured by your commitment,
Mr. President, to treating this file with the utmost priority
and look forward to your guidance and leadership.
We also strongly support your decision to reappoint,
for the seventy-seventh session of the Assembly,
both co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly for
the previous session, Ambassadors Egriselda González
López of El Salvador and Mitchell Fifield of Australia,
in keeping with the notion of never changing a winning
team. From the onset, the co-Chairs provided for a
22-67676

07/11/2022

A/77/PV.30

structured and targeted work programme, with a focus
on implementing what was agreed in resolution 75/325.
We know we are in very good hands, and are confident
that we can make further progress at this session.
The President’s letter of 25 August, which contains a
summary of the key proposals made at the previous
session, provides an excellent basis for our work, and
we look forward to receiving the comprehensive report
in the course of this month.

we further improved the process during the seventyfifth session by ensuring that the Organization gets the
best possible leadership, which is chosen in a process
that adheres to the highest standards in terms of open,
inclusive and transparent conduct. We also welcome the
reference in resolution 75/325 to encourage Member
States to put forward more female candidates for the
highest office, in the recognition that the Organization
has not yet seen a female Secretary-General.

We clearly share the assessment of the co-Chairs that
the previous session delivered on the hoped-for benefits
of biennialization, giving us the space to discuss issues
more in depth without the pressure of having to adopt
a draft resolution. We therefore encourage the further
biennialization and triennialization of other resolutions.
And we count on your renewed guidance, Sir, with clear
timelines and a precise and realistic programme of
work, and feel reassured by your remarks this morning.
We also very much welcomed your comments at last
week’s General Committee meeting. To use a sports
analogy, the club’s management is well aligned and now
we the players need to deliver.

With regard to the chapter on the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, we acknowledge the
President of the General Assembly’s key role in steering
the work of this body, and we therefore consider efforts
to further strengthen the accountability, transparency
and institutional memory of his Office to be essential.
We fully recognize the need for the President to have
an adequately staffed and adequately funded office
to be able to fulfil his role and mandate. At the same
time, we strongly commend the approach that you,
Mr. President, have adopted by taking a thorough look
at the real needs instead of simply calling for more staff.
Further streamlining and prioritizing the work of this
organ, in line with our agreed priorities as enshrined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), should remain our
guiding principle. In line with Our Common Agenda, we
strongly encourage you, Mr. President, to facilitate the
active and systematic engagement of young people and
other stakeholders in our work. That is the best way to
ensure inclusiveness, transparency and accountability.
The Assembly can count on the EU’s constructive
engagement throughout this session.

Resolution 75/325 — in which we agreed to
focus not exclusively but as a priority on the Office
of the President of the General Assembly and the
selection and appointment process of the SecretaryGeneral — provides our road map for the current
session, together with the summary prepared by
the co-Chairs. At the same time, the two chapters
discussed in detail at the previous session remain
the bread and butter of our work and will certainly
be given due attention in the light of negotiating the
adoption of an all-encompassing resolution by the end
of the session. We also lend our support to many of the
concrete proposals in the co-Chairs’ summary, such as
making better use of the General Committee, hand-over
meetings between outgoing and incoming committee
Chairs and a voluntary pledge to limit the number
of side events during the general debate. We also
encourage you, Sir, to continue in the footsteps of you
predecessor when it comes to efforts towards achieving
gender parity for high-level and other meetings of the
General Assembly and embedding gender equality into
the working methods of this organ. We also count on
your support in strengthening multilingualism as a core
value of the Organization.
Turning to the two chapters we agreed to discuss as
a priority at the current session, when it comes to the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General,

Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica): I am honoured
to take the floor on behalf of the 27 members of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group. The group is comprised of Austria, Chile,
Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Ghana,
Hungary, Ireland, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Uruguay and my own
country, Costa Rica.
The ACT group promotes a more transparent and
efficient United Nations. We believe that the process of
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
constitutes an important avenue towards achieving that
goal. We welcome the adoption of resolution 75/325 and
value the constructive discussions held at the previous
session by Mrs. Egriselda González López, Permanent

22-676765/31

A/77/PV.30

Representative of El Salvador, and Mr. Mitchell Fifield,
Permanent Representative of Australia, and thank them
for guiding our work. We take note of the summary
of discussions that was circulated with relevant
suggestions on how to improve the role and authority of
the General Assembly, its working methods and other
cross-cutting issues. That constitutes a very useful
input for our negotiations. We look forward to another
productive session under their able leadership. The ACT
group is keen to continue the excellent collaboration
with all Member States and groups of States towards
the adoption a new resolution at the current session.
As you, Mr. President, mentioned at the most recent
meeting of the General Committee, held on 28 October,
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
is a critical component of the overall reform of the
United Nations. According to the most recent resolution
on that topic (resolution 75/325), we agreed that the
primary focus at the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly would be on strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
as well as on the transparent and inclusive selection
and appointment process of the Secretary-General and
other executive heads. In that regard, the current session
takes on particular significance as an opportunity to
put in place a predictable and transparent timeline for
the Secretary-General selection process to begin at the
eightieth session of the General Assembly. Agreeing
an indicative time frame for the process would ease
procedural burdens and improve the clarity of the
process for Member States and candidates alike. As
ACT group proposed previously, we would suggest the
starting point of the process to be October of the year
preceding the appointment, with a deadline of April of
the appointment year for the presentation of candidates,
in order to ensure a transparent and predictable process.
At the seventy-fifth session, we began crucial
discussions on that and two other aspects of the
nomination and selection process of the SecretaryGeneral, which are still pending: first, the prospect of
multiple candidates being recommended; and secondly,
the term of the office of the Secretary-General. We
consider clarifications in those three areas to be vital
in order to ensure a process with the greatest possible
transparency and inclusiveness. That is undoubtedly
what is expected from us as an Assembly in that most
crucial matter. We must continue to build on resolutions
69/321 of 2015 and 70/305 of 2016, which constitute
6/31

07/11/2022

the framework of the truly historic, inclusive and
transparent process of the selection and appointment
of the current Secretary-General, which continues to
provide the basis of our efforts.
We look forward to continuing the discussion, and
we recall the ACT Group’s position paper and lessons
learned document on the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General, which were transmitted to the
President of the General Assembly and the President
of the Security Council and circulated to all Member
States in documents A/76/950, A/75/755 and A/72/514,
of 16 September 2022, 17 February 2021 and 9 October
2017, respectively. The ACT group continues to stress
the importance of the annual report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly. We continue to call
for the report to be submitted to the Assembly on time.
In that respect we acknowledge the observation by the
Security Council in recent years of that timeline, as set
out in presidential note S/2019/997. We now challenge
the Council to build on its excellent progress. The
Assembly would no doubt benefit from an even shorter
period between the end of the year in question and the
debate on the report in order to allow for a more timely
and relevant discussion. We hope that consultations
with the broader membership can be organized, in line
with paragraph 129 of presidential note S/2017/507, in
order to assess the work of the Council ahead of the
drafting of the introduction of the report.
We reiterate that the Council should make better
use of the annual report to provide a more complete,
substantive and analytical account of its work to the
General Assembly, as recently called for repeatedly
by the Assembly. The annual report must also reflect
the special reports of the Council. The use of special
reports is an important innovation that brings Security
Council practice closer in line with the Charter of the
United Nations. We thank the Council for its consistent
production of special reports in line with resolution
76/262. Going forward, we note that special reports
can also be used in other scenarios in order to ensure
that the General Assembly is kept informed. In terms
of substance, we encourage the codification of lessons
learned from the coronavirus disease pandemic in
order to prepare for future contingencies and preserve
institutional memory in working methods. We also
suggest including further analysis on the draft
resolutions that failed to be adopted by the Council,
including, when applicable, the use of the veto. In that
22-67676

07/11/2022

regard, we recall the important mechanism adopted by
the General Assembly to ensure accountability on the
use of the veto under resolution 76/262.
In conclusion, the ACT group will continue its focus
this session on the important role and authority of the
General Assembly. In times of increasing tensions and
divisions within the international community, a strong
and efficient General Assembly could not be more
important. In times when parts of the United Nations
system are unable to fulfil their mandate, the General
Assembly bears a special responsibility. It needs to
step up to ensure peace and protect the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, we saw that the General
Assembly was able to step up when a veto was cast
in the Security Council. The veto initiative is crucial
for ensuring accountability within the United Nations
system and strengthening the role of the General
Assembly. The ACT group looks forward to working
with all Member States to agree focused and targeted
solutions during the upcoming thematic discussions
and sessions and dialogues of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. We remain committed to making a concrete
contribution to promoting a more transparent, efficient
and coherent United Nations, and thereby a strengthened
multilateral system, with the United Nations at its core.
Mr. Adam (Maldives): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its sincere gratitude
to Mr. Mitchell Fifield and Mrs. Egriselda González
López, Permanent Representatives of Australia and El
Salvador, respectively, for their leadership as co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly at the seventysixth session.
The United Nations embodies the hopes of all,
irrespective of status, class or gender, and of those who
believe in peaceful dialogue to solve global problems.
Within the United Nations, the General Assembly
remains the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative organ. It stands at the centre of our
multilateral system. Therefore, it is vital to ensure that
the General Assembly remains effective and efficient
in fulfilling the functions outlined under the Charter
of the United Nations. A stronger United Nations
requires a more robust General Assembly. Continual
efforts have been made in the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly. In that regard, we welcome
the transparency in the selection and appointment
process of the Secretary-General, as well as the recent

A/77/PV.30

enhancement of the relationship and coordination
among the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council. We also applaud the
continuous encouragement to seek gender balance and
geographical representation in the distribution of the
Chairs and Bureau members of the Main Committee, as
well as among invited speakers and panellists.
The United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, must keep pace with and respond to the rapid
changes taking place in the world. That was evident
during the worst of the coronavirus disease outbreak,
when Member States remained firmly committed to
keeping the General Assembly functioning despite
the limitations. Moreover, strengthening coordination
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council is vital and will
enhance and reinforce accountability, coherence and
transparency among the three main bodies. We also saw
Member States of the General Assembly stepping up to
uphold global peace and security — a principle enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations — by convening
the eleventh emergency special session this year when
the Security Council failed to effectively address the
challenge. We also welcome the adoption of the veto
initiative contained in resolution 76/262 — a resolution
that Maldives was happy to co-sponsor. Therefore, the
Maldives supports increasing the substantial role and
moral authority of the General Assembly.
The Maldives believes that improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of the General Assembly
is critical — an overarching objective outlined in
resolution 75/325. Many resolutions are recycled year
after year with few substantive updates and without
mechanisms for assessing their implementation.
Furthermore, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), our focus must be
on implementation rather than increasing the number
of new resolutions and mandates. In that regard,
we must do more to reduce the content and number
of resolutions. We must continue to implement our
decision to biennialize and streamline resolutions. That
would allow us to free up resources to address more
pressing issues, such as concrete measures to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.
We also welcome the decision of the Ad Hoc
Working Group to focus primarily on strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly
and the procedure for the selection and appointment

22-676767/31

A/77/PV.30

of the Secretary-General and other executive heads at
the seventy-seventh session. In order to improve the
accountability and transparency of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretariat can
strengthen the induction programme through enhanced
content and more efficient delivery in order to equip the
staff with adequate knowledge and skills. Moreover, the
institutional memory of the Office can be strengthened
by retaining high-level employees in order to decrease
the learning curve with regard to the internal workings
of the United Nations.
Despite the progress made in the selection and
appointment process of the Secretary-General, there is
still much work left to be done. In that regard, Member
States must consider nominating more women for that
post. As highlighted by our Foreign Minister, Abdulla
Shahid, the President of the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session, it is high time for a woman to be
appointed as Secretary-General.
In conclusion, the Maldives acknowledges the
results yielded to date in revitalizing the work of the
General Assembly. However, as Member States, it is
our duty to contribute further to revitalizing the main
policymaking organ of the world’s only truly universal
global Organization. Only by doing so will we be able
to contribute towards the overall efforts to reform the
United Nations and reinvigorate multilateralism in
international affairs.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your excellent leadership on the critical issue of
revitalizing the work of the General Assembly.
At the outset, my delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representative of Malaysia,
on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
as well as by the representative of Algeria, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
These are troubled times. It is clear that the Security
Council is not always able to discharge its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The global economy faces headwinds,
and we are falling behind on addressing climate change
and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Yet a rules-based multilateral system in which all
Member States have an equal voice remains critical to
international peace, security and prosperity. The role
played by the General Assembly has therefore become
even more critical in defending the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and strengthening the
8/31

07/11/2022

rules-based multilateral system. To achieve actual
outcomes, the General Assembly must continue to be
nimble, effective and inclusive and — most important
of all — we must ensure that the revitalization exercise
does not in itself become an exercise in routine
and rhetoric.
Ultimately, the test of the revitalization programme
or process lies in whether we can deliver real action
through concrete steps — not just by words and
talk on revitalization. In that regard, I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Mitchell Fifield, Permanent
Representative of Australia, and Ambassador Egriselda
González López, Permanent Representative of El
Salvador, on their reappointments as co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly during the seventy-seventh
session. They have done an excellent job in steering
the process thus far, and we have every confidence that
they will lead us to greater heights. We are pleased that
they have agreed to continue steering the work of the
Group, and we strongly support their proposal for us
to focus on the list of issues identified in their letter of
25 August 2022. I call on the co-Chairs to be bold and
ambitious in their work during this session in order to
push the boundaries of possible reforms and to raise
the level of ambition far beyond “business as usual”.
I pledge the support of my delegation in pursuing
ambitious outcomes from this very important process.
My delegation is encouraged by the tangible
progress made to revitalize the work of the General
Assembly in recent years. There are many concrete
examples of the work we have achieved, including the
decision to biennialize the revitalization process or
resolution, to elect the President, Vice-Presidents and
Chairs of the Main Committees at least three months
in advance of a new session and to enhance dialogue
between Member States and the Secretariat. Still, we
think we can do more.
In that regard,
three suggestions.

please

allow

me

to

make

First, I think we should strive for a greater degree
of coherence and coordination across the multiplicity of
processes and workstreams. With the many mandated
processes launched, there is a real risk of fragmentation
and a lack of coherence in how the various processes are
carried out. We therefore welcome your commitment,
Mr. President, to leverage the General Committee and
use it as an inclusive platform for all Member States
22-67676

07/11/2022

to take stock regularly during dedicated meetings and
to engage in what I call big-picture conversations. We
also believe that we can use the General Committee for
joint briefings by the Secretary-General, the Deputy
Secretary-General, heads of specialized United Nations
agencies and other relevant stakeholders and experts.
We believe that would help improve synergies and
tighten coordination across the Main Committees
and mandated processes. I truly believe that it is time
to make greater use of the General Committee as a
platform to share information among delegations and
to try to have an overview of what we do here in the
General Assembly, rather than let the multiplicity of the
processed launched to proceed individually and work
in silos.
One specific area where greater coordination
through the General Committee could yield concrete
benefits is scheduling. I think there is merit in
bettering coordinating a schedule to allow us to
minimize overlapping meetings, particularly during
times when voting and other election procedures are
scheduled to take place. That is especially salient for
delegations from small States, which inevitably have
very few representatives or diplomats and have to run
from meeting room to meeting room. We should not
disadvantage smaller delegations — or any delegation,
for that matter — and we should ensure that they are not
excluded from participating in the various mandated
processes just because many meetings may take place
at the same time.
Secondly, we must continue to rationalize and
streamline the General Assembly’s agenda. My
delegation reiterates our support to cluster items
and resolutions and introduce sunset clauses where
possible. We are very concerned that, if left unchecked,
the proliferation of agenda items, as well as lengthy
and repetitive resolutions, will serve only to undermine
swift action by the General Assembly. We think it is
time to get serious about rationalizing the General
Assembly’s agenda.
At the seventy-sixth session, the General Assembly
adopted 307 resolutions and 140 decisions, up from 297
resolutions and 108 decisions at the sixty-sixth General
Assembly. The work of the General Assembly has
expanded, if not exploded exponentially. We believe
that the time is ripe to seriously consider bolder ideas
to streamline the agenda. One idea we would like
to suggest is to biennialize any resolution adopted
annually with only technical updates unless there is

A/77/PV.30

consensus to do otherwise, for a specific resolution. In
such a case, we would focus on the reasons to accord
an exception to such a resolution. We could even go
further — to automatically biennialize every single
annual resolution. We are ready for that move. Is any
delegation willing to work with us on that idea? Please
let us know. Another idea we would like to suggest is
to automatically triennialize every biennial resolution
unless there is consensus otherwise for a specific
resolution, in which case delegations are welcome to
present the specific reason as to why a given biennial
resolution should be granted an exemption. Once again,
we are ready for ambitious reforms, and we invite
colleagues to work with us and with the co-facilitators.
But whatever we do, it is time to get serious about
streamlining the agenda of the General Assembly.
Thirdly, we must continue to strengthen the Office
of the President of the General Assembly. An active and
hands-on President can make a real difference — as
we are seeing in the current Office of the President of
the General Assembly and the leadership and initiative
of our current President, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, whom we
thank for his leadership — to shaping our collective
agenda for the better. We strongly welcome efforts by
all Presidents to participate in retreats to strengthen
the General Assembly, comprising the incoming
and outgoing presidencies of each session, in order
to provide a comprehensive handover report and to
introduce morning dialogues on relevant topics of the
day, as such dialogues allow for a safe space to have
informal conversations on critical issues confronting
the international community.
We therefore support the long-standing calls for the
Office of the President to be given adequate human and
financial resources, as indicated in resolution 73/325,
rather than making the Office rely mainly on voluntary
contributions and secondments. We think it is time
to address that issue seriously. The Office of the
President is an important one, and its running and
resourcing should be properly institutionalized. The
issue of providing sufficient financial and human
resources for the Office is particularly important for
small countries because many of them have provided
candidates who have gone on to serve as Presidents of
the General Assembly, and I would add that they have
served with great distinction and leadership. Moreover,
it is important that we allow small States to continue to
provide candidates to serve in that important position, as
small States, by their nature, have limited resources and

22-676769/31

A/77/PV.30

would not be able to bring their own resources to fund
the Office of the President of the General Assembly.
We should not disadvantage smaller countries from
aspiring to hold the highest office, which is why the
issue of adequate financial and human resources for the
Office is vitally important.
The world is looking to the United Nations — and to
the General Assembly, if I may add — for leadership at
a time of great geopolitical and economic uncertainty.
If the General Assembly is to remain relevant and
respected, we must redouble our efforts to modernize
and revitalize its working methods and deliver concrete
results. My delegation stands ready to work with all
Member States to deliver ambitious outcomes at this
session’s meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I join other delegations in congratulating Ambassador
Egriselda Aracely González López, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador, and Ambassador
Mitchell Fifield, Permanent Representative of
Australia, on their reappointment as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly.
Ecuador associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Costa Rica, on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, and Algeria, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
With the biennialization of the resolution on
revitalization, we must continue to engage in the
implementation of the mandates and recommendations
deriving from resolution 75/325 and its predecessors.
At this seventy-seventh session, we must also adopt
another flagship resolution that will allow us to project
that progress forward for another two years. It is the
responsibility of all to implement the arrangements we
agreed during the negotiations two years ago, and that
applies to all aspects of General Assembly resolutions.
My delegation is convinced that the best way to
reflect the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency
of the General Assembly is through the implementation
and execution of the recommendations emanating from
it. I add that implementation falls on both the States and
the organs of the United Nations system. At the end of
this process, we should be able to clearly identify what
we have implemented and to what degree.
10/31

07/11/2022

The training and coaching of delegations in the
exercise of drafting and negotiating resolutions and
action-oriented decisions is, undoubtedly, important.
But we must also recognize that it is not only about
optimizing capacities, but also about a political effort
of prioritization. It is true that the Assembly is like
a sounding board that amplifies the narratives of all
countries, but it is time to make better use of it as a driver
for implementation. In the discussions of the process,
we should keep in mind that the General Assembly is the
forum for establishing policies and recommendations,
while the Economic and Social Council is to review,
assess and support their implementation.
Ecuador will continue to work to improve the
Assembly’s relationship with the Security Council. We
stress that its relationship is indispensable, as illustrated
by the implementation of resolution 76/262, known
as the veto initiative, for which three special reports
have been presented in the plenary. On that point, I
wish to stress that the monthly meetings between the
President of the Assembly and the monthly President
of the Security Council should be maintained and their
discussions deepened.
Finally, Ecuador, together with Malaysia, Finland
and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research, held the second transitional workshop
between officials of the Office of the President of the
Assembly in September, and we hope to continue that
practice. I commend the leadership of the President of
the Assembly. Let us also move forward during this
session in building on and improving our working
methods so that the revitalization process also remains
the first example of the modernization of our work.
Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
come to this debate, which should be one of the highest
priorities for the Organization, because it concerns our
General Assembly, the universal forum par excellence
and guarantor of the legal equality of States. But
let us be frank, if we are talking about the need for
revitalization, it is because the Assembly carries inertia
and practices that undermine its effectiveness vis-à-vis
the Organization, but above all vis-à-vis our peoples.
In recent years we have been able to reaffirm the
primacy and significance of the Assembly’s general
debate amid the proliferation of side events organized
in the framework of the high-level week. Although
it was for health reasons, this year we saw how the
debate took place without holding informal meetings
22-67676

07/11/2022

in this building, thereby sharpening the focus on the
pronouncements of our leaders and promoting bilateral
meetings and dialogues.
On the other hand, the accommodations made in the
face of the coronavirus disease pandemic generated new
practices that we should assess and, where appropriate,
maintain. While nothing can replace face-to-face
diplomacy, we must recognize the flexibility that virtual
and hybrid formats allow. They can facilitate various
aspects of our work in the General Assembly. Measures
such as the consolidation of debates on various agenda
items or the establishment of interactive debates allow
us to counter the rigidity of lists of speakers and open
up space for genuine diplomatic debate.
The legislative role of the General Assembly is
often hampered and devalued by the application of the
so-called “consensus rule”, which in practice represents
a veto for the 193 members of the General Assembly.
While it is our duty to seek ways to achieve such
consensus, it should be seen as an aspiration and not
as an end in itself, since, more often than not, we have
observed how it becomes a way of blocking the action
of the General Assembly. It should not be necessary to
say that resolutions and decisions adopted through a
vote must be viewed with full legitimacy.
Recent events reveal the importance of political
signals from the General Assembly. Actions such as
the adoption of resolution 76/262, on the response to
a veto in the Security Council, demonstrate that this
organ can respond in a timely manner to the needs of
the international environment. Following that example,
we urge reflection on further steps that will bring the
General Assembly to the centre of international affairs,
with continuous improvements, and let us move beyond
the notion that it needs to be revitalized.
Against that backdrop, the work to be undertaken
in the Ad Hoc Working Group must be one of the
highest priorities for the Organization, with a view
to reaffirming the role and value of the General
Assembly and its deliberative character. We welcome
the appointment of the Permanent Representatives
of El Salvador and Australia to continue to lead its
work. We acknowledge recent steps, such as the early
commencement of the work of the President of the
General Assembly and his Office, recommendations
on the nomination of candidates, the nomination and
approval of the Secretary-General and the call for more
women candidates to be nominated.

A/77/PV.30

Finally, the launch of the report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and the intergovernmental discussions on
it are an opportunity for us, along with this debate, to
move towards effective and inclusive multilateralism.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this joint debate on the
agenda items “Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations” and “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly”.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
extend our warm congratulations on the reappointment
of Mrs. Egriselda Aracely González López, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador, and Mr. Mitchell Fifield,
Permanent Representative of Australia, as co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly. We also salute their
remarkable work during the previous session, which
demonstrated their professionalism, determination
and leadership.
I take the opportunity of this joint debate to recall
resolution 75/325, which contains many practical
and concrete measures to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the General Assembly. The resolution
has led to significant progress on a wide range of
important reform issues. The decision to review
biennially the revitalization process itself is important,
as it will allow us to better focus our efforts on a
more detailed implementation of our decisions and to
together reflect in-depth on future actions. We hope
that this biennial rhythm will pave the way for further
streamlining of other General Assembly processes.
We also welcome the decision to amend rule 1 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, which
will take effect at the start of the seventy-eighth session
and which will allow the session to start on the Tuesday
of the second week of September, one week earlier than
current practice, in order to give the new presidency
and its Bureau more time to prepare for the general
debate and the high-level week.
While the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has had an impact on the work of the
General Assembly, and on that of the United Nations in
general, it has also given us the opportunity to reflect
on how effectively the General Assembly is adapting
its working methods in order to enable it to continue
addressing global challenges as they evolve.

22-6767611/31

A/77/PV.30

The purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations guide the conduct of international
relations. In that context, we reiterate the importance
of the rigorous implementation of the provisions of
the Charter relating to the prerogatives of each organ.
Moreover, scrupulous respect for Article 12 is a sine
qua non condition in order to avoid interference and
encroachment between the functions and powers of
the main organs and will contribute to the effective
revitalization of the General Assembly.
A revitalized General Assembly would contribute
significantly to bolstering the United Nations system
as a whole and to strengthening multilateralism.
The revitalization of the General Assembly, the
main deliberative and decision-making organ of the
United Nations, plays an indispensable, pivotal role
in the overall reform of the Organization and in the
strengthening of multilateralism. Now more than
ever, multilateralism must be improved so that we are
able to meet the challenges facing humankind in an
increasingly interdependent and interconnected world.
In that context, we reiterate our support for the
important reforms introduced by the Secretary-General,
the positive results of which are already enabling the
United Nations to better address the complex and
multidimensional developments in our world. We
also thank him for the report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which we support and which covers a wide
range of challenges that require our attention and a
series of recommendations that deserve serious and
thoughtful follow-up. The report presents a vision of
how to reinvigorate inclusive, networked and effective
multilateralism, especially in the COVID-19 era, and
will help us get back on track to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The implementation of that road map reflects
strong recognition that our Organization is the most
representative platform for multilateral action par
excellence to address the global challenges of the
twenty-first century and to strengthen international
solidarity. We eagerly look forward to the submission
by the Secretary-General, early next year, of working
papers that will enable us to better prepare for the
Summit of the Future and to adopt the decisions needed
to meet the current challenges facing humankind.
We also welcome the tangible and constructive
progress made in recent years in revitalizing the work
of the General Assembly, thanks to our joint efforts and
12/31

07/11/2022

the successful completion of initiatives emanating from
the Working Group. We call on all Member States to
continue in the same spirit in order to consolidate the
achievements of previous sessions.
We note with satisfaction the measures taken by
the Secretariat, and in particular by the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management, to
implement the decisions of the General Assembly on
the revitalization of this organ and to ensure the smooth
conduct of our meetings and other activities within
the Organization.
With regard to the financial and liquidity crisis
that our Organization continues to face, we welcome
the speed and effectiveness of measures taken by the
Secretary-General in that regard. In our common goal
of revitalizing the General Assembly and ensuring the
smooth functioning of the Organization, it is incumbent
upon us all to ensure that the United Nations has all
the financial and administrative means necessary
for its proper operations. In that connection, we
appreciate the commendable efforts and achievements
of the Department of Management Strategy, Policy and
Compliance to ensure the necessary budgetary balances
for the proper functioning of the Organization.
It is important to continue to work towards
increasing synergies and coherence between the issues
on the agenda of the various Committees and to ensure
the alignment of the General Assembly’s agenda with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
With regard to the working methods of the General
Assembly, we support the efforts to increase gender
parity within the United Nations and welcome the
commitment and outstanding developments introduced
by the Secretary-General in order to ensure gender
equality, already achieved at the level of senior officials,
for all staff of the Organization.
Morocco welcomes efforts to make the selection
process for the appointment of the Secretary-General
and other senior United Nations officials more inclusive,
transparent and effective.
We welcome the provisions contained in resolutions 70/305 and 71/323, which have led to several notable advances. In that regard, we also note with interest
the steps already taken to strengthen the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly through the organization of relevant thematic debates. My delegation
22-67676

07/11/2022

underscores the importance of providing the Office of
the President of the General Assembly with sufficient
long-term human resources, which are essential to ensuring that it functions effectively and preserving its
institutional memory.
Lastly, I would like to recall that the process of
revitalizing the work of the General Assembly requires
the continuous commitment of all Member States, as
well as genuine political will, in order to realize its
noble goals. In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco
reaffirms its commitment to continuing to contribute
effectively, constructively and responsibly to the work
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this plenary meeting on the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly.
At the outset, Japan would like to thank Ambassador
Mitchell Fifield, Permanent Representative of
Australia, and Ambassador Egriselda Aracely González
López, Permanent Representative of El Salvador, for
their leadership as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly at the seventy-sixth session, and to
congratulate them on their reappointment as co-Chairs
for the seventy-seventh session. We look forward to
productive discussions leading to the adoption of an
action-oriented draft resolution in order to heighten the
Assembly’s efficiency, effectiveness and transparency.
Today the international order faces multifaceted
challenges, and the role of the United Nations has
become more important than ever. The Security
Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but
in certain circumstances we have seen the Council
unable to respond to its expectations. Since the General
Assembly is the forum in which all Member States
gather, embodying the just cause of the international
community, I believe that we shall restore confidence
in the United Nation by strengthening the General
Assembly through its revitalization. It is also important
to explore further ideas as to whether there is a role
that the General Assembly can play in the issue of
the exercise of the veto. We would like to continue
to deepen discussions with Member States on that
issue. Based on resolution 75/325, we will deepen
our discussion on strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of

A/77/PV.30

the President of the General Assembly and the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General and other
executive heads. In that regard, Japan would like to
highlight the following points, as well as to reiterate a
number of points discussed at the seventy-sixth session,
as they are interlinked and crucial to consider during
the negotiation of this session’s draft resolution.
We believe that it is desirable to make rules and
timelines with regard to making the selection process
of the Secretary-General more transparent and visible.
I would like to remind everyone of the note contained
in the annex to the identical letters dated 1 February
2017 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security Council (see A/71/774),
which was intended to provide an overview of the entire
selection process, with a description of the achievements
made during the 2016 process and the lessons learned
for future selection processes. Japan will continue to
explore possible steps towards achieving that goal.
Japan is willing to take an active part in the followup process to the Secretary-General’s Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982). Member States should seriously
discuss in the General Assembly what kind of world
they would like to hand over to future generations,
bearing in mind the preparations for the Sustainable
Development Goals Summit to be held next year and
the Summit of the Future to be held in 2024. In Our
Common Agenda, the Secretary-General recognizes
the importance of the revitalization of the General
Assembly so that the United Nations will be able to
tackle multifaceted challenges in the years to come.
Japan commends your initiative, Mr. President, to
make use of the General Committee for coordination
with the co-facilitators, as all discussions towards
those goals should be appropriately integrated so that
the General Assembly can effectively hear the voices of
Member States in order to make a great achievement.
Under the leadership of Germany and Namibia, as
co-facilitators, and with the full support of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, Member
States should actively join in the process.
In order to enable the General Assembly to
be effectively represented by the President of the
General Assembly, the latter should enjoy the solid
organizational support of the Secretariat as well as
the support of Member States, both of which are
indispensable. We should make full use of the Ad Hoc

22-6767613/31

A/77/PV.30

Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly to make the Assembly’s debates and
decisions more relevant to impending global issues. In
that regard, further efforts should be made to streamline
the Assembly’s agenda, in close consultation with the
Bureaus of the Main Committees, the Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary bodies. We should
consider biennialization, triennialization and clustering,
as well as the elimination of items, where appropriate,
with a view to promoting an in-depth discussion
under each item in an efficient manner. In addition,
further interaction and continued coordination among
the Presidents of the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council should
be encouraged, including complementarity between
the General Assembly and the Security Council in the
event that a veto is cast in the Security Council, based
on resolution 76/262, adopted in April.

07/11/2022

United Nations, it is also a platform of truth, justice
and hope. Its members meet in this Hall and share the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and for safeguarding the gains made
by humankind, and promote cooperation for achieving
development and preserving human rights. We must all
therefore pursue joint efforts and address shortcomings
and imbalances while working tirelessly to advance and
upgrade the working mechanisms and methods of the
General Assembly, in addition to exploring the means
available to achieve our shared goals and realize our
desired hopes.

The revitalization of the General Assembly
remains a priority for all Member States, and Japan is
determined to work earnestly to further strengthen the
functions of the General Assembly in cooperation with
the United Nations as a whole so that it can play an even
greater role in the maintenance of peace and security.

The State of Kuwait underscores that revitalizing
and reforming the General Assembly represents
an essential pillar in the overall reform process of
the United Nations. We reiterate in that regard the
Secretary General’s vision set out in Our Common
Agenda, setting a road map for United Nations work for
the years to come. We look forward to continuing our
work in line with General Assembly resolution 75/325,
which established the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
in order to advance the role and the authority of the
General Assembly. That resolution is indeed a step in
the right direction.

Mr. Althayedi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank Ambassador
Mitchell Fifield, Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations, and Mrs. Egriselda González
López, Permanent Representative of El Salvador
to the United Nations, for their constructive efforts
during their joint chairmanship of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. I wish them every success.

In order to safeguard the inclusive and pluralistic
nature of the General Assembly, the State of Kuwait
stresses the importance of prioritizing issues that are
of interest to the largest number of Member States.
To promote its inclusive nature, we also reaffirm the
importance of equality among all official languages of
the United Nations. Linguistic diversity is important,
as is the quality of translation on United Nations online
sites and during its meetings and sessions.

Our world today faces significant challenges in
complex and unprecedented circumstances that threaten
the coherence of our international community and cast a
shadow over all achievements that humankind has made
in terms of progress, growth and peace. More than ever,
those challenges today demonstrate our dire need to take
concerted efforts and to promote ties of cooperation to
preserve the gains made by the United Nations, a noble
organization that has consistently been a leader of and
compass for international efforts.

Digital technology has profoundly transformed our
societies, and the information revolution has made us
change our working methods. In order to adapt to our era
and the progress made, we underscore the importance
of harnessing technological means to promote the
use of digital technology at the United Nations and
preserve its archive and institutional memory. We
commend the efforts made by those responsible for the
Journal, and we look forward to developing it further
in order to easily access information and facilitate
working methods. We also commend the work of the
Department of Global Communications in the creation,
promotion and dissemination of content in various
official languages and its role in highlighting the work
of the General Assembly and effectively countering
false information, misinformation and disinformation.

The Charter on the basis of which the Organization
was founded clearly stipulated the tasks conferred upon
its principal organs, in particular the General Assembly.
In addition to being the most inclusive executive organ
in the world and the main decision-making body at the
14/31

22-67676

07/11/2022

It is also important to shed light on the
complementary nature of the work of the General
Assembly and that of its main committees, as well as
of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary
organs. Further coordination between them and the
General Assembly will limit overlaps and the repetition
of agenda items, and that in turn will enhance the
efficiency of the work towards achieving 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
Turning to the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, we emphasize
the importance of promoting cooperation between
them on the basis of the principles of transparency and
accountability. From the beginning, the State of Kuwait
supported resolution 76/262, which requires convening
a formal meeting of the General Assembly within 10
working days of the casting of a veto by a permanent
member of the Security Council in order to facilitate
a debate on the relevant situation. We believe that the
resolution will substantially add value to the work of
the General Assembly and its effectiveness in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, we are cognizant that the process
of developing the working methods of the General
Assembly needs ongoing work and serious efforts to
make headway in the joint action towards a broader
horizon that will enable us to address effectively
anything that happens in the international arena. I
reaffirm the full belief of the State of Kuwait in the
international multilateral system and in supporting
everything that can safeguard it and strengthen
its foundations.
Mr. Mohammad Aamir Khan (Pakistan): At the
outset, let me thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting. Let me also thank and commend Ambassador
Mitchell Fifield, Permanent Representative of
Australia, and Ambassador Egriselda González López,
Permanent Representative of El Salvador, for their
able stewardship of the revitalization process during
the seventy-sixth session and the energy and vitality
that they have both brought to the discussions on this
important topic. We look forward to continuing to work
with them and Member States with the aim of advancing
these discussions.

A/77/PV.30

Pakistan aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to
add a few points in my national capacity, as well.
A key motivating factor in the revitalization debate
has been the disparity between the General Assembly
and the Security Council. Under the Charter of the
United Nations, both organs have separate, yet important,
roles, and making optimum use of those assigned roles is
key to achieving progress in the revitalization process,
particularly at a time when the Security Council is
in paralysis and trust in the United Nations ability to
tackle multifaceted global challenges is at an all-time
low. Against that backdrop, our delegation reiterates
that the General Assembly is the only United Nations
body with universal representation, which is a unique
feature of the General Assembly, providing an ample
space to this forum to simultaneously address issues
of global concern, on the one hand, and those affecting
individual Member States, on the other. It is for that
reason that the revitalization of the General Assembly
is vital to promoting world peace based on equal and
indivisible security and sustainable development for all.
Indeed, the primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security is vested in the Security
Council. But the Charter also delineates the role of the
General Assembly in several areas related to peace
and security, such as disarmament, international law
and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The General
Assembly should devote efforts to securing the full and
comprehensive implementation of the principles of the
right to self-determination, the non-use of force, the
territorial integrity of States and non-intervention in
their internal affairs. It should also develop the capacity
to address new and emerging challenges, such as
climate change, the new arms race, governance of the
global commons and a knowledge-based and digitalized
world economy. Harnessing the true potential of the
Assembly will augment the legitimacy and vitality of
the United Nations, rendering it more effective and
valuable for the people we serve.
A vibrant United Nations also requires frequent
interaction and coordination between its primary organs,
especially the General Assembly and the Security
Council. In some cases, the General Assembly can
complement Security Council’s work — for example,
in the area of conflict prevention, through long-term
structural prevention, such as by addressing the longstanding root causes of conflicts. Such complementary

22-6767615/31

A/77/PV.30

work can lend immense value in forging a coherent and
effective response to pressing international challenges
across the three pillars of the United Nations.
Under Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, the
General Assembly can invite the Security Council to
provide subject-oriented special reports on issues of
current international concern. The need for such reports
is felt even more whenever the Security Council takes
a decision under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is also
important that the reports provide a comprehensively
elaborative, analytical and material account of the
Security Council’s work.
While we can argue about the binding nature of the
General Assembly’s resolutions, there can hardly be
two views on the Assembly’s indelible contribution to
the norm-building and codification of international law.
From the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, the General
Assembly has time and again had a meaningful impact
on the international legal landscape. We must continue
to add to this solid structure of the international legal
framework through our work at the General Assembly.
During the seventy-fifth session, Member States
took the important decision to biennialize the resolution
on the revitalization process (see resolution 75/325). The
development should serve as a welcome opportunity
to dedicate more time to the implementation of
the revitalization agenda and to evaluating the
implementation status of General Assembly resolutions.
Translating our collective ambition into action is vital to
reinvigorating the General Assembly. Resolution 75/325
reinforces the sovereign right of every Member State to
introduce any new agenda item or draft resolution in the
Assembly. That provision has a special value for most
Member States and preserving it in future resolutions
should remain a priority. Rationalization should not
mean a restriction on the prerogatives of the General
Assembly membership.
We also appreciate the fact that the resolution
proclaims that no post should be considered the
exclusive preserve of any Member State and that the
Secretary General should ensure that this principle is
applied in accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical distribution. The resolution also
consolidates the crucial gains achieved since 2015 and
2016 in the selection process of the Secretary-General.
That momentum must continue.
16/31

07/11/2022

The seventy-sixth session afforded an opportunity
to discuss at length, including through interactive
dialogues, the role, authority and working methods
of the General Assembly. Pakistan made substantive
contributions during the deliberations, and we are
thankful to the co-facilitators for reflecting several
of our suggestions in the summary. We look forward
to working with the same spirit on the remaining
two clusters, as well as the outcome document of the
revitalization process this year.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): This really is our
opportunity to help the General Assembly move closer
to being what we all know it can be and should be. It
is a genuine honour to be re-appointed as co-Chair of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly for the seventy-seventh
session to help move the ball forward. My thanks go
to the President and the membership for entrusting me
once again with this important task. Let me also express
my sincere congratulations to my good friend and
colleague, Ambassador González López of El Salvador,
on her re-appointment as co-Chair. It is a great pleasure
to be joined once again in this task by Ambassador
González López. She brings her invaluable experience
and wisdom to the role, and we all benefit from her
energy, enthusiasm and expertise.
As other representatives have noted, the previous
session of the Ad Hoc Working Group was the first of the
new biennalized format — the first without a negotiated
text. I am pleased to say that it was a productive session
and a practical example that the biennialization and
triennalization of items can help reduce the General
Assembly’s overburdened agenda. As co-Chairs at
the previous session, Ambassador González López
and I presided over four meetings. They included a
general debate, two thematic debates and the informal
dialogue between Member States and the Secretariat. I
would like to thank all delegations for their frank and
constructive engagement throughout the meetings and
extend my thanks to our Secretariat colleagues for their
participation and support. In particular, I would like to
thank those in the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management.
The Ad Hoc Working Group continues to be
central to Member States’ efforts to enhance the role,
authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the General
Assembly. As we embark upon a new session, I have
to say that I am excited by the prospect of what we can
achieve together. In our letter dated 25 August 2022,
22-67676

07/11/2022

the co-Chairs provided an overview of the key issues
discussed by the Ad Hoc Working Group during the
previous session and suggested possible proposals for
further consideration by the Group. The proposals aim
to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and equity of
the Assembly. I would like to take this opportunity to
touch on a few of them for members’ consideration.
First, let me speak to improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of the General Assembly. Member States
continued to reiterate their strong desire to streamline
the Assembly’s agenda. Together we should seek to
make meaningful progress on the issues this session.
As the General Assembly’s agenda continues to grow,
we must take steps to focus our work on the critical
areas that require global solutions, such as addressing
climate change, driving progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals, ending conflict, nurturing peace
and protecting and promoting human rights. To that
end, I welcome the invitation of the President of the
General Assembly for delegations to bring concrete
suggestions for streamlining the agenda to the next
meeting of the General Committee.
In addition, measures such as the distribution of
timely and comprehensive concept notes in advance
of General Assembly meetings and processes, early
access to live lists of speakers for plenary meetings
and a formal hand-over meeting between the Chairs
of the Main Committees are all examples of small
practical measures that can improve the operation of
the General Assembly. But, with regard to improving
the equity of the General Assembly, I would point to
other concrete proposals canvassed during the previous
session, such as encouraging closer adherence to
speaking-time limits during plenary meetings — that
is an idea — further increasing women’s representation
at General Assembly meetings and improving the
accessibility of Headquarters. The General Assembly
remains the most representative and inclusive
United Nations organ. We should work to ensure that
its working methods reflect those principles.
The biennalized format enabled us to bring a special
focus the previous session to issues under the two
pillars: the role and authority of the General Assembly;
and working methods. This session, we encourage
delegations to focus on the relevant pillars identified
for the seventy-seventh session: strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory

A/77/PV.30

of the Office of the President of the Assembly; and the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads.
In conclusion, it is my hope and that of Ambassador
González López that the constructive and collaborative
spirit shown by all delegations during the seventyfifth and seventy-sixth sessions will prevail once again
this session. As co-Chair, I recommit to engaging
transparently and constructively with all members of
the Working Group and to providing clear timelines
and an early programme of work to enable meaningful
engagement by all delegations. When I say, “meaningful
engagement with all delegations”, I mean all members
of delegations who work on the revitalization of the
General Assembly. I am therefore available any time
by phone.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
South Africa would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting today. We would also to
express our gratitude to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly, Mr. Mitchell Fifield of Australia
and Mrs. Egriselda González López of El Salvador,
for guiding us through the process at the seventysixth session. We also welcome their reappointment as
co-Chairs for the seventy-seventh session to allow the
necessary continuity through the biennialized process.
At the current session of the General Assembly, we
welcome the focus on strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly and the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General and other
executive heads, in accordance with resolution 75/325.
With regard to the Office of the President, South Africa
has long maintained and would like to like to reiterate
once again that the Office of the President of the General
Assembly should be provided with the necessary
resources that are commensurate with executing its
mandate to drive the overall agenda of the General
Assembly. While the Office of the President of the
General Assembly requires sufficient resources from
the regular budget, the Office’s ability to operate also
relies on the human resources and capacities provided
to it. Member States should also equally consider
advancing women as candidates for the position of

22-6767617/31

A/77/PV.30

President of the General Assembly, especially given
the number of years that have elapsed without a woman
President and the limited number of women Presidents
to date.
We support the initiatives of the Secretariat to
preserve and further strengthen the institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly. We must also be mindful not to overburden
the Office. Therefore, South Africa supports the
streamlining of the work of the United Nations through
appropriate coordination among the principal organs
and their agendas, as well as rationalizing the number
of outcomes that we produce. With regard to the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other senior executives, South Africa has been
consistent in stressing that, upon the recommendation
of the Security Council, the Secretary-General should
ideally be appointed by secret ballot in the General
Assembly. We also believe that the Security Council
should be encouraged to submit more than one name
for the General Assembly’s consideration and that the
Assembly should seriously reflect on and consider
appointing future Secretaries-General for a longer, but
single, non-renewable term. We also continue to urge
that the executive heads and senior management of the
Secretariat should always reflect balanced gender and
equitable geographical representation.
South Africa looks forward to once again considering
a draft resolution on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, as a follow-up to resolution 75/325,
within the Ad Hoc Working Group at the current session.
Some of the significant advances made in 2021 on the
resolution included the biennialization of the General
Assembly’s revitalization resolution, as an example for
other resolutions; the overall streamlining of the work
of the General Assembly; the effort to limit the number
of high-level events in the margins of the Assembly;
the reaffirmation of previous resolutions referring to
gender balance and regional rotation in the course of
the identification and appointment of the best, wellqualified and experienced candidate for SecretaryGeneral, while noting that a woman has yet to become
Secretary-General and inviting Member States to bear
that in mind when nominating candidates; and, lastly,
the invitation to Member States to equally consider
women as candidates for the position of President of the
General Assembly and encouraging Presidents-elect
18/31

07/11/2022

to continue to strive for both gender and geographical
balance within the Office of the President of the
General Assembly.
Therefore, we hope to further those advances,
especially in realizing the commitments that we have
already made and doing more to achieve them. We
accordingly look forward to the negotiation process,
guided by the co-Chairs, in order to build on the
ambition shown in previous discussions.
Ms. Lim (Brunei Darussalam): Brunei Darussalam
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the statement delivered
by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, Brunei Darussalam would like to
express its utmost appreciation for the endeavours
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly, especially the
co-Chairs, Mr. Mitch Fifield, Permanent Representative
of Australia, and Mrs. Egriselda González López,
Permanent Representative of El Salvador, in
spearheading and facilitating the discussions at the
seventy-sixth session. We congratulate them on their
reappointment. They may rest assured of Brunei
Darussalam’s continued support in their efforts on this
matter of vital importance.
As we heard from our leaders and ministers at the
high-level debate, the world continues to face many
challenges, ranging from the lingering impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the path towards
recovery to the challenges to food and energy security
and the need to combat the effects of climate change. No
one country is immune to the adverse effects of those
challenges. And, as we strive towards the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals in this last
decade of action, collective and concerted efforts
are much needed in addressing those wide-ranging
issues of concern in order to ensure that no one is left
behind. Global challenges require global solutions,
and it is therefore the General Assembly — the most
representative organ of the United Nations — that is an
essential platform for the deliberations of all Member
States on such issues. It is here also that we must
reiterate our pledge to ensure cooperation and action as
a follow-up to those deliberations in keeping with the
spirit of multilateralism.
22-67676

07/11/2022

During the thirty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, held in 1984, Brunei Darussalam was
admitted to the United Nations. At that time, we
noted that,
“Our only hope is to look to the moral and
persuasive authority of the United Nations and
its machinery for the maintenance of peace and
security” (A/39/PV.3, para. 86).
That statement holds true today, as it did nearly 40 years
ago. Therefore, it is imperative that the work of the
General Assembly continue to remain relevant in order
for this organ to continue to remain fit for purpose,
efficient and effective in fulfilling its functions as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, resolution 75/325, including the four
main clusters identified and focused on, provides a good
guideline on the basis of which work should proceed, as
they all speak to the core areas in which the General
Assembly can be further improved in order to maintain
its central role and credibility. We welcome the updates
on the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group carried
out during the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly, including the updated inventory on the
progress of the implementation of the four clusters and
the actions to be taken to implement those measures,
while recognizing the ongoing nature of such work.
Brunei Darussalam also welcomes your particular
determination, Sir, to prioritize the coordination of
actions among your Office, the Secretary-General, the
Economic and Social Council and all other relevant
organs and bodies of the United Nations. To that end,
Brunei Darussalam encourages greater cooperation
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The General Assembly is one of the only
United Nations organs with representatives from the
entire membership, and as such the revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly contributes greatly
towards the overall reform of the United Nations.
Recalling the adoption by consensus earlier this
year of landmark resolution 76/262, on the initiative
establishing a standing mandate for a General Assembly
debate when a veto is cast in the Security Council,
Brunei Darussalam believes that is certainly a step in the
right direction towards improving synergies between
both organs. The resolution also broadens discussions
on international peace and security to the wider
membership, particularly on matters of importance,

A/77/PV.30

which in turn underscores the General Assembly’s
central position as the chief deliberative, policymaking
and representative organ of the United Nations.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Brunei Darussalam’s continued support for the ongoing efforts to
revitalize the work of the General Assembly, as the primary organ of the United Nations — the foremost multilateral Organization — to ensure effective and collective action on common concerns and shared interests
for the benefit of all humankind.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): I thank you very much, Sir,
for convening the first plenary meeting of the current
session on the revitalization of the General Assembly.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add some
important elements from our national perspective.
The revitalization of the General Assembly is
one of the critical components of the overall reform
of the United Nations, and we welcome your efforts,
Mr. President, to promote the process to foster
strengthening multilateralism and international
cooperation. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassadors Egriselda González López and Mitchell
Fifield, who have been reappointed as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly for the current session.
Their views and suggestions for consideration by the
Working Group at the current session, which were
included in your letter of 25 August 2022, provide a
very good basis for further debates, in particular with
a view to the negotiation of the next draft resolution on
the revitalization of the General Assembly.
I will now turn to the issues identified in resolution 75/325.
First, with regard to strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
the President of the General Assembly and the
President’s Office play a key role in the overall success
of the work of the Assembly. Efforts to strengthen
accountability, transparency and the institutional
memory of the President’s Office are essential. In
that regard, a compendium of best practices of past
Presidents would be instrumental in reinforcing the
institutional memory of the Office. The activities of
the President of the General Assembly have increased
steadily in recent years, and the President’s Office

22-6767619/31

A/77/PV.30

relies greatly on voluntary contributions for a growing
number of the mandates entrusted by the Assembly. We
are very glad that Poland has contributed to supporting
the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
and therefore the Assembly’s revitalization process, by
seconding one national expert to join the Office at the
current session.
Turning to the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, Poland welcomes the reference
in paragraph 68 of resolution 75/325 to encouraging
Member States to nominate female candidates for the
position. For the time being, the United Nations can
hardly be seen as a trailblazer in women’s empowerment
or gender parity, since there has not been a single female
Secretary-General in its entire 77-year history. Another
very important principle in the selection process involves
regional rotation, in particular among United Nations
regional groups. It would be desirable for each regional
group to have a representative appointed as SecretaryGeneral on a rotational basis. In the same vein, the
principle of equal and fair distribution in terms of a
gender and geographical balance needs to be applicable
to all the executive heads of the United Nations system
and the Senior Management Group.
(spoke in French)
Poland also notes with satisfaction your efforts,
Sir, to advance gender parity among the speakers
and briefers invited to high-level and other meetings.
Equality between women and men should be integrated
within the working methods of the General Assembly,
as well as the promotion of multilingualism as a
core value of the Organization. Poland supports the
General Committee in playing a more active role in the
revitalization process, as mandated in resolution 75/325.
We welcome your initiative to invite the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group to brief the General Committee
on a regular basis in order to ensure coherence and
coordination with the other co-facilitated processes
during the current session. My country will actively
be involved in such coordination, as the Permanent
Representative of Poland was appointed as one of
the co-facilitators of the negotiation process for the
political declaration of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the fight against tuberculosis.
In conclusion, I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, of Poland’s commitment to promoting
the revitalization of the General Assembly throughout
the current session. Poland stands ready to support
20/31

07/11/2022

all initiatives on improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of the Assembly, and therefore of the entire
United Nations system.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): The Philippines
aligns itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Malaysia and Algeria on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, respectively.
We congratulate Ambassador Egriselda González
López of El Salvador and Ambassador Mitchell Fifield
of Australia for their well-deserved reappointment
as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
We appreciate today’s joint debate on the Assembly’s
revitalization — an important platform that both
reaffirms the General Assembly’s pre-eminence in the
United Nations system and provides focus on how to
improve its work. We also echo ASEAN’s appreciation
of the important role of the Main Committees in
complementing the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
in revitalizing the General Assembly.
Since 2015, the Philippines has actively engaged
in the dialogue on revitalization in the context of the
United Nations reform agenda. For the current session,
we welcome the focus on two themes: strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
and the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and other executive heads.
With regard to strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly, the Philippines
strongly supports that agenda and the increasing call
of Member States to create a permanent core staff for
the Office of the President. That will lower the costs of
establishing a new team of experts every 12 months.
We also support the continuing request of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly for Member
States to discuss measures to close the gap between the
number of tasks they request from the President and
the resources allocated to the Office of the President.
We commend the institutionalization of the President’s
handover report since the seventieth session of the
General Assembly and recommend the continuation of
the morning dialogues with the Permanent Missions, as
well as the practice of convening interactive dialogues
with candidates for the position of President of the
General Assembly.
22-67676

07/11/2022

Concerning the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General and other executive heads,
resolution 75/325 must be implemented faithfully in
order to ensure a transparent and inclusive selection
process. The Philippines therefore supports continuing
timely informal discussions and town hall meetings
with the candidates. We further emphasize that the
Secretary-General must be accorded independence
in selecting senior officials, while adhering to the
highest standards in those appointments and ensuring
equal and fair distribution on the basis of gender and
geographical balance. We also reiterate our support for
the proposal to come up with a compendium of best
practices and lessons learned on the selection and
appointment process for the Secretary-General.
With greater political will and stronger collaborative
action on the part of Member States, we hope to achieve
the adoption of a more ambitious, innovative and
action-oriented draft resolution at the current session.
The Philippines stands ready to help ensure the success
of the Ad Hoc Working Group in its important task of
revitalizing the work of the General Assembly.
Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this first plenary meeting of the seventyseventh session on the revitalization of the General
Assembly. I would like to begin by congratulating
Ambassadors Egriselda González López and Mitchell
Fifield on their reappointment as co-facilitators and by
reaffirming the United Kingdom’s commitment to this
agenda. I would like to make three points today.
First, I thank you, Mr. President, for your letter of
24 August providing an overview of the work of the
seventy-sixth session. We also welcome your remarks
at the previous meeting of the General Committee,
including on the benefits of biennializing this issue. We
agree on the need to develop a targeted programme on
this agenda, with clear timelines to move from principles
to implementation. We all need to take responsibility
for putting forward and agreeing on concrete proposals
to streamline the General Assembly’s agenda, rather
than just providing words of support. We look forward
to doing that at the current session.
Secondly, we look forward to engaging on our
two agreed priority issues for the current session: the
Office of the President of the General Assembly and the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General.
With regard to the former, we would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for upholding your commitment

A/77/PV.30

to appointing an efficient team. Concerning the latter,
we have important decisions ahead on ensuring a
transparent process for appointing the next SecretaryGeneral. Many United Kingdom representatives
before me have called for the appointment of a female
Secretary-General. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts of resolution 75/325 to increase the number
female candidates in the next election.
Thirdly, we know that we are behind on delivering
the Sustainable Development Goals. We also know that
we have work ahead on implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). Achieving
those goals will be best accomplished by an inclusive
approach, bringing in relevant stakeholders. Therefore,
allow me to conclude as you began earlier, Mr President,
by emphasizing the importance of revitalizing the
General Assembly’s work. For the United Nations and
multilateralism to thrive, it is critical that we allow the
General Assembly to focus on real issues that matter to
real people.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): We thank you, Sir, for
your leadership and for convening this debate on an
important issue.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and the
representative of Algeria, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We congratulate Ambassador Egriselda González
López of El Salvador and Ambassador Mitchell Fifield
of Australia on their reappointment as co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly. We thank them
for their excellent stewardship in steering the work of
this important process and look forward to working
with them.
Since its inception in 2005, the Ad Hoc Working
Group has contributed towards progress on numerous
fronts, from streamlining the agenda to increasing
transparency in the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General. At this time of great global
challenges, it is a matter of urgency that we make
further concrete progress in making the work of the
United Nations more effective and efficient, as well as
supporting our efforts to meet global targets. Therefore,
as we move forward, we must be ready to take difficult
measures and practical steps that will truly revitalize
the Assembly to be more relevant in terms of today’s

22-6767621/31

A/77/PV.30

challenges and fit for purpose. We appreciate the
fruitful deliberations on the working methods of the
Ad Hoc Working Group held at the previous session.
We look forward to continuing our deliberations at
the current session on the issue of strengthening the
Office of the President of the General Assembly and
the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads.
Elements that are important and should be taken
into consideration for our work at the current session
include the following.
First, we need to both take stock of achievements
and galvanize the necessary actions. Guided by
resolution 75/325, in particular its paragraphs 4 (b)
and 11, Indonesia believes that we need to urgently
implement the existing recommendations of the
resolution, especially those that require follow-up or
further actions. We need to take action on all pending
matters, including those mentioned in annex II to
the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group (A/75/973,
annex). It is also important that all recommendations
made by the Working Group have clear timelines for
their implementation.
Secondly, we need to redouble our efforts to
reach the widest possible agreement among States.
The Special Committee on the Rationalization of the
Procedures and Organization of the General Assembly
concluded that,
“[C]onsensus is desirable when it contributes to the
effective and lasting settlement of differences, thus
strengthening the authority of the United Nations”
(A/520/Rev.19, para.104).
Therefore, we believe that the General Assembly needs
to strive for consensus wherever possible. We need to
promote inclusive consultations and dialogue within
the General Assembly and its Main Committees and
ensure that meaningful engagements trump a take-itor-leave-it approach. We therefore propose that the
upcoming draft resolution on revitalization also
address that important issue, as it touches upon the very
foundation of multilateralism.
In conclusion, allow me to underline that the
Assembly is the place where all nations, big and small,
interact on the basis of equality in order to achieve
the august ideals enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. We need to continue to ensure that the
Assembly discharges its mandate effectively, as the chief
22/31

07/11/2022

deliberative, policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations. We need to work on renewing
solidarity and political will as well as on strengthening
trust and the spirit of international cooperation.
Rest assured of Indonesia’s readiness to contribute
to and engage constructively in the Ad Hoc Working
Group in pursuit of our common goals and objectives.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Let me begin by expressing
my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting. I should like also to congratulate
Ambassador Fifield, Permanent Representative of
Australia, and Ambassador González López, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador, on their reappointment
as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group and for
their leadership in the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
As the only United Nations organ with the
representation of all Member States, the General
Assembly plays a crucial role in guiding the work
of the United Nations and in upholding the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. It is the
chief deliberative and policy-making organ of the
United Nations to discuss and make recommendations
on global issues. Therefore, the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly is vital to the comprehensive
reform of the United Nations.
We should continue our efforts to enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of the General Assembly
to make the United Nations fit for purpose and enable it
to respond effectively and meaningfully to present and
emerging global challenges.
We are encouraged by the progress achieved thus far
on all clusters and welcome the continued deliberations
on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly, including the discussions held during the
seventy-sixth session on the role and authority of the
General Assembly and its working methods.
On strengthening the accountability, transparency
and institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly, we welcome the convening of
the second transition workshop for the Office aimed at
that goal.
22-67676

07/11/2022

It is also important to ensure continuity among
the various sessions of the Office in order to enhance
institutional power and memory in general. In addition,
the relationship between the principal organs of the
United Nations should be strengthened, first and foremost
to ensure cooperation, coordination and the exchange of
information among the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council.
In that regard, we are of the view that in order to
enhance the transparency of the Office, Member States
should receive updates about the substantive issues
raised during the regular meetings of the heads of
the principal United Nations organs, for instance the
President of the General Assembly and the President of
the Security Council.
On the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and other executive heads, we welcome the
progress made in ensuring a more transparent process of
the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General.
At the same time, we emphasize the need to ensure that
the process of the selection and appointment of senior
United Nations posts is transparent and merit-based,
ensuring gender parity and promoting geographical
balance in appointments to individual positions.
Last but not least, we welcome the efforts made
by Member States in streamlining General Assembly
resolutions, reporting requirements and committees.
We believe that to further revitalize the work of the
General Assembly, discussions should be more resultsoriented, with specific outcomes, so as to meet the
interests and aspirations of Member States.
The General Assembly should also make efforts to
find solutions and ways to support the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development within
existing United Nations budget resources, eliminating
duplication among its various entities and improving
transparency and accountability.
We welcome the programme of work shared by the
co-Chairs at the beginning of the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group during the seventy-sixth session, which
provided a useful and clear road map for Member States to
prepare for and participate in the discussion. We hope to
see similar guidelines to prepare for our discussions ahead.
In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm
its readiness to work in close cooperation with you,
Mr. President, and other delegations to enhance the role
of the General Assembly and push forward the reform
of the United Nations.

A/77/PV.30

Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We wish
also to congratulate the Permanent Representatives of
Australia and El Salvador, His Excellency Mr. Mitchell
Fifield and Her Excellency Mrs. Egriselda González
López, on their reappointment as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly during the seventyseventh session.
We express our gratitude to the co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group and to the staff of the delegations
for their tireless efforts to enhance the role, authority,
efficiency and effectiveness of this principal organ of
the United Nations, namely, the General Assembly.
We reaffirm that the principles of multilateralism,
transparency, accountability, integrity and cooperation
must remain the bedrock of the work of the
United Nations.
We are staunchly of the view that there is a need to
avoid duplication in the work of the General Assembly
and its main committees and the Economic and Social
Council. We believe that the General Assembly’s
agenda should take account of present-day realities so
as to avoid rehashing issues.
We welcome the proposals and measures aimed
at democratizing the process of the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General and other senior
executives to ensure geographical balance in the
selection of candidates to key positions.
Given the importance of ensuring a smooth annual
rotation of the presidency of the General Assembly, we
stress the need to issue a compendium of best practices
from previous sessions of the General Assembly, which
could serve to strengthen the institutional memory of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly.
In our opinion, in order to maintain that institutional
memory, the outgoing President should inform the
incoming President of best practices and lessons
learned from previous sessions.
We believe that the key to any change and reform
in the Organization is our cooperation, based not just
on the desire to persuade our partners of the rightness
of our own views but, most important, on our ability to
listen to our interlocutors. Moreover, while maintaining
a genuine desire to achieve the expected results, we

22-6767623/31

A/77/PV.30

must actively seek a compromise while remaining
impartial and ensuring an appropriate level of analysis
in the conduct of debates. States are perfectly capable
of further improving the General Assembly during its
current session.
Mr. Adhana (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened a meeting on this important issue.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm that India supports
the statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We also extend our appreciation to the Permanent
Representatives of Australia and El Salvador as the
co-Chairs at the seventy-sixth session of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly, congratulate them on their
reappointment and wish them success. My delegation
will extend full support to them for a productive outcome.
The primacy and legitimacy of the General
Assembly flows from the inclusive nature of its
membership and the principle of the sovereign equality
of all its constituents. The universal character of the
General Assembly and the moral weight of its decisions
and opinions cannot be overemphasized. The world is
facing turbulent times.
The General Assembly, the main organ of the
United Nations, has a major role to play in addressing
the challenges. Thus the revitalization of the General
Assembly to transform it into an effective and efficient
organ is an important collective endeavour for its
Member States.
There is a growing perception that the General
Assembly has gradually lost touch with its foundational
responsibilities and has become overwhelmed with
processes. Moreover, the attempts to discuss thematic
issues in the Security Council have also undermined
the role and authority of the General Assembly.
We must admit that some of the blame lies with
the General Assembly and its member States for
having allowed its relevance to be diluted despite
being the collective voice of nations. That surely
undermines the overall effectiveness and relevance of
the United Nations.
India has always been of the view that the General
Assembly can be revitalized only when its position as the
primary deliberative, policy-making and representative
organ of the United Nations is respected in letter and
in spirit.
24/31

07/11/2022

Any discussion of the revitalization of the General
Assembly leads us to the foundational objective
whereby the Charter of the United Nations gives the
General Assembly a distinct leadership role. Article
10 of the Charter mandates the General Assembly to
discuss any question or matter within the scope of the
Charter or relating to the powers and functions of any
organs provided for in the Charter, except as provided
in Article 12.
The General Assembly must therefore take the lead
in setting the global agenda and restoring the primacy of
the United Nations in adopting a multilateral approach
to resolving existing and emerging global challenges.
For a revitalized General Assembly that is in tune
with the challenges of our times, we need to draw
inspiration from the high standards that the General
Assembly set for itself right at the beginning of
its journey.
With the passage of time, there have been several
occasions on which the General Assembly has led from
the front while setting a global agenda and facing the
challenges. For instance, the Sustainable Development
Summit, in 2015, followed by the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage are examples
of how the General Assembly can set the global agenda
and galvanize the global community to solve common
problems and challenges.
It is therefore incumbent upon us to remain vigilant
in ensuring that the General Assembly retains its
leadership role and strengthens its capability to address
the global challenges.
We also hope the various streams of the Our
Common Agenda process will be deliberated in an
inclusive manner and that decisions will be taken by
consensus so as to ensure its effective implementation.
Towards that end, we call for more effective working
methods and better and inclusive engagement among
member States during negotiation processes in the
General Assembly.
The process of the revitalization of the General
Assembly is an urgent obligation. While we have made
some progress, we must not forget that we have a long
way to go. We believe that multipolarity, rebalancing,
fair globalization and reformed multilateralism cannot
be kept in abeyance.
22-67676

07/11/2022

The call for reformed multilateralism — with
reforms of the Security Council at its core — enjoys
considerable support among States Members of the
United Nations. It does so because of the widespread
recognition that the current architecture is anachronistic
and ineffective. It is also perceived as deeply unfair,
denying entire continents and regions a voice in a
forum that deliberates their future. India is prepared to
take up greater responsibilities.
India will be a constructive and active participant
in any process that allows serious negotiations on such
a critical matter to proceed sincerely. They must not be
blocked by procedural tactics. Naysayers cannot hold
the intergovernmental negotiations process hostage
in perpetuity.
India fully supports any initiative that genuinely
furthers the objective of achieving a meaningful and
comprehensive reform of the key elements of the global
multilateral architecture.
Lastly, I assure you, Mr. President, that you
can count on my delegation’s positive support and
participation in the process of the revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I must congratulate
Ambassadors Mitch Fifield and Egriselda González
López on their reappointment.
At the outset, my delegation would like to reiterate
that the revitalization of the General Assembly is a
political process and that its principal objective should
be to strengthen the role of the General Assembly as the
main deliberative, policy-making and representative
organ of the United Nations. In addition, my delegation
believes that attempts to undermine the role played by
the General Assembly through perceived encroachment
must be countered and discouraged at all costs.
While reaffirming resolutions 73/341, of 12 September
2019, and 74/303, of 4 September 2020, and all other
previous resolutions adopted by consensus related to the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, my
delegation would like to remind members of the role and
authority of the General Assembly and the need for strict
respect of the Charter-based prerogatives and division of
work among the principal organs of the United Nations.
There has undoubtedly been a sustained effort to make the
work of the General Assembly more focused and relevant.
That was identified as a priority during the fifty-eighth
session, and efforts continued at subsequent sessions to

A/77/PV.30

streamline the agenda, improve the practices and working
methods of the Main Committees, enhance the role of the
General Committee, strengthen the role and authority
of the President and examine the Assembly’s role in the
process of selecting the Secretary-General.
We might also recall that during the seventieth and
seventy-first sessions, the Assembly adopted landmark
resolutions on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly that, inter alia, established an oath
of office and a code of ethics for the Presidents of the
General Assembly and provided for informal interactive
dialogues with candidates for the position of President
of the General Assembly.
The practice of convening high-level thematic
debates, we will recall, is also a direct outcome of the
revitalization process, which is commendable.
It has become an established practice for the
Secretary-General to brief Member States periodically,
as we have seen, in informal meetings of the General
Assembly, on his recent activities and travels. Those
briefings have provided a well-received opportunity
for exchange between the Secretary-General and
Member States.
Let me now turn to the circumstances of developing
countries and smaller States. It has become difficult to
attend all the high-level and side events organized in
parallel with the general debate. As such, we suggest
that the side events organized in parallel with the general
debate of the Assembly should be kept to a minimum.
We note that with the commencement of the in-person
meetings in the post-coronavirus-disease period has
created a situation in which the resources of the smaller
delegations are exploited beyond their capacity to focus
on side events, which results in an impediment to giving
priority to the main meetings of the General Assembly.
We remain hopeful that that aspect will be addressed as
a matter of priority in future.
Another aspect that I thought we should focus on
is the opportunity for multiple statements to be made
prior to the adoption of or voting on a draft resolution.
You will recall, Mr. President, that member States
are entitled to make a general statement on the draft
resolution discussed, followed by an explanation of vote
before the vote and one after the vote, and, finally, to
two rights of reply, if we are lucky enough not to have
points of order being raised from time to time. With
all due respect to member States, it would appear that
that right is being overexploited, resulting in a failure

22-6767625/31

A/77/PV.30

07/11/2022

to economize on time, which compels the extension of
the time frames allocated to the various committees,
entails consequent costs and results in an unavailability
of support services such as interpreters and connected
back-up staff.

At the same time, we would highlight the need to
maintain the transparency, democracy and inclusivity
of all Member States in the context of that endeavour,
which will be vital to realizing the targets envisioned
under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

We would also like to see greater consultation
between the Secretariat and the Member States in the
structuring of the programme of work, particularly
concerning activities of an informal nature, which
closely follows the procedures of a formal meeting. It
is important that Member States not feel left out of the
planning process and the selection of resource persons.
It is also important that the selection of resource persons
adequately reflect a balanced geographical distribution
of such persons wherever possible, unless there is a
compelling rationale for doing otherwise. Arbitrariness
in that process must be discouraged, as it can be
anathema to procedural priority and the rule of law.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the convening of today’s meeting
of the General Assembly on the implementation of the
resolutions of the United Nations and the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly.

In the long term, my delegation would like to
encourage you, Mr. President, to optimize the informal
dialogue format by minimizing duplication of questions
and ensuring more time for responses. In certain
instances, we have observed that the main focus of the
Assembly is diverted owing to the same issues being
raised repeatedly by the same delegations in different
forms. That leads to a situation in which the time
allocated to more substantive issues is limited.
As such, doubts have been raised in the minds of
many whether the outcome envisioned by the theme of
the seventy-third session, “Making the United Nations
relevant to all people: global leadership and shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies”, has been fully realized.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka wishes to commend all
past Secretaries-General and Presidents of the General
Assembly for their unstinting commitment to the
revitalization of the Assembly. We remain hopeful and
have reason to believe that the working methods of
the General Assembly will be made more meaningful
under your leadership, Mr. President, in the time to
come, thanks to the efforts to revitalize its work. We
are pleased with your style and manner in interacting
with the member States at many levels and through
the creation of the General Committee in a frank and
transparent manner, as well as the sharing of your ideas
with the membership. What greater democracy can we
have than through consultation and the ability to draw
on such consultation?
26/31

The Russian delegation continues to constructively
participate in the discussions on the revitalization
agenda of the General Assembly. Our efforts should be
apolitical in nature and aimed primarily at improving
the effectiveness of the Assembly. That goal can largely
be achieved through a further fine-tuning of working
methods and a streamlining of the still overburdened
agenda. In particular, it is necessary to continue work
and ensure that certain agenda items of the Assembly
are transitioned to a biennial or triennial basis and
that those that are no longer relevant are deleted. In
that connection, we are convinced that the decision
to consider resolutions on revitalization once every
two years would make it possible to more effectively
implement their provisions and analyse the results.
We support the initiatives to lessen the burden of
the high-level week during the general political debate.
The relevant activities can be evenly distributed
throughout the work of the session. At the same time,
it is important that such changes reflect the interests of
all Member States.
The process of revitalization should not result in any
redistribution of powers to the General Assembly from
other statutory organs, including the Security Council.
We therefore unreservedly insist on strict compliance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations on the principal responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
We wish to recall that the General Assembly,
pursuant to article 12 of the Charter, shall not make
any recommendation pertaining to issues under
consideration by the Security Council.
We categorically object to the now-popular practice
of using the General Assembly platform for vociferous
public relations campaigns aimed at demonizing
certain Member States. We believe that such measures
22-67676

07/11/2022

irrevocably undermine the Assembly and its authority
and are counterproductive in terms of genuinely
resolving certain international issues.
In recent years, much attention has been paid
to issues relating to increasing transparency and
democracy in the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General. We stand ready to continue efforts
to reasonably streamline the existing procedure.
At the same time, we believe that this idea must be
carefully considered, first and foremost to ensure that it
stringently adheres to the Charter of the United Nations,
pursuant to which the Secretary-General is appointed
by the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Council. It should also be borne in
mind that the main goal is to select the most worthy
candidate for the post of Secretary-General. Too
much codification of the procedure can only result in
undesirable consequences.
The question of the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly is key to us.
Most of the decisions taken in this Hall are aimed at
improving many aspects of human existence, and, of
course, those must and will be implemented, because it
is in our common interest.
At the same time, in recent years, especially this
year, a relatively small group of Western States has
been trying to hijack the General Assembly by openly
exerting pressure to transform it into a tool to advance
its parochial agendas, attempting to divide it on the
principle that “those who are not with us are against us”.
Resolutions of the General Assembly adopted on
the basis of such a paradigm are null and void and will
not be implemented. Only a constructive dialogue and
a willingness to heed and take into account the views
of all parties will help to ensure the effective work of
any body of the United Nation system.
In conclusion, we wish the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the revitalization of the General
Assembly — the Permanent Representatives of Australia
and El Salvador — every success in their work.
Mr. Fif ield (Australia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank President
Csaba Kőrösi for the trust invested in me once again
in my position as co-Chair, together with my esteemed
colleague and friend, Ambassador Mitchell Peter

A/77/PV.30

Fifield, Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly at
this seventy-seventh session.
In my role as co-Chair and on behalf of El Salvador,
allow me to reiterate our full readiness to deploy our best
efforts to continue to ensure that the Ad Hoc Working
Group can contribute to strengthening multilateralism
and the role of the General Assembly, thus enhancing
its efficacy and efficiency in fulfilling the mandates
that we, the Member States, have entrusted to it.
As has been highlighted, after agreement was
reached on the biennial consideration of this agenda
item at the seventy-sixth session, the Ad Hoc Working
Group has been focused on the implementation of
resolution 75/325 and on tackling the functions and
authority of the Assembly and its working methods.
We thank delegations for their involvement
and constructive participation and their valiant
support of the Secretariat during the holding of the
thematic debates and the interactive dialogue with
the Permanent Missions. On that basis, important
contributions have been compiled, that, as various
delegations have indicated, have been circulated by the
co-Chairs in their letter dated 25 August 2022. I would
like to highlight just some aspects that we believe
deserve the Assembly’s attention and are, as others
have noted, one of the bases of the work that we are
going to undertake in the coming months.
First, we need to continue the debate on how
we can ensure the continued functioning of the
Assembly in situations of disruption, with the aim
of strengthening its adaptability and resilience in
extraordinary circumstances.
Secondly, we must touch on the advantages
and disadvantages of the use of technologies and
digital platforms, considering in particular how the
implementation of said technologies can contribute
to minimizing the challenges that Member States are
facing in terms of ensuring their participation.
Thirdly, we would stress the importance of
increasing gender parity among the speakers and
panellists invited to high-level meetings and meetings
of the General Assembly. That approach, we believe,
must be extended to all processes of the General
Assembly, including facilitation.

22-6767627/31

A/77/PV.30

Fourthly, equitable geographic representation is a
key element in maintaining the inclusivity of the General
Assembly, as is respect for multilingualism, which
should also be reflected in the selection of panellists
and speakers who are invited to high-level meetings, as
well as in all meetings of the General Assembly and its
intergovernmental processes, inter alia.
At the current session, we will also be tackling,
as other delegations have mentioned, discussions on
strengthening accountability, transparency and the
institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly, as well as the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General and other
executive heads. Those are very important issues not
only for the General Assembly but for the Organization
as a whole.
We have listened attentively to the interventions
made by delegations in this forum, and I thank them
for their willingness to move forward together in the
revitalization of our General Assembly. I echo the call
made by the Permanent Representative of Singapore to
be bold and to drive forward innovation in this area.
We also have another crucial task: the negotiation of
the draft resolution on revitalization. We hope that the
Working Group will continue to be a dedicated platform
for strengthening this principal organ for the adoption
of policies and representation of the United Nations in
such a way as to ensure that we are better equipped to
tackle the challenges that we are now facing.
I also welcome the call made by President Kőrösi
to strengthen multilateralism by ensuring the greater
relevance of the General Assembly. As the President
indicated, we have at our disposal various important
intergovernmental processes, including the Summit
of the Future and Our Common Agenda. However, a
strengthened and revitalized General Assembly that is
able to achieve that goal is vital to translate all those
agreements into reality.
Revitalization should therefore be considered in
the various committees of the General Assembly, with
a view to using this agenda item to reflect on how to
improve its working methods. It is that political effort
of prioritization, as the representative of Ecuador
has just mentioned, that should be implemented and
materialized here, but, above all, we must work even
harder to streamline the agenda of the Assembly.
28/31

07/11/2022

The revitalization of the General Assembly is thus
a continual process that requires the full attention,
commitment and constructive involvement of all
Member States in order to achieve concrete results that
will benefit the entire Organization. To that end, it will
be necessary to carefully consider the gains we have
made through working groups, as members have noted
during this meeting, some of which are the direct result
of the specific mandates handed down by the Group
through various resolutions.
We must also reflect on challenges to the
implementation of existing revitalization mandates and
the challenges that we are still facing daily in order to
ensure that the work that we do in the Assembly is more
effective and efficient and has a greater impact on the
people outside of this Organization.
We must not forget that this process depends largely
on how the General Assembly tackles current global
challenges and how the decisions that we take affect the
peoples that we serve and to whom we are accountable.
As a result, we invite and encourage delegations to
involve themselves in a process of negotiation that is
focused on action during this session. My dear friend
and co-Chair, Ambassador Mitch Fifield, gave his
telephone number earlier, which we could say is a hotline
for revitalization, so please take this into account,
because we also want this process to be inclusive and
transparent and for members to make it their own.
We firmly believe that this is an opportunity for us to
demonstrate our true commitment to improving the
capacities of the Organization so that it can continue to
make relevant contributions to international peace and
security, human rights and sustainable development.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on these items.
I should like, from the Chair, to thank members
and ask them to indulge me, as a co-Chair of the
Working Group, in also thanking colleagues for
their contributions.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 123 and 124.
22-67676

07/11/2022

Agenda item 131 (continued)
Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a
zero-tolerance policy
Draft resolution (A/77/L.8)
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
the debate on this item will be held at a later date to
be announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.8.
Ms. Bio (Sierra Leone): I take this opportunity
to commend Mr. Kőrösi’s stewardship of the General
Assembly at this seventy-seventh session. I bring him
and the Assembly warm greetings from His Excellency
Mr. Julius Maada Bio, President of the Republic of Sierra
Leone, and his best wishes for the smooth adoption of
the draft resolution contained in document A/77/L.8,
entitled: “World Day for the Prevention of and Healing
from Child Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Violence”,
which I have the honour to introduce.
My participation in this meeting is clear testimony of
the importance that the President and the Government of
Sierra Leone attach to the concerns of women, children
and the marginalized. That is part of the objectives that
Sierra Leone has committed itself to pursue, in service
to humankind and the international community, as we
look forward to the Assembly’s resounding support for
Sierra Leone to serve in the non-permanent category
of the Security Council for the term 2024-2025 with
similar priorities.
On the draft resolution before the Assembly for
consideration, I am pleased to inform members that
in addition to the main sponsors, Nigeria and Sierra
Leone, at least 100 Member States have co-sponsored
the draft resolution on e-deleGATE. I thank all the
co-sponsors for agreeing to take ownership of this
important initiative.
Children, especially girls, are at great risk of experiencing forced sex, sexual exploitation, abuse and
violence. The prevalence of child sexual abuse and the
attendant consequences associated with that scourge
have placed that heinous crime among the 24 risk factors identified by the World Health Organization as substantively contributing to the global burden of disease.
The growing incidence and burden of chronic
diseases associated with child sexual exploitation,
abuse and violence adversely impact gross domestic

A/77/PV.30

product growth as well as economic and social
development, especially among developing nations,
where the prevalence has been alarming.
Preventing child sexual abuse is an emergency,
yes, but the necessary work is doable and requires
a multisectoral approach. Effective approaches to
preventing that menace include supportive parents;
teaching positive parenting skills; increasing awareness
among Governments, international organizations and
civil society on the actions that every stakeholder can
take to combat child sexual exploitation, abuse and
violence. We therefore call for the enhancement of laws
that protect children in their homes, online and in their
communities and to bring the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes to justice.
The declaration of United Nations international
days to call on, sensitize and educate the public on issues
of concern, in order to mobilize the necessary political
will and resources to address the global problems
impacting humankind, have proved to be effective tools
of advocacy for the public good and social justice.
The adoption of this draft resolution today to
declare 18 November as World Day for the Prevention of
and Healing from Child Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and
Violence will, accordingly, lead to increased awareness
of child sexual abuse. Through the adoption of the
draft, States Members of the United Nations will be
committing to mobilizing our respective Governments,
international organizations and civil society not only
to act but also to promote greater understanding of the
impact of childhood sexual abuse on victims and on
their families, communities and the world at large.
More importantly, the clarion call is to eliminate
the shame and stigma associated with child sexual
abuse by elevating the voices of victims and survivors
and to provide a platform for international collaboration
to urge Governments, international organizations and
civil society to dedicate resources for the prevention of
all forms of child sexual abuse, healing and justice for
its victims.
The Government of Sierra Leone is exceedingly
grateful to the Government of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria for the collaboration in pioneering and
facilitating the process with Sierra Leone that has led to
the submission of this draft resolution for consideration
and adoption by the General Assembly.

22-6767629/31

A/77/PV.30

On the process, I am pleased to note that Nigeria
and Sierra Leone, as co-facilitators, led open and
transparent consultations and negotiations in which all
delegations were able to express their views.
Substantively, the draft resolution contains five
preambular paragraphs and four operative paragraphs.
The preambular paragraphs recall the relevant
human rights instruments and resolutions of the General
Assembly, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which places the dignity of children and
their right to live free from violence as a priority on
the international development agenda and is relevant
to ending exploitation, abuse, trafficking, torture and
all forms of violence and harmful practices against
our children.
In expressing grave concern that children, especially
girls, are at a greater risk of experiencing forced sex,
sexual exploitation, abuse and violence, including both
online and offline, the preambular paragraphs also
affirm the need to eliminate and prevent all forms of
child sexual exploitation, abuse and violence and to
promote their dignity and rights, including their mental
and physical health and healing.
Through the operative paragraphs, the General
Assembly would proclaim 18 November each year as
the World Day for the Prevention of and Healing from
Child Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Violence and
invite all Member States, the relevant international
organizations, world leaders, faith actors, civil society,
academic institutions, the private sector and other
stakeholders to commemorate the day each year in a
manner that each considers most appropriate.
Commemorating the day may include commitments
to ensure quality education and to raise public awareness
of those impacted by child sexual abuse and the need to
prevent and eliminate child sexual exploitation, abuse
and violence, and the imperative to hold perpetrators
to account.
It is also aimed at ensuring access of survivors and
victims to justice and remedies, as well as to facilitate
open discussion on the need to prevent and eliminate
their stigmatization, promote their healing, affirm their
dignity and protect their rights.
We are therefore deeply grateful for the broad
support that this draft resolution has received. We would
like to thank all delegations for their very constructive
engagement and active support. We once again thank
30/31

07/11/2022

all Member States that have co-sponsored the draft and
call on those who are yet to do so to co-sponsor the
draft resolution before its adoption. We hope that all
Member States will support our efforts to adopt this
draft resolution by consensus.
We once again thank the Federal Republic of
Nigeria for partnering with Sierra Leone, and we thank
the Secretariat for its technical support and advice. We
take this opportunity to thank Global Collaborative for
its support and engagement throughout the process.
In closing, at the United Nations we believe that
dignity is fundamental and an inalienable human right.
Let us therefore work to preserve the dignity of our
children; protect their childhood; restore the dignity of
victims and survivors of child exploitation, abuse and
violence; and bring them justice and healing.
Here I want to say to the world, “Hands off
our girls”.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.8, entitled
“World Day for the Prevention of and Healing from
Child Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Violence”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/77/L.8,
the following countries have also become co-sponsors
of the draft. It is a rather long list, so please bear
with me.
They are: Afghanistan, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, the Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, the Netherlands, Norway, Panama,
22-67676

07/11/2022

Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Yemen and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.8?
Draft resolution A/77/L.8 was adopted
(resolution 77/8).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.

A/77/PV.30

Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): The Holy See would
like to congratulate Nigeria and Sierra Leone on their
leadership and efforts throughout the negotiations on
resolution 77/8, entitled “World Day for the Prevention
of and Healing from Child Sexual Exploitation, Abuse
and Violence”.
Our delegation commends the fact that the
resolution adopted today focuses squarely on the
inalienable dignity of children, recognizing their right
to live free from violence. As such, the inauguration of
a day to underscore the importance of ending abuse,
exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence and
torture against children is to be warmly welcomed.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 131.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

22-6767631/31
