S/PV.9223

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9223rd meeting

Friday, 16 December 2022, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Jardim Oliveira
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2022/932)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75424 (E)
*2275424*

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2022/932)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/932, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Bathily and myself, in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: Since my last briefing on 15 November
(see S/PV. 9192), I continued my dialogue with Libyan
stakeholders and international partners to advance
the political process and revive the electoral track, in
accordance with resolution 2656 (2022). In that regard,
I undertook a tour of the region to meet with regional
partners. From 19 to 30 November, I travelled to
Türkiye, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt and
Tunisia. In my meetings, I sought my interlocutors’
continued and coordinated support for the efforts of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to
help the Libyan leaders overcome their differences and
resolve the legitimacy crisis of the interim institutions
that have been in place for too long.
I reiterated that the first important step on the
path to legitimacy, security and sustained stability is
to afford the 2.8 million Libyans registered to vote the
2/18

16/12/2022

opportunity to cast their ballot and freely select their
country’s future leaders, to begin a new era for Libya,
its neighbours and the region. I am thankful for the
unanimous expressions of support and commitment
to United Nations efforts to support the resumption
of the intra-Libyan dialogue. In the coming weeks,
while intensifying my engagement with the Libyan
actors, I plan to conclude my regional tour and visit
other international partners to seek their views on
the ongoing crisis in Libya and how best to support
UNSMIL in carrying out its mandate.
I have urged the leaders of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council to
rise above personal and group interests and work
constructively towards finalizing the constitutional
basis for elections, within a well-defined time frame,
in line with the pressing aspirations of the majority of
the citizens of Libya. Following my repeated calls to
the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the
President of the High State Council to meet inside
Libya to demonstrate to all Libyans their willingness
to initiate dialogue in earnest to find a way out of the
crisis, Mr. Agila Saleh and Mr. Al-Mishri agreed to
meet under the auspices of the United Nations in the
city of Zintan on 4 December. The meeting would
have been an occasion to signal a resumption of the
political dialogue on Libyan soil. Regrettably, it had to
be postponed due to unforeseen logistical reasons as
well as emerging political obstacles. We are working
with the Chairs of the House of Representatives and
the High State Council to identify a new date and
location in Libya for the meeting to take place. I am
also in touch with the Presidential Council to facilitate
a meeting among the three institutions, based on the
recent proposal put forward by Mr. Menfi, President of
the Presidential Council, in that regard.
While the meetings outside the country remain
useful, it is evident that seeing national leaders meet
inside the country will help to set a positive example
for the citizens in healing the wounds of division in
society and signal their willingness to mitigate the risks
of the country’s partition. In order to garner maximum
support for the process, I informed the Prime Minister,
Mr. Al Dabiba, of the forthcoming meeting of the heads
of the two chambers and the Presidential Council. I have
also highlighted my readiness to work with all actors
to reach consensus on a Libyan-owned and Libyanled political process that can help the country emerge
from its more than 10 years of political pitfalls and
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

increasing economic and social hardship for a majority
of its population.
Today I am asking the Council, its members and
all those with convening power to support UNSMIL’s
efforts to bring Libyan political leaders back to the
negotiating table and prevent a further deterioration of
the situation on the eve of the first anniversary of the
postponement of the 24 December elections in 2021.
The protracted crisis in Libya significantly affects
the people’s welfare, compromises their security and
threatens their very existence. It also carries a serious
risk of further dividing the country and its institutions.
We are already witnessing the signs of the partition
with two parallel Governments, separate security
apparatuses, a divided central bank, the decision by the
House of Representatives to establish a constitutional
court in Benghazi in the east of the country in the
absence of an agreed Constitution, and the growing
discontent in all regions about the unequal allocation of
the country’s substantial oil and gas revenues. Political
leaders of all sides should be held responsible for those
developments, which are such an ominous portent for
the future of the country.
In contrast to their political counterparts, under the
leadership of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission the
security and military track has demonstrated greater
will for making progress towards the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement and unifying the country’s
security institutions. The ceasefire has continued to
hold and there have been no violations recorded since
my last briefing, despite a reported build-up of forces
on both sides. However, the situation remains tense and
unpredictable throughout the country. On 8 December,
I attended a plenary session of the Security Working
Group of the International Follow-up Committee on
Libya with other co-Chairs in Tunis, in the presence
of most members of the Berlin process, the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and officials of the Libyan
Ministry of Interior in charge of ensuring the security
of the electoral process. Following up on its previous
meeting in Sirte on 27 October, the Security Working
Group discussed and agreed on the establishment
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
subcommittee of the Joint Military Commission, in
accordance with the fourth provision of the ceasefire
agreement. UNSMIL will provide the subcommittee
with the relevant technical support and expertise, as
requested by the 5+5 Commission.

S/PV.9223

In the absence of the Libyan authorities’ necessary
authorization for the effective establishment of the
UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring mechanism in Sirte,
international ceasefire monitors continue to operate
from Tripoli. During the meeting, I urged the 5+5
Commission to help overcome that hurdle in order to
enable the ceasefire monitoring mechanism to be fully
operational, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. I hope that the commitment made
by the 5+5 Commission to support the deployment
of UNSMIL monitors to Sirte will materialize in
the coming meeting of the Commission in Sirte on
15 January, under the auspices of UNSMIL.
The proliferation of weapons under the control of
various State and non-State actors and the presence
of foreign fighters, foreign forces and mercenaries
continue to pose a serious challenge to the safety and
security of Libyans and undermine efforts to unify
the country’s security institutions. This year alone,
39 people, including 11 children, have been killed or
maimed in incidents involving explosive remnants
of war. Approximately 75 per cent of those affected
were civilians.
The co-Chairs of the Economic Working Group
of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya
continue to engage with Libyan institutions to advance
discussions on an agreement for a temporary expenditure
and oversight mechanism. I reiterate the importance and
urgency of establishing a Libyan-led mechanism that
brings together stakeholders from across the country to
agree on spending priorities and ensure that oil and gas
revenues are managed in a transparent and equitable
manner, in line with resolution 2656 (2022).
UNSMIL continues to observe a systematic
campaign by Libyan security actors attempting to
undermine and silence civil society, humanitarian
actors, human rights defenders and political activists,
including women and young people. It is my belief
that a robust civil society is key to a safe, open, and
democratic discourse between the State and its citizens
and represents the very foundation required for
Libya’s political transition. On 8 December, to mark
International Human Rights Day, I hosted a digital
dialogue with Libyans, during which participants
expressed concern about the prevailing security
situation and the serious deterioration in basic services,
including access to health care, education, housing
and electricity. They also called for elections to be held.

22-754243/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

My briefing today comes at the end of a global 16-day
campaign on violence against women. On 25 November,
I issued a statement calling on all concerned parties in
Libya to take concrete steps to combat violence against
women and girls in all its online and offline forms. I
have also called for the adoption of laws that would
provide protection for women and girls who are victims
of violence.
Violence against women is not an isolated
phenomenon, and its prevalent occurrence is enabled
by Libya’s institutional fragmentation and inadequate
legal framework. On a positive note, on 19 October,
the Government of National Unity issued a decision
that provides children of Libyan women married to
non-Libyans access to basic services such as education
and health care. It also waived the visa requirements
for their children. That is a step in the right direction
that needs further consolidation through the adoption
of relevant laws and the strengthening of institutions.
I urge the relevant authorities to continue to take all
the necessary measures and adopt laws that protect and
enhance the rights of women and children.
I am concerned about new bureaucratic obstacles
and movement restrictions faced by humanitarian
organizations, which are impeding humanitarian
access and the delivery of life-saving humanitarian
assistance to internally displaced persons, as well as
the thousands of detainees held without judgment in
numerous detention centres across the country. I call
on all Libyan authorities to facilitate the renewal of
the registration of international non-governmental
humanitarian organizations and expedite visa approvals
for their staff operating in Libya.
In summary and in conclusion, work on the security
track has resulted in some notable achievements,
and the economic track is building some momentum,
which can be built upon. The political track, however,
is showing little sign of progress. With the support of
the Security Council and its individual member States,
we need to apply pressure on the country’s political
leaders with regard to the urgency of finalizing the
constitutional basis. The continued disagreement
between two individual men, the Speaker of the House
of Representatives and the President of the High
State Council, on a very limited number of provisions
of the constitutional basis can no longer serve as a
justification to hold an entire country hostage. The
patience of the people of Libya is not limitless. If the
two institutions cannot reach an agreement swiftly,
4/18

16/12/2022

alternative mechanisms can and should be used to
alleviate the suffering caused by outdated and openended interim political arrangements.
We need to think creatively about ways to ensure
that free, fair, transparent and simultaneous presidential
and parliamentary elections are organized and held
under a single, unified and neutral Administration, and
that those who wish to run as candidates resign from
their current functions to create a level playing field
for all.
Finally, we need to hold those individuals and
entities taking or supporting actions that prevent or
undermine the holding of elections accountable. That
applies to actions committed before, during and after
the elections.
Together we must resolve to help Libyans to ensure
that the year 2023 marks the beginning of a new era
through the rise of legitimate institutions through free
and fair elections. I hope I can count on the active
engagement of the Security Council to that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Bathily for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
In accordance with resolution 1970 (2011), paragraph
24 (e), I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
by the same resolution. The report covers the period
from 31 August to 16 December, during which time
the Committee met once in informal consultations and
conducted additional work by silence procedure.
At the outset, I would like to note that during
the informal consultations held on 4 November, the
Committee heard a briefing by the Panel of Experts on
its programme of work under resolution 2644 (2022).
The presentation was followed by an interactive
discussion between Committee members and the Panel.
A press release was issued in that regard.
In relation to the arms embargo, the Committee
approved a request for exemption under resolution
1970 (2011), paragraph 9 (c), submitted by Malta. The
Committee received a vessel inspection report from the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI, which refers to the seizure of cargo and on
which the Committee expects a second report to be
submitted. The Committee members expressed varying
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

views on the seizure of the cargo. The Committee also
received a report on an attempted vessel inspection.
The Committee further received two letters from
the Panel of Experts concerning the seized cargo
and correspondence submitted by a Member State
concerning the application of the exception to the arms
embargo under resolution 2009 (2011), paragraph 13 (a),
as modified by resolution 2095 (2013), paragraph 10, to
the seized cargo.
With respect to the assets freeze, the Committee
dispatched a letter to Bahrain in relation to a previously
reported notification invoking resolution 1970 (2011),
paragraph 21. The Committee received a note verbale
from Türkiye on the scope of the claims provision set
out in resolution 1973 (2011), paragraph 27, to which the
Committee responded. The Committee also responded
to a letter from Mauritius providing clarification on the
Committee’s implementation assistance notices related
to the assets freeze, after considering technical inputs
provided by the Panel of Experts on the matter. The
Committee responded to Libya on the same topic as
well. Additionally, members of the Committee met at
a technical working level to further discuss two assetsfreeze-related recommendations contained in the
final report of the Panel of Experts under the previous
mandate (see S/2022/427). Thereafter, the Committee
agreed to dispatch a note verbale to all Member States
on the Panel’s recommendation regarding negative
interest rates in connection with frozen assets.
Regarding the travel ban measure, I would like to
refer to the previously reported travel notification from
Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi for travel to Italy, under the sixmonth extension to the exemption from the travel ban
granted for humanitarian purposes. Owing to technical
issues, the Chair’s previous report inadvertently
omitted that Italy, as the country of destination, had
already notified the Committee on the matter within
the required notification time frame. Subsequently, a
communication was also received from a representative
of Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi confirming her return to
Oman. During the reporting period, the Committee
extended for a fourth time the six-month exemption
request granted for humanitarian purposes to three
individuals on the Committee’s list — Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi. With regard to the sanctions list, the
Committee received an eighth communication from
the focal point for delisting established pursuant to
resolution 1730 (2006) in connection with the delisting

S/PV.9223

request of a listed individual. The focal-point process
is still ongoing.
During the reporting period, the Committee
dispatched a note verbale to all Member States in a
follow-up to paragraph 8 of resolution 2644 (2022), in
which the Security Council calls on them to report to the
Committee on their steps taken to effectively implement
the travel-ban and asset-freeze measures regarding all
individuals on the Libya sanctions list. In that regard,
the Committee received three implementation reports
from Bahrain, Malta and Moldova.
Before I conclude, given that this is very likely the
last time that I will be addressing the Security Council as
Chair of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), on behalf of my predecessor,
Ambassador Tirumurti, my team and myself, I would
like to thank the members of the Committee for the
support they have provided in the past two years and to
reiterate the Committee’s commitment to contributing
to promoting peace and stability in Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily and you, Madam
President, as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, for your briefing and updates. I
would like to make three points.
First, we welcome Mr. Bathily’s clear message to
Libya’s political elite that they are blocking progress
and must urgently come together to agree on a way
forward on the political process. As we approach a
year since elections were due, the lack of progress is
striking, despite the demonstrable desire of the Libyan
people to vote. We stand ready to support Mr. Bathily
as he works for an inclusive, Libyan-led process that
can deliver long-term political stability, economic
prosperity, security-sector reform and the removal of
foreign forces and mercenaries, including the Wagner
Group, from Libya.
Secondly, we note with disappointment the lack of
progress towards agreement on a legal and constitutional
basis for elections. The continued inability of the House
of Representatives and High State Council to deliver

22-754245/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

that undermines their credibility and stalls progress. As
a Council, we should collectively bring pressure to bear
on Libya’s political leaders to work constructively with
Mr. Bathily and a broader range of Libyan actors to
agree on an achievable basis for free, fair and inclusive
parliamentary and presidential elections without
further delay.
Thirdly, a vibrant and open civil society should
be an integral part of the political process. I remain
deeply concerned about the reports of increased
restrictions and decreasing operating space for civilsociety organizations. I therefore call on all the Libyan
parties to ensure that civil-society actors, including
women activists and peacebuilders, can continue
their roles safely and unhindered. I also ask Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily to
ensure that civil society and the voices of Libyan
citizens are represented in the political process that
seeks to determine their future.
This past year Libya has faced many obstacles and
a disappointing lack of sustainable progress on the
way forward. I therefore urge all Libyan actors, with
support from the region and the wider international
community, to fulfil their responsibilities to deliver
political progress in 2023. We in the Security Council
should give our full support to Mr. Bathily in ensuring
they achieve that.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abdoulaye Bathily and you, Madam President,
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for our briefings, and welcome the participation of
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative
of Libya. We have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/932) and commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his continued mediation efforts. We also commend the
staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) for their work.
It is good that as of today’s meeting there has
been relative calm, especially in and around Tripoli.
However, we are acutely aware of how delicately the
ceasefire is holding. Any more time that we spend on
this file should therefore be geared to a serious dive
into the practical aspects of guiding and supporting the
6/18

16/12/2022

peace process. That is why we are particularly keen on
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s
plan of action, informed by wide consultations with
Libyan stakeholders. In that regard, we propose four
elements that we consider critical to the success of the
peace process.
First, the process must be truly Libyan-led and
-owned. The people of Libya are capable of deciding
what is best for Libya. As Libyans, they understand
their history and the vision of their country. They
know what has worked, what has not and why. They
understand the psyche of the people and are able to
prescribe practical solutions. For that to happen, the
international community should refrain from dictating
solutions, which is tantamount to foreign interference.
When played out in public, it is utterly careless and
leads to confusion. We demand the departure of foreign
forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya,
as they undermine Libya’s territorial integrity and
national ownership of the peace process.
Secondly, if Libyans are to be able to make such
Libyan-led and -owned decisions, we must provide
them with the space for dialogue and national
reconciliation, linked to every stage and track of the
peace process as acknowledged under resolution 2656
(2022). Intra-Libyan dialogue is critical and should
include all Libyan stakeholders, including the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and
young people. UNSMIL should be strengthened to
enable it to provide the requisite support, not only at
the central political level but in grass-roots engagement
as well. We commend the Presidential Council for
taking leadership of the national reconciliation process,
including the drafting of a reconciliation law and the
plans for a national reconciliation conference, with the
support of the African Union. An inclusive national
dialogue and reconciliation process will make for the
firmest foundation for the development of a consensus
constitutional basis on which credible national elections
can be conducted as the people of Libya desire.
The third element is the coordination of
international support through the United Nations-led
process. Foreign interference in Libya is also manifest
through uncoordinated international support. Some
of it is driven by narrow foreign interests in Libyan
resources, while others are doing it to advance proxy
wars. In that regard, we call on all Libyan political
actors, especially those who may be advancing the cause
of foreign interests, to consider the overall interests of
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

Libyans as a matter of urgency. To counter that, any
international assistance offered to Libya for the peace
process should respect the United Nations-mandated
leadership of the process, as stipulated under resolution
2542 (2020). International assistance is important, but
should be channelled in a manner that does not feed the
ongoing political impasse to further divide Libyans and
advance foreign agendas on Libyan soil.
The fourth and final element is the critical role
of neighbouring States and regional and subregional
organizations. Libya is inextricably linked with its
neighbours in history, culture, politics and economics,
among other areas — hence the direct bearing of the
conflict on the region. We call for active coordination
and collaboration by the United Nations-led process
with neighbouring States and regional initiatives.
That is indispensable to a successful peace process
in Libya and a stable region. We urge coordination
and cooperation in, among other areas, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; counter-terrorism;
and the trafficking and smuggling of arms and humans.
The inhumane treatment of migrants, refugees
and asylum seekers continues unabated, despite our
repeated calls for further action to tackle it. We have
repeatedly called for closer monitoring of resources and
information channelled towards tackling illegal and
irregular migration in Libya through the Mediterranean
Sea and to the southern outline of the European coast.
We reiterate that call.
Given the magnitude of the issue, support for
border and migration management programmes on the
northern frontier of the African continent needs to have
international transparency and corresponding systems
of accountability. We call on the European Union and
its members to factor that into their migration policies.
We demand that refugees, migrants and asylum
seekers be treated with dignity as a basic requirement
of international law. To provide a clearer status
of the intensity of the problem, we request a more
comprehensive segment on the same in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Including representatives of the
United Nations agencies for refugees and migration
as briefers in Council meetings on Libya would also
be informative.
We acknowledge the work of the Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) and recall that sanctions are not perpetual but
are a means towards the ultimate goal, which is the

S/PV.9223

peace and stability of Libya. In that regard, there
should be close coordination with Libyan authorities in
the administration of sanctions. We emphasize that all
Libya’s frozen assets belong to Libyans and therefore
should be preserved for the eventual return to and
benefit of Libyans.
Finally, we reaffirm our respect for Libya’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty and support for
the people of Libya for a truly Libyan-led and -owned
peace process.
Before I finish, I wish to make some remarks in
my national capacity. This is the last briefing on the
situation in Libya in which Kenya is participating as an
elected member of the Security Council for the period
2021–2022. As we covered the Libya file, we sought to
speak for the people of Libya. We thank Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya,
for helping us to see and understand the aspirations of
Libyans. We assure him, and through him the people of
Libya, that Kenya will continue to support them in their
aspirations for peace and stability.
Finally, my delegation found great strength in
the unity of the A3, so I thank Gabon and Ghana
for their great support. We will keep our doors of
cooperation open.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Bathily, and you, Madam President, as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for your briefings. I welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
It has been nearly a year since the postponement of
Libya’s elections, which were planned for 24 December
2021. During this period, the Libyan parties have been
disputing the legitimacy of the Government, security
incidents have occurred one after another, and there has
been little progress on the important work related to
the long-term stability of Libya, such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the reunification
of State institutions. The status quo is therefore
unsustainable. China hopes that all parties in Libya
will put the interests of the country and its people first,
avoid any actions that might complicate the situation
and restart the dialogue and negotiation process as
soon as possible under the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

22-754247/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

The top priority remains to reach agreement on
the constitutional basis for the elections as soon as
possible, to hold the elections in order to overcome
the political division Libya is facing, and to create a
political environment conducive to Libya’s national
development and reconstruction.
The United Nations is the main channel for good
offices on Libya. Special Representative Bathily
has recently done a great deal of work to restart the
political process in Libya, which China appreciates. We
call upon the international community to implement
the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned principle, respect
Libya’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, actively
support the good offices of the United Nations and
avoid imposing external solutions.
The national reconciliation of Libyan parties and
their harmonious coexistence will help to create a
propitious environment for the Libyan political process
and help to resolve the deep-rooted antagonisms of
Libya’s years of turmoil.
China supports the promotion of the strategic
vision of national reconciliation by all parties in
Libya, welcomes the upcoming national reconciliation
conference and encourages the African Union and
other regional organizations to give full play to their
advantages in the field of reconciliation and to provide
active support to the Libyan reconciliation process so
as to lay a solid foundation for Libya to achieve longterm peace and stability.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/932), the ceasefire in Libya is generally
holding, but the security situation is tense and fragile,
which is of concern to China. The Libyan issue cannot
be solved by military means. We call upon all parties
in Libya to adhere to the general direction of a political
settlement, exercise maximum restraint and maintain
the hard-won peace.
The 5+5 Joint Military Commission has an
irreplaceable role in implementing the ceasefire
agreement. The Libyan parties should continue
to strengthen their communication through the
Commission to avoid miscalculation. All foreign
combatants and mercenaries in Libya should be
withdrawn from the country as soon as possible in a
balanced and orderly manner, in accordance with the
will of the Libyan people. In that process, all parties
concerned should strengthen coordination with
8/18

16/12/2022

neighbouring countries to avoid increasing regional
security risks.
Mr. Cisneros Chávez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily for
his briefing and reiterate Mexico’s support for his efforts
to restart the political process in Libya. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate India on the excellent
work it spearheaded as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya. I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya to this meeting.
In recent months, it has become clear that
parliamentary and presidential elections are the only
way to make progress on the unification of Libyan
institutions and put an end to the current uncertainty.
While we recognize the importance of reforms
in the economic and security spheres, we are aware
that the current institutions face structural problems
in implementing those reforms and the agreements
inherited from the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
and the Berlin Conferences on Libya.
We therefore believe that only a popular vote
will make it possible to renew the State’s authority
and to extend it across the entire Libyan territory in
order to successfully promote the pending reforms.
Consequently, we urge the Special Representative and
the Libyan parties to continue steering the various
ongoing dialogue processes towards the organization
of credible, inclusive and fair elections.
Mexico calls on the political actors involved to
explore creatively and in good faith the options that
will make it possible to overcome the differences with
respect to the legal framework for elections.
Unfortunately, the influence of external actors has
contributed to deepening divisions among Libyans. As
long as that polarization continues and is incited by
actors outside the country, the security and stability
of the entire region will be at risk. The absence of a
strong State is precisely why we are seeing situations
where Chadian armed groups are active in southern
Libya, terrorist groups have a presence on the country’s
territory and illicit arms are flowing into the region.
We have emphasized the harmful effects of those
situations, particularly in the Sahel, on many occasions.
That is why for the past two years my country has
insisted on the need to strengthen regional cooperation
in implementing the arms embargo and preventing
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

the flow of arms to the Sahel and North Africa.
Considering the current situation in Libya, Mexico
believes that the Security Council and the various
United Nations agencies present in the country have a
special responsibility to protect the rights of the groups
most affected by the conflict.
In that regard, we once again condemn the abuses
that have been committed against migrants and
refugees in Libya, as well as activists, particularly
women activists. We also deplore the shrinking of the
civil-society space. It is imperative that the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) keep the
Security Council informed on all the aspects of the
conflict related to the human rights situation, including
sexual violence. At the same time, we call on the Libyan
authorities to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on
Libya. Accountability is essential if the Libyan people
are to move towards a true national reconciliation that
will enable them to achieve the peace and freedom they
have been fighting to secure for so many years.
As this will be Mexico’s last statement on this issue
during its term as an elected member of the Security
Council, I would like to conclude by expressing our
appreciation for the work of the Special Representative
and UNSMIL. I also renew my country’s commitment
to Libya’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
Mr. Jardim Oliveira (Brazil): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for your briefing in your
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), and for India’s chairmanship
of the Committee throughout its mandate. I also thank
the Special Representative Bathily for his briefing and
welcome the Libyan delegation to today’s meeting.
Last month we heard the Special Representative
speak about some of the obstacles preventing progress
towards elections in Libya (see S/PV.9192). The picture
painted today differs little from what we heard then.
Mr. Bathily spoke very candidly of some Libyan
institutional players who are actively hindering the
progress towards elections. In that regard, Brazil would
like to emphasize that through its 1970 Sanctions
Committee, the Council remains in a position to target
individuals who undermine the successful completion
of the Libyan political transition. It is worth reminding
the Council that should there be evidence supporting
any findings that individuals are obstructing elections,
the Committee can extend to those persons the measures

S/PV.9223

set out in resolution 1970 (2011) and as modified by
subsequent resolutions. That was indeed the Council’s
reminder through its adoption in October of paragraph
8 of resolution 2656 (2022), demonstrating the unity
that is needed to address the situation in Libya. In
addition, the unity of the Council should go beyond
its call for elections. We concur with the Special
Representative that there is a deficit of legitimacy in the
parallel Government institutions that emerged from an
incomplete transitional period that has already expired.
Against that backdrop, we should be careful not to
allow the domestic bifurcation of Libya’s institutions to
replicate itself internationally.
In that regard, Brazil emphasizes the need to
coordinate international efforts aimed at Libya
under the auspices of the appropriate United Nations
agencies, as well as the mediating role of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Channelling those efforts adequately through the
appropriate multilateral forums is essential to ensuring
a true Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process.
We welcome the Special Representative’s recent
engagement with actors in the region and hope it can
actually contribute to the implementation of Libyan
solutions reached within Libya through negotiations
involving all Libyan stakeholders. In that regard, we
also recall the significant role that the Peacebuilding
Commission can play, on Libya’s request, in mobilizing
and coordinating international attention to the country
in full respect for Libya’s sovereignty.
Brazil emphasizes the importance of enforcing
the arms embargo in Libya in a transparent and
non-discriminatory manner. Today the authorization
for Member States to inspect vessels suspected of
violating the arms embargo is for all practical purposes
being acted on by only one regional organization. That
circumstance increases the demand for neutrality and
impartiality on the part of the operation implementing
the embargo. We welcome the French Mission’s
organization last week of a briefing session on the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI, with the participation of the Force Commander. A
better understanding of the obstacles related to logistics
and capacity that are preventing Operation IRINI from
identifying more vessels in potential breach of the arms
embargo would certainly strengthen perceptions that
it is objectively contributing to reducing the flow of
weapons into Libya.

22-754249/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

Brazil commends the contribution of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission to consolidating the ceasefire
agreement reached in 2020. We particularly welcome
the Commission’s endorsement last week of terms
of reference paving the way for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups in
Libya. We look forward to further results on that front,
bearing in mind the Commission’s upcoming meeting
scheduled for next month.
Regarding the withdrawal of foreign forces and
mercenaries from Libya, we would like to highlight
resolutions 2647 (2022) and 2656 (2022), the two most
recent in this area, adopted in July and October. Both
acknowledged the need for a synchronized, phased,
gradual and balanced withdrawal. At the same time,
they both also urged for the withdrawal to begin
immediately, without further delay. Brazil therefore
calls on all parties to act accordingly.
Finally, we would like to reiterate the concerns that
have been expressed about the active management of
Libyan assets frozen abroad, as well as the application
of policies that can contribute to the erosion of those
assets. We recall the conclusion by the Panel of
Experts that active management of Libyan assets is
not allowed under the auspices of operative paragraph
19 of resolution 1970 (2011). We also recall the Panel’s
observation that some national policies used in
commercial banking may actually contradict the aim of
the sanctions regime, which is to preserve those funds
for the benefit of the Libyan population.
Brazil stands committed to further contributing
to a restoration of peace and stability in Libya in a
manner that is respectful of Libya’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We continue to believe that in
order to achieve that goal, our efforts should focus on
allowing Libyan priorities to materialize. These are
most prominent in the fields of national reconciliation,
institution-building, peacebuilding and economic
development, and should be pursued without foreign
interference and for the benefit of the Libyan people,
under a unified Libyan State.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Representative for
his briefing and efforts to engage with Libyan and
international actors. I also welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Libya in
today’s meeting.
10/18

16/12/2022

The Libyan authorities failed to implement the
agreement reached in the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum on holding presidential and legislative elections
on 24 December 2021. Almost one year later, the promise
made to the Libyan people of a return to democracy
remains unfulfilled. In that regard, relaunching the
electoral process remains France’s foremost priority for
Libya. The first prerequisite for that is the formation of
a unified Government capable both of holding credible
presidential and legislative elections simultaneously
throughout Libya and of ensuring governance
everywhere and for all.
Secondly, an agreement on a constitutional and
legal framework, as well as a new and credible political
road map, are also required in order to ensure that the
elections are held. The road map must include political
and financial safeguards. The absence of corruption
and the acceptance of the results by all will be key to
ensuring the success of the elections.
France continues to support the full implementation
of the ceasefire agreement, in coordination with the
United Nations. At the meeting of the 5+5 Joint Military
Committee on 8 December in Tunis, which brought
together security actors from both the east and west of
the country, the Committee expressed its willingness
to move towards establishing a unified Libyan army
capable of maintaining the ceasefire and controlling the
borders. Those stakeholders also called for the process
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of the militias to speeded up. The Libyan authorities
must therefore rise to those challenges and support the
5+5 Joint Military Committee.
Finally, continued work is also essential to
ensure compliance with the arms embargo and the
withdrawal of all foreign forces, foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya’s territory, in cooperation with
its neighbours.
France calls for concrete action to be taken in
support of the equitable and transparent redistribution
of revenues for the benefit of the entire population. We
regret the lack of progress in the reunification process
of the Central Bank of Libya.
France is concerned about the human rights
violations that human traffickers and militia groups
have been perpetrating, in particular against
migrants and refugees. We deplore the restrictions
on the freedom of expression of civil society, as
well as the entrenchment of obstacles to the work of
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

non-governmental organizations, particularly in the
Tripoli area. Those organizations need to be able to
carry out their humanitarian and development activities
in the service of the Libyan population.
Maintaining the status quo risks leading to a de
facto partition of the country, a situation that endangers
regional stability. France reiterates its full support to
Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily’s mediation
efforts and calls on all actors to work together towards
a united, sovereign and democratic Libya.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for your briefing today and your work
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I also thank Special Representative Bathily for his
informative update. As this is Ireland’s last scheduled
briefing on Libya during our tenure on the Security
Council, I wish to acknowledge and express our
appreciation for the vital work Mr. Bathily has done
since taking office and assure him of our support
going forward.
Next week will mark one year since the
postponement of Libya’s planned presidential and
parliamentary elections. Those elections were intended
to mark a crucial stage in securing a peaceful, stable
and prosperous outlook for all Libyans. They were
intended to return the future of Libya into the hands of
the Libyan people. Regrettably, since the postponement
last December, we have not seen the progress required
to bring us back to the ballot box. The prolonged divide
over executive power is deeply troubling, and we are
concerned that political and institutional divisions
could become even more entrenched.
There is an urgent need for all Libyan leaders to
come together and agree on a constitutional basis for
the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections as soon
as possible. We urge all Libyan institutions, including
the House of Representatives, the High State Council
and the Presidential Council, to reinvigorate efforts to
that end through good-faith dialogue. All stakeholders,
both in Libya and internationally, must set aside selfinterest in service of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
future for the people of Libya.
We are very encouraged by the Special
Representative’s commitment to an inclusive process
for overcoming the deadlock. We welcome his visit
to Sebha, in southern Libya, last month. We also
agree with his assessment that Libyan women have

S/PV.9223

a critical role to play in Libya’s journey to stability.
We should not accept that only those who have been
involved in conflict get a chance to shape the peace.
The full, equal, meaningful and safe participation of
women and the inclusion of young people in all areas
of Libya’s political, economic and security sectors must
be secured.
While the ceasefire continues to hold, we are
concerned that the protracted political stalemate and
prominence of politically aligned militias will lead
to deeper instability and conflict, as we witnessed in
Tripoli in August. All actors have a responsibility to
protect civilians and refrain from escalatory actions
or rhetoric.
We welcome the continued work of the Joint
Military Commission, a key enabler of the ceasefire
agreement. The establishment in November of a
subcommittee on armed groups and the convening of
the security working group in Tunis earlier this month
are welcome steps. The unification of the military and
security architecture is clearly a key component for any
sustainable solution.
On the other hand, we remain deeply concerned
about the shrinking civil society space in Libya. The
deliberate targeting of civil society, including women’s
rights activists, as well as arbitrary detentions must end.
Migrants and refugees continue to be subject to human
rights violations and face serious humanitarian and
protection concerns. The killing of at least 15 migrants
and asylum seekers in Sabratha in October serves as a
shocking reminder of that grim reality.
We urge the Libyan authorities to address impunity
and ensure accountability for all those who have
suffered violations of international humanitarian
law, as well as violations and abuses of human rights.
Ensuring accountability and justice is essential not only
for victims and survivors, but also to counter impunity
and prevent future violations.
We welcome efforts made by the authorities to
advance durable solutions for internally displaced
persons, including through the finalization of a national
strategy in line with the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework.
Let me conclude by echoing the Special
Representative’s call for a Libyan-led and -owned
process, under United Nations auspices, that addresses
the aspirations of the Libyan people to choose their own

22-7542411/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

16/12/2022

leadership. We urge all members around this table to
remain united in support of those legitimate aspirations.
The status quo, which serves only the few and not the
many, is unsustainable and, frankly, unacceptable.
We hope that 2023 will find Libyans on the path to a
genuine and sustainable peace.

even more elusive against the backdrop of the suspended
interaction between the House of Representatives and
High State Council because of the disagreements that
arose in early December. It seems, unfortunately, that
the Libyan politicians themselves are not very interested
in finding a compromise.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), for his briefing. We also thank you,
Madam, for your briefing as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

We are convinced that the role of the United
Nations is more relevant today than ever before. We
are counting on UNSMIL to step up its activity as
an impartial and neutral mediator in moving forward
the political process in Libya. It would be a mistake
to build a Libyan settlement outside of the framework
set by the Security Council. We once again express our
support to Special Representative Bathily and hope that
his efforts to revive the Libyan settlement in all areas
will be successful. We are ready for close cooperation
and a substantive exchange of views with Mr. Bathily
on the situation in Libya.

We continue to pay close attention to the
developments in Libya. Having reverted to a system of
duality of power, Libya is once again balancing on the
verge of a resumption of armed conflict. We cannot rule
out a possible escalation in the foreseeable future. The
country’s leading political forces are mobilizing their
supporters and trying to secure additional support from
the outside, while promising the external stakeholders
that their interests in Libya will be guaranteed once
their opponents in the struggle for power are defeated.
That is hardly the path that ordinary Libyans deserve,
given the fact that their country has been in a permanent
state of chaos and uncertainty since 2011.
In order to overcome that impasse, Libya needs to
agree on a draft of its future constitution and convene
nationwide inclusive elections. The involvement of
the entire spectrum of Libya’s leading political forces,
including representatives of former authorities, is a
cornerstone of national reconciliation. We therefore
welcome the efforts of the African Union to organize
an all-Libyan conference to that end.
However, as we can see, there is still a long way to
go before the situation can be resolved. We regret to note
the lack of meaningful progress on the political track.
The intensive consultations between the leadership of
the House of Representatives and the High State Council
have yet to yield any breakthroughs. They were merely
limited to the discussion of plans for distributing the
high-ranking leadership positions of the executive and
a mutual affirmation of an intent to conduct a popular
vote as soon as possible.
At the moment, the prospects for implementing
concrete steps towards agreeing on a draft constitutional
framework and conducting a national vote are becoming
12/18

Given the current trends in Libya, engagement
on the military track is key. We took note of the
agreements reached earlier in December under the
Special Representative’s mediation to convene a session
of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in January 2023
in Sirte, Libya. We call on the parties to deliver on their
respective obligations under the ceasefire agreement
and to stop delaying the unification of the national
armed forces, especially in the light of the constructive
approach clearly demonstrated in that regard in both
eastern and western Libya. Any inadvertent accident or
deliberate provocation could trigger a new outbreak of
violence or lead to a military disaster. In that context,
the issue of eliminating the foreign military presence in
Libya remains crucial. We have consistently advocated
for a synchronized, well-balanced and step-by-step
withdrawal of all non-Libyan armed groups and
military units, without exception.
We understand the Libyan people’s desire to ensure
stable exports of their hydrocarbons, considering that
they are critical to Libya’s economic recovery. We
underscore that oil revenues must be distributed in a fair
and transparent manner. Otherwise, the Libyan people
could once again fall victim to the duplicitous agenda
of the Western States, which are ready to sacrifice a
comprehensive and lasting settlement in Libya to their
own geopolitical and commercial interests.
There should also be a continued focus on the
management of the Libyan assets that were frozen by the
relevant Security Council sanctions. The international
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

restrictions are supposed to help guide the political
process and a return to stability while safeguarding
Libya’s money, rather than helping Western States
enrich themselves. It is unacceptable that financial
institutions in third countries profit from Libyan assets,
which should be preserved for succeeding generations
of Libyans. We will continue to monitor that aspect
closely, including in the context of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily for his briefing on the
latest developments in Libya. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of India for her briefing on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and warmly welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
Norway strongly supports the important work of
Mr. Bathily and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) to get the Libyan-led and -owned
political process back on track. In particular, we applaud
his ongoing work to engage in consultations with a broad
range of relevant stakeholders and actors, including
regional organizations and neighbouring countries, as
well as civil society, women and young people’s groups
from across Libya. We call on all Libyan institutions
and parties to engage with the Special Representative
in good faith and work constructively with him to find
a solution to end the political impasse. This month
we mark one year since elections were postponed and
progress brought to a standstill. It is important that
all sides agree on a consensus-based way forward to
preserve the country’s unity and stability and meet
the demands of the Libyan people themselves. We
echo the Secretary-General’s call for agreement on the
way forward so that the Libyan people can determine
their own future through national, transparent and
inclusive elections. Sadly, we have yet to see Libya’s
political leaders demonstrate the necessary political
will. The political and institutional divide is widening
and deepening, the security situation is fragile, and the
people of Libya are suffering. A strong and persuasive
United Nations is needed to lead a united international
effort to put an end to that unsustainable deadlock. The
international community must speak with one voice
on Libya.
It is a positive step that the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission (JMC) has agreed to resume its work and
move forward with the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement. We understand that the Commission plans

S/PV.9223

to convene in January, and we hope it will use that
opportunity both to build on its previous achievements
and reinvigorate progress on outstanding issues. We
are especially pleased to note that the Commission has
agreed to establish a technical subcommittee on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, which is a crucial element of the ceasefire
agreement. The DDR process, together with steps to
unify Libya’s armed forces, as well as to ensure the
full withdrawal of foreign fighters and reform of the
security sector, remains an essential component for
building lasting peace and stability both in Libya and
the wider region.
Norway remains concerned about the reports
of the arbitrary arrests, detention and sentencing of
civil-society representatives, human rights defenders,
humanitarian workers and social activists for exercising
their right to freedom of expression. We also underline
the importance of an independent judicial system
for securing the rule of law. Similarly, we are deeply
troubled that UNSMIL has observed a “significant
surge” in verified cases of violations against children
this fall, as well as attacks on schools and hospitals.
That is simply unacceptable. We call on the Libyan
authorities to fulfil their obligations to protect human
rights and the space for civil society.
Finally, we encourage all the parties to show
restraint, refrain from any escalatory actions or rhetoric
and tackle the resolution of this conflict through
peaceful solutions with a sense of urgency. As this is
the last meeting on Libya during our country’s tenure
on the Security Council, I want to assure everyone that
Norway will continue to stay engaged in and support
the United Nations efforts to find the political solution
that the Libyan people desperately want and deserve.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for
the update. I would also like to thank you, Madam
President, for the briefing of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), and I congratulate
you on the work that India has conducted as Chair of
the Committee over the past two years.
Almost one year has passed since 24 December
2021. The elections were called off, dashing the strong
desire of the Libyan people to go to the polls, elect their
representatives and give Libya the sense it still lacks
in its path to the future. It was a monumental setback
with serious repercussions, which, as we see, continue

22-7542413/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

to this day. The latest unilateral decisions — the
attempt by the House of Representatives to set up
a constitutional court in Benghazi and in return, the
decision by the High State Council to suspend all
interactions with Parliament — add to a long list of
unwelcome events. All of that is wrong, disappointing,
bad and counterproductive, and only feeds into the
never-ending, frustrating impasse that Libyan leaders
have made their refuge. Such unilateral initiatives only
foment more divisions in an already sharply divided
country and seriously undermine the United Nationsfacilitated efforts to set the stage for presidential and
parliamentary elections. We have reiterated a number
of times this year — and it needs to be repeated
again — that only elections will provide legitimacy to
the Libyan leaders and institutions and open a path to
unifying the country.
We are encouraged by the clear sense of direction
emerging from the statements and public declarations
of the Special Representative, whom we want to assure
of our full support. We reiterate our call to the Libyan
and international stakeholders to set their personal and
factional interests aside and work hand in hand with
the Special Representative to find the much-needed
compromises that will enable the elections to be held as
soon as possible. In our view, the road map to national
elections depends on a timely and comprehensive
solution that encompasses the finalization of the
constitutional basis; striking an agreement to create
a purpose-driven Government that is unified, neutral
and capable of holding interference-free elections
everywhere in the country; and ensuring the equitable
and transparent management of oil-industry profits and
other national resources. The Libyan people have grown
increasingly weary of the corruption and wasteful
management perpetuated by a few while the population
faces increasingly difficult living conditions. The
common wisdom indicates the need for every
opportunity to be seized and every possible solution be
explored to revive the intra-Libyan dialogue. Time is
of the essence, and that should be of concern to Libya’s
leaders. They must know that with their stubbornness,
they continue to stand between the current stalemate
and hope for Libya.
Albania welcomes the fact that the 2020 ceasefire
is still holding. We commend the outcomes of the
plenary meeting of the Security Working Group of the
International Follow-up Committee on Libya, held on
7 December in Tunis under the leadership of the Special
14/18

16/12/2022

Representative. We are pleased with the agreement
among the 5+5 Joint Military Committee on some
complex issues related to demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration and in favour of starting dialogue
with armed groups across the country. The commitment
to re-energizing efforts for the withdrawal of foreign
combatant forces and mercenaries is a relevant and
necessary step. We look forward to a resumption
of the meetings in Sirte on 15 January under United
Nations auspices.
The Council should support that progress and
jointly call for all international partners to refrain
from any interference or obstruction. Albania — and, I
hope, the entire Council — will not stand idly by before
any actions affecting Libya’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity or prosperity. The same goes for the
much-needed support for civil society and freedom
of expression.
Time is being unforgivably wasted in Libya. The
interim institutions there are rusting. The Libyan
people do not deserve to wait endlessly — they deserve
a democratic, free, united, stable and prosperous
country, and that perspective starts with elections.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his
valuable briefing, and I also thank Your Excellency
Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj, for your briefing. I
would like to seize this opportunity to commend you
on the important role that you and your predecessor,
Ambassador T. S. Tirumurti, have played in chairing
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. We wish
the incoming Chair every success. I would also like to
welcome His Excellency Ambassador Taher Elsonni to
today’s meeting.
Nearly a week from today will mark one year
since the elections were postponed in Libya. While
the elections have not taken place yet, we hope that
the Libyan parties are able to unite and overcome their
remaining differences. However, that aspiration for
unity must also be matched by the unity of Council
members and partners through support for the Special
Representative’s efforts.
We believe that the effective engagement of
the Libyans and the international community with
Mr. Bathily is encouraging and should be intensified.
Such engagement adds momentum to the political track
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

and advances the electoral process. In that regard, we
must commend the good offices of Libya’s neighbouring
States that are invested in aligning different points of
view in order to enable Libya to hold parliamentary
and presidential elections, thus ending the transitional
period. Therefore, we call on all actors to coordinate
their efforts with the Special Representative to ensure
that they complement his good offices. We also stress the
importance of ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of Libyan women in the political process.
We note the importance of Libyan national
reconciliation in order to turn the page on the past
and strengthen national cohesion in a way that serves
peace and security in the long term. In that regard, we
commend the United Nations and regional organizations
for prioritizing support for de-escalation efforts and a
comprehensive and inclusive reconciliation process.
In conjunction with political efforts, it is imperative
to continue building on the gains made in the security
sector, especially in defeating terrorism and maintaining
the ceasefire.
We continue to demand the gradual, balanced and
parallel withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign fighters
and mercenaries. We thank the military leaders and
members of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission for
their impartiality and for prioritizing national interests
to safeguard the ceasefire agreement, which should
be made permanent. We urge them to take concrete
steps to unify security institutions to serve the Libyan
people. That would also prevent the illegal proliferation
of weapons and ensure that clashes affecting the safety
and security of the Libyan people are not repeated. It
would also address the threats posed by unexploded
ordnance to the population. We further support calls
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for
disarmament and security sector reform, as well as
the joint statement by the United Nations Children’s
Fund and the United Nations Mine Action Service
on the danger of unexploded ordnance to civilians,
especially children.
Although Libya is a country rich in natural
resources, there are many challenges that severely
affect the everyday lives of Libyan citizens, including
a lack of access to education and health care and delays
in the payment of salaries. Therefore, we support the
efforts of the United Nations to work and cooperate
with Libyan institutions, including the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
which was initiated recently by the United Nations

S/PV.9223

for achieving sustainable development, and to ensure
that the Libyan people, including women, youth and
children, can build resilience in the face of current
challenges. We also support the Organization’s current
efforts to provide necessary vaccines to all parts of
Libya, especially vaccines that protect children, as
there is a shortage of vaccines at the local level.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates looks
forward to seeing the road map of the Special
Representative, which we hope will present essential
Libyan-led and -owned tracks for achieving progress
in a manner that establishes stability and meets
the aspirations of the Libyan people for security
and prosperity.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bathily for his update on the current situation in Libya.
We have been impressed with his perseverance so far in
convening Libya’s leaders, and we continue to support
his efforts.
In the seven years since the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement, the Libyan people have witnessed
conflict, Government mismanagement, rampant
corruption and human rights abuses instead of the
democracy and prosperity that they deserve. Libya’s
political transition remains stuck in the year since the
failure of Libya’s leaders to hold presidential elections.
We support the Special Representative’s efforts to
help Libyan leaders work to solve Libyan problems in
Libya and to encourage them to engage with the Libyan
people to explain why they deserve their votes in free
and fair elections.
In the past year, we have seen the continued
manipulation of Libya’s oil resources and the diversion
of revenues to fund militias in both the east and the
west of the country, instead of being used to benefit the
Libyan people by building infrastructure, promoting
a diversified economy or improving services such as
health care and education. The leaders of sovereign
institutions have been threatened, and technocrats have
been sidelined in favour of a rotating cast of cronies.
Phony legal justifications have been used to attempt
to close State institutions to subvert their authority.
Where does that leave Libya? Powerful Libyans have
undermined the road map to elections, seeking only to
protect their spheres of influence. They preside over turf
battles among militias, criminal enterprises and foreign

22-7542415/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

16/12/2022

fighters, as well as the horrific treatment of migrants
and declining living standards for the Libyan people.

towards elections, better governance and, ultimately,
security and prosperity.

The Libyan people have long made it clear that
they want better for themselves and their country.
They have demanded elections. We reiterate that it is
imperative for Libyan stakeholders to engage in good
faith discussions facilitated by Special Representative
Bathily and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya towards the establishment of a constitutional
framework for presidential and parliamentary elections
and a timeline for a vote.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.

We have seen that meaningful progress is possible.
The meetings in September between representatives
of the House of Representatives and the High State
Council yielded considerable agreement on a draft
framework for elections. We know the remaining items
are not about substantive constitutional issues, but are
instead about shaping the framework to accommodate
the circumstances of specific individuals. It is time to
set aside the ambition that has frozen Libya for years and
finalize the framework. The finalization of a revenue
management and transparency mechanism should help
to blunt personal ambition by reducing opportunities
for personal enrichment and access to funds to
maintain personal security arrangements. It is hard to
imagine a credible and reasonable objection to joint
decision-making and transparent recordkeeping around
the allocation of Libya’s vast oil wealth. We appreciate
Special Representative Bathily’s efforts to prioritize
the establishment of a transparency mechanism.
The work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission has
largely been positive. It is imperative to ensure that the
group continues its collaboration on the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement. We welcome the deliberate
consideration of initiatives and pilot projects to unite the
armed forces and look forward to detailed information
about such ideas.
Once again, we thank Special Representative
Bathily for his efforts to generate an agreement on the
holding of free and fair presidential and parliamentary
elections. The United States supports that work and
urges Libyan leaders to engage constructively in order
to deliver elections, which are desperately needed to
restore the credibility of the Libyan Government and
the faith of the Libyan people. Special Representative
Bathily has a challenging mission before him, but we
want to assure him of the continued steadfast support of
the United States as he helps to move the Libyan people
16/18

I thank Special Representative Bathily for his
briefing today. I also welcome the Libyan Ambassador
to this meeting.
As we near the end of our tenure, we feel compelled
to reflect on the fact that the progress made after the
signing of the ceasefire agreement in October 2020 is
at risk of being undermined. It has been nearly a year
since the missed deadline for elections and yet we have
no agreement on the way forward. The political impasse
continues and points of friction between various
institutions have given rise to tensions. It is important
that all actors resume their cooperation in order to
overcome the political deadlock. That is in the interests
both of the people of Libya and the region as a whole.
Holding elections as soon as possible and in a free, fair,
inclusive and credible manner is an urgent imperative.
Despite the call of the Libyan parties. the continued
presence of foreign forces and mercenaries in Libya, in
violation of multiple Security Council pronouncements,
is a matter of concern. Their continuing mobilizations
and clashes bring to focus the dangers they pose to
Libya’s security and stability. Violations of Security
Council resolutions, especially its provisions on the
arms embargo, have gone on with complete disregard
for peace and stability in Libya and the region. We
are also concerned about the resurgence of terrorist
activities in the country and reiterate that terrorist
groups and affiliated entities must not be allowed to
operate unchallenged in Libya. Terrorism emanating
from Libya is bound to have cascading effects in
the Sahel region. It is therefore important for the
international community to address it at this stage so
as to avoid its collateral consequences for the wider
African continent.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the political process
in Libya should be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned,
with no imposed or external interference. As we prepare
to exit the Security Council, I want to assure everyone
that India remains committed to supporting Libya and
the Libyan people in their endeavour to seek lasting
peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
22-75424

16/12/2022

The situation in Libya

I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I want to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to take this opportunity
to thank you for your country’s efforts during its
membership of the Council for the past two years,
as well as during its chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank my colleagues who
represent the other members leaving at the end of this
month — Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway — for all
their efforts. I thank Kenya in particular for its efforts
as one of the Council’s three African members (A3),
and my colleague Martin Kimani for his representation
of the A3 in the Council.
Next week will mark the anniversary for the
presidential and parliamentary elections that were
supposed to be held on 24 December 2021. Those
elections had almost 100 presidential candidates and
4,500 parliamentary candidates with nearly 3 million
voters. All of them were looking forward to a
democratic election as a way out of the spiral of conflict
that has been going on for years and as the beginning
of the end for all the transitional periods. However,
those elections, unfortunately, did not take place, for
reasons that are now well known to us all. The Security
Council was unable to address the situation, despite its
statements and resolutions and its calls for the elections
to be held on that semi-sacred date. Nor was the Council
unable to identify those who hindered and undermined
the elections, whether locally or internationally. Why?
That was why we lost hope and why the country was
in a desperate mood. The door was opened once again
to conflicting internal and international proposals
and initiatives, until we finally arrived at an intense
political impasse, division and stalemate in the entire
political process. All of that begs the question as to
whether anyone really has any serious intention of
working together to get out of this vicious circle.
Today, unfortunately, the only thing we are left with
is to reiterate to the Council and to Mr. Bathily what
we have said in our previous briefings, which is that
one cannot repeat the same mistakes made in the past
and expect different results. Today we heard statements
and briefings in the Council. However, what they all
have in common is that they are merely narratives of
events, with no proposed treatment. They are merely

S/PV.9223

diagnostic. And what we have to tell the Council is that
we have been taking the very same medicine for years
and the illness persists. In the light of that, everyone
should listen to the voice of the Libyan people and their
Libyan-owned and -led solution, along with their desire
to end the conflict and achieve stability.
We need support for sincere efforts and national
initiatives to reach consensus on a constitutional basis
and on election laws, so that general elections can be
held as soon as possible, and no effort is spared to
end all the transitional periods. The elections should
be a means, not an end in themselves, leading to an
end to the ongoing crisis and to the conflict among
the deteriorating legitimate governmental institutions,
which Libyans are tired of. Radical solutions must then
be found for the remaining challenges, which have been
accumulating for years. In that context, we call on the
Council to support national dialogues and initiatives
that aim to bring together Libyan stakeholders around
a single table, in Libya. The most recent of those was
the political initiative launched by the Presidential
Council to sponsor a dialogue together with the House
of Representatives and the State Council in order to
consult on the constitutional framework and a set
timetable while taking into consideration the visions
of national stakeholders and political parties leading to
the fulfilment of the Libyan people’s desire to holding
see elections held as soon as possible.
We have continued to call for support of the Joint
Military Committee, which held its latest meeting in
Tunisia last week together with the Security Action
Group, as they discussed the strategy for security
reform together with the mechanisms and plans for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants, ending the presence in Libya of all foreign
military troops and discussing the means to unite the
security and military institutions and build the nucleus
of a unified Libyan army under civilian command and
with a State monopoly on arms. Together, those steps
are aimed at reinforcing stability and ending war and
its scourge because we all believe firmly that there can
be no military solution to the Libyan crisis.
Today we listened to the statement by the
representative of India in her capacity as Chair of
the Sanctions Committee. In that context, we want to
reiterate our warning that certain States are manipulative
and have tried repeatedly to seize Libyans’ funds and
frozen assets of the Libyan Investment Authority.
Those funds and assets were frozen in the first place

22-7542417/18

S/PV.9223

The situation in Libya

to be protected and preserved, not to be used to exploit
the current crisis and pillaged in an attempt to settle
lawsuits or be used for compensation purposes. That
flies in the face of all the Council’s resolutions. We will
not allow that to happen, and we will hold accountable
every single person who tries to expropriate the wealth
of the Libyan people.
Speaking of sanctions, we would once again like
to remind the Council of our request to have the names
of a number of our citizens removed from the sanctions
list either for humanitarian reasons or because the
reasons they were originally listed for have ceased to
exist after all these years. We call for the support of
the international community for national reconciliation
efforts and for rebuilding trust among Libyans, which
we see as one of the practical steps that should be taken.
The relevant dossier should not be politicized if we are
to realize justice and human rights.
In conclusion, we reaffirm once again that the
solution to the Libyan crisis lies in putting an end

18/18

16/12/2022

to external interventions, respecting our national
sovereignty and ensuring the commitment of all parties
to implementing all the entitlements needed. We need
a genuine, honest desire on the part of the international
community to support the Libyan people and our
national determination for a solution in my country.
Despite everything that has been said today, we are
optimistic and fully confident in our people, both
women and men, and particularly our young people,
who can be capable of leading our country and who
will contribute to finding a way out of the crisis so that
Libya can once again be strong. Together we will build
a modern Libya.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-75424
