Resolution1 adopted without reftrem~e to a main Committee

3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ··-·-·- .. --··-·-- . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

2. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee the Director-General oí the lnternational Atomic
Energy Agency and the Scientific Secretariat of the
Conference, as well as to the participants in the Conference, for their co-operation in its planning, organizing and successful conduct ;
3. Decides to consider at its twenty-second session
the question of holding further conferences on the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2079 (XX). Question of Tibet
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principies relating to human
rights and fundamental freedoms set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Reaffirming its resolutions 1353 (XIV) of 21 October 1959 and 1723 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 on the
question of Tibet,
Gravely concerned at the continued violation of the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the people of Tibet
and the continued suppression of their distinctive cultural and religious life, as evidenced by the exodus of
refugees to the neighbouring countries,
l. Deplores the continued violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the people of Tibet;
2. Reaffirms that respect for the principies of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is essential for the evolution of a peaceful world order based on the rule of law;
3. Declares its conviction that the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in Tibet and the suppression of the distinctive cultural and religious life of
its people increase international tension and embitter
relations between peoples ;
4. Solemnly renews its call for the cessation of all
practices which deprive the Tibetan people of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms which they have always enjoyed;
5. Appeals to ali States to use their best endeavours
to achieve the purposes of the present resolution.
1403rd plenary meeting,
18 December 1965.

2105 (XX). lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and
its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810
(XVII) of 17 December 1%2 and 1956 (XVIII) of
11 December 1963,
Recalling also its resolutions 1805 (XVII) of 14
December 1962 and 1899 (XVIII) of 13 November
1%3 by which it assigned to the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples tasks relating to South
West Africa, and its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16
December 1%3 by which it entrusted to the Special

Committee additional functions relating to information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter oí the
United Nations,
H aving considered the reports prepared by the Special Committee for the years 196412 and 1965,18
N oting with deep regret that five years after the
adoption of the Declaration man y T erritories are still
under colonial domination,
De ploring the negative attitude oí certain colonial
l'owers, and in particuiar the unacceptable attitude of
the (;overnments of Portugal and South Africa, which
refuse to recognize the right oí colonial .. peoples to mdependence,
Concerned about the policy of colonial Powers to circumvent the rights of colonial peoples through the promotion of the systematic influx of foreign immigrants
and the disloca.tion, deportation and transfer of the
indigenous inhabitants,
N oting the action taken and envisaged by the Special
Committee regarding the list of Territories to which the
Declaration is applicable,
Deploring further the attitude oí certain States which,
despite the resolutions of the General Assembly and oí
the Special Committee, continue to co-operate with the
Governments of Portugal and South Africa and even to
provide them with aid which is being used by the two
Governments to intensify ihe repression of the oppressed African populations,
Fully aware that the continuation oí colonial rule and
the practice of apartheid as well as ali forms of racial
discrirnination threaten international peace and security
ami constitute a crirne against humanity,.
H aving adopted resolutions on specific Territories
considered by the Special Committee,
l. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV), 1654
(XVI), 1810 (XVII) and 1956 (XVIII);
2. No tes with appreciation the work accomplished
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regan!
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and congratulates it on the efforts it has made to implement the Declaration;
3. Approves the reports of the Special Committee
and again invites the administering Powers to implement the recommendations contained therein;
4. Decply regrets the refusal of certain colonial Powers to co-operate with the Special Committee and their
continued disregard of the rrsolutions of the General
Assembly;
5. Calls upon the colonial Powers to discontinue
their policy of violating the rights of colonial peoples
through the systematic influx of foreign immigrants
and the dislocation, deportation and transfer of the indigenous inhabitants :
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
perform its task and to continue to seek the best means
for the immediate and full application of resolution 1514
(XV) to all Territories which have not yet attained
independence;
7. A pproves the p1 ogramme of work envisaged by
the Special Committee during 1966, including the possibility of holding a srries of meetings in Africa and
12 [bid., Ninetemth Session. Annexes, annex No. 8 (part 1)
( A5800/Rev.1).
IS ]bid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1 ).
