S/PV.7433

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7433rd meeting

Friday, 24 April 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Judeh/Mrs. Kawar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Zainudin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ybañez
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/264)

15-11638 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1511638*

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) (S/2015/264)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. António
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees; Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, Special Envoy of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Executive Director of the United
Nations World Food Programme.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/264, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014).
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: Since my first briefing to the Council
on Syria some three years ago (see S/PV.6790), we
have sat in this Chamber many times and borne
witness to the spiraling violence and growing despair
in the country. Each time, I speak of atrocity after
atrocity, violation after violation, misery after misery.
And despite the Council’s unity on the appalling
humanitarian consequences of the conflict and three
resolutions demanding protection for civilians and full
humanitarian access, the Government and armed and
terrorist groups continue to kill, maim, rape, torture
and take Syria to new lows that seemed unimaginable
a few years ago.

2/35

24/04/2015

People have become numb to figures that should,
every day, shock our collective conscience and spur
urgent action. More than 220,000 people have been
killed and over 1 million injured. More than 7.6 million
people are displaced within Syria and nearly 4 million
have sought refuge in neighbouring countries. People
risk their lives if they stay and some when they leave,
as we have seen with those who have drowned in the
Mediterranean.
We need the numbness to the senseless violence
and the apparent apathy to end. Violence has continued
to escalate in a number of areas of the country. In the
past weeks alone, well over 100,000 people have been
displaced by fighting in Idlib — many of them for the
second time. More than 1,500 people have been injured,
but none of the three hospitals that were operating less
than a month ago is functioning. There is nowhere for
those seeking medical help to go.
And despite the Council’s concerted action on the
removal and destruction of chemical weapons, there
are fresh allegations that chemical weapons have been
used again in Idlib, killing and injuring civilians.
Civilians in Aleppo also continue to be subjected to
indiscriminate fire from the air and from underground,
with barrel bombs dropped on opposition-controlled
parts of Aleppo city and tunnel bombs exploding under
Government-controlled districts. And it is civilians
who are paying the heaviest price.
The Council has been briefed on the situation in
Yarmouk, once a symbol of Syrian hospitality with
refugees and host communities living side by side.
Today, people have reached new levels of despair.
Hundreds of thousands of people elsewhere in the
country also remain besieged. Theirs is a daily struggle
for survival as they remain trapped and out of our
reach, subjected to collective punishment. Full and
unimpeded humanitarian access remains a priority.
Humanitarian workers, often at great risk to
themselves, are responding as best they can throughout
the country including through cross border operations.
On 26 March, a team of United Nations humanitarian
workers and Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers
delivering humanitarian supplies in Ar-Rastan was
briefly detained by a non-State armed group. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has continued to
inhibit the delivery of aid, and this month has even
prevented polio vaccines from reaching hundreds of
thousands of children under five years old.

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7433

The Government has finally approved a number
of interagency convoys and critical food and education
assessments, but there continue to be restrictions in aid
delivery that limit our capacity to deliver. Last month,
I called on the Council to remind Government security
forces that all aid — particularly medical and surgical
supplies — must be allowed on convoys. Despite
these calls and the approval of civilian authorities,
Government security forces again removed all surgical
supplies from the trucks destined for Ar-Rastan in
Homs governorate, depriving people of urgently needed
treatments.

should be done through the conduct of a fact-finding
mission.

In resolution 2139 (2014), the Council expressed its
intent to take further steps in the case of non-compliance
with the resolution. Fourteen months later, there
continues to be a shocking lack of respect for the most
basic rules of international humanitarian law and a
total absence of accountability. The failure to stop the
violence has undermined the credibility of the Council
and eroded confidence in the international community
to take its responsibilities seriously. Billions of dollars
have been pledged for humanitarian assistance, which
we welcome, but the people of Syria, rightly, want
more. They want an end to the war that has ravaged
their country and destroyed lives and livelihoods.

Fifthly, it should enforce an arms embargo and
targeted sanctions for violations of international
humanitarian law and non-respect of humanitarian
imperatives.

I am appealing to the Council to look seriously at
all the options at its disposal that could help to bring
an end to the violence in Syria, stop the violations
of international law, protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian access. Some are practically difficult and
others contentious but, given the conditions ordinary
Syrians have to face, I ask the Council to consider the
following.
First, it should demand that attacks on education
and health facilities cease and that schools and hospitals
become zones of peace. This is in line with resolution
2139 (2014), in paragraph 10 of which the Council
“demands that all parties demilitarize medical
facilities, schools and other civilian facilities and
avoid establishing military positions in populated
areas and desist from attacks directed against
civilian objects”.
Secondly, the Security Council should give a
specific mandate to the International Independent
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
looking specifically at the situation in besieged
communities and the militarization and responsibility
for attacks on medical and educational facilities. This

Thirdly, the Council should mandate the negotiation
of humanitarian pauses and days of tranquillity.
Fourthly, it should send perpetrators a clear
message that their crimes will not go unpunished and
demonstrate to the Syrian people that there will be
justice for the crimes committed against them. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has called for the situation in Syria to be referred to the
International Criminal Court.

The Council has paid great attention to the
humanitarian situation in Syria, but try as we may there
is no humanitarian solution. The only solution is through
political dialogue that reduces and ultimately ends the
violence. Time is, however, running out for Syria and
for the neighbouring countries that have taken on such a
heavy burden on behalf of the international community.
This is a crisis with potential global repercussions. I
ask the Council to match its scale with an equally bold
and courageous response.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Amos
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: We are all longing for a shred of
hope and some good news, but since my last briefing to
the Council (S/PV.7394) things have only gotten worse.
The regional spillover effects of the Syrian conflict are
taking on dramatic proportions. Fourteen million people
are now displaced due to the interlinked crises in Syria
and Iraq. Security threats to neighbouring countries are
growing. As a result, we have been observing a steady
deterioration in the protection space for Syrians trying
to escape the conflict. Security concerns in the region
have led to border management measures that also limit
refugees’ chances of reaching safety.
It is my duty as United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to ask Governments to continue letting
civilians seek protection, but the conflict and the
resulting refugee influx, in the absence of sufficient
international solidarity, have had such an enormous
impact on neighbouring countries that we are now
seeing a growing host fatigue, as the Ambassador

15-116383/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

from Jordan said at our last meeting on this issue, and
harsher policies imposed on refugees in some areas.
There are increasing tensions between communities
as local families struggle harder to cope the longer the
conflict drags on.
As humanitarian agencies, we are doing the best
we can, but what we are able to provide is far out of
proportion with the needs. Living conditions across
the region are deteriorating, and there is insufficient
international support to cover even the most basic
humanitarian necessities. The World Food Programme,
our privileged partner, was forced to reduce its food
voucher programme by 30 per cent, with far-reaching
consequences for refugee families. Our own cashassistance programme in Jordan, for instance, targets
only those most at risk, but with current funding levels
we reach just 22,000 households — less than two-thirds
of those that should qualify, even with the strictest
criteria. With an estimated 100,000 urban refugee
families in Jordan living below the absolute poverty
line, these interventions are little more than a drop in
the ocean. As a result, dangerous coping mechanisms
are on the rise, with more and more families forced to
send their children to work or marry off their teenage
daughters. There are also increasing reports of refugees
resorting to survival sex to make ends meet.
With conditions in the neighbouring countries
worsening and refugees growing increasingly
desperate, more and more are attempting the dangerous
journey across the Mediterranean. This month alone,
twice as many people drowned as during all of 2013. We
have long been calling on Europe to reinstate a robust
search-and-rescue capacity and to focus on saving lives
at sea, crack down on smugglers and traffickers, and
create more legal avenues to safety for persons needing
protection. These include expanded resettlement,
humanitarian admission, flexible visa policies, family
reunification, or academic and sponsorship schemes.
The unbearable tragedy in the Mediterranean can be
tackled only through genuine international cooperation.
I sincerely hope that the measures announced in
Brussels yesterday will represent a first step towards
collective and effective European action.
One thing is clear — the situation in the region has
become utterly unsustainable. After Iraq became so
dramatically engulfed in the Syrian conflict with the
attacks on Mosul and Tikrit last year, I do not know
where the next disruptive shock will take place. I know
only that it will come, and that things risk getting even

4/35

24/04/2015

worse. We all know that, ultimately, the only way to
stop this from happening is a political solution to the
conflict. There is no way around this, and it is high
time that all those who have an influence on actors in
Syria put aside their differences and come together to
create the conditions to stop the fighting. But as long as
that remains a distant prospect, we must do everything
possible today to prevent a further deterioration of the
regional situation — a descent that could otherwise
become irreversible.
First, some immediate priorities must be addressed:
providing more humanitarian aid to refugees and
vulnerable host communities, and stopping the horrific
loss of life in the Mediterranean. Secondly, there has
to be massively increased support to the neighbouring
countries. The funding announced in Kuwait last
month to support the Regional Refugee and Resilience
Plan is an important signal of hope and must now
be disbursed quickly. But it is also essential for the
structural investment programmes presented by the host
Governments to receive development funding from the
international community. This requires a fundamental
review of development cooperation policies. Because
Lebanon and Jordan are middle-income countries,
the World Bank is not allowed to give them grants to
help deal with the severe demographic shock they have
endured. We have to redress this and other serious
inadequacies in the global development cooperation
architecture.
Bilateral and multilateral development aid
policies should include among their first priorities the
countries that not only host large refugee populations,
but are also fundamental pillars for regional stability
and a first line of defence in ensuring the collective
security of the international community. This is true
for not only Syria’s neighbours, but also for countries
like Cameroon, the Niger and Chad that border northeastern Nigeria, or for those around Somalia. The fact
that some of these are middle-income countries should
not exclude them from this priority.
The World Bank is now exploring various
possibilities of making large-scale concessional
financing available to Lebanon and Jordan, combining
bilateral grants with its own usual loans. If that strategy
shift can materialize, it could go a long way towards
helping those countries cope, and even to supporting a
more positive attitude towards refugees’ self-reliance
and economic participation. I very much hope that with
Governments coming together later this year in such

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

forums as the annual meetings of the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the Group of 20 and the
Group of Seven will support these and other proposals.
Now is the time to adapt to today’s fundamentally
changed reality, in which conflict, stability and
development are linked.
Thirdly, we must recognize the increasingly
protracted nature of this refugee crisis. The ultimate
priority objective of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees remains voluntary
repatriation in safety and dignity, in line with what
most refugees prefer, but we have to recognize that for
Syrians this option is not immediately in sight. In the
meantime, Syria’s neighbours need help that is adequate
to managing the vast economic, demographic and fiscal
impact of the refugee influx. The extraordinary efforts
made by Turkey, where Syrians now have access not
only to free education and health care but also to the
labour market, are an enormous step forward. With
more support across the region, we could help turn
the refugees’ situation around from one of dependency
and unsustainability to one in which their economic
self-reliance becomes an option that enables them to
contribute to their host societies’ development.
The situation in the Middle East is a cancer that
risks spreading and metastasizing. If things continue
this way, we could see future developments spin out of
control independent of our will, and with increasingly
dangerous global consequences. We cannot let that
happen. This is not just a question of solidarity with
those who are bearing the brunt of this crisis. It is a
matter of preserving the very foundation of who we are
and ensuring our common interests.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Guterres
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt.
Ms. Jolie Pitt: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council today. I would like to thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and my
colleagues from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the World Food Programme.
Since the Syria conflict began in 2011, I have made
11 visits to Syrian refugees in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey and Malta. I wish that some of the Syrians I
have met could be here today. I think of the mother
I met recently in a camp in Iraq, who could tell the

S/PV.7433

Council what it is like to try to live after your young
daughter is ripped from your family by armed men and
taken as a sex slave. I think of Hala, one of six orphaned
children living in a tent in Lebanon. She could tell us
what it is like to share the responsibility for feeding
your family at the age of 11, because your mother died
in an air strike and your father is missing. And I think
of Mr. Ayman, a doctor from Aleppo, who watched
his wife and three-year-old daughter drown in the
Mediterranean when a smugglers’ boat, packed with
hundreds of people, collapsed. He could tell us what it
is like to try to keep your loved ones safe in a war zone,
only to lose them in a desperate bid for safety after all
other options have failed.
Any one of the Syrians I have met would speak more
eloquently about the conflict than I ever could. Nearly
4 million Syrian refugees are victims of a conflict they
have no part in. Yet they are stigmatized, unwanted and
regarded as a burden. So I am here for them, because
this is their United Nations. Here, all countries and all
people are equal, from the smallest and most broken
Member States to the free and powerful. The purpose
of the United Nations is to prevent and end conflict, to
bring countries together, find diplomatic solutions and
save lives. We are failing to do that in Syria.
Responsibility for the conflict lies with the warring
parties inside Syria, but the crisis is made worse by
the division and indecision within the international
community that prevents the Security Council from
fulfilling its responsibilities. In 2011, the Syrian
refugees I met were full of hope. They asked me to tell
people what was happening to them, trusting that the
truth alone would guarantee international action. When
I returned, hope was turning into anger, the anger of
the man who held up his little baby, asking me, “Is this
a terrorist? Is my son a terrorist?” On my last visit, in
February, anger had subsided into resignation, misery
and the bitter question, “Why are we, the Syrian people,
not worth saving?”
To be a Syrian caught up in this conflict is to be
cut off from every law and principle designed to protect
innocent life. International humanitarian law prohibits
torture, starvation and the targeting of schools and
hospitals, but those crimes are happening in Syria every
day. The Security Council has powers to address those
threats to international peace and security, but those
powers go unused. The United Nations has adopted the
concept of the responsibility to protect, which says that
when a State cannot protect its people the international

15-116385/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

community will not stand by. But in Syria we are
standing by.
The problem is not a lack of information. We know
in excruciating detail what is happening in Yarmouk,
Aleppo and Homs. The problem is a lack of political
will. We cannot look at Syria, and the evil that has
arisen from the ashes of indecision, and think that this
is not the lowest point in the world’s inability to protect
and defend the innocent. I say this as someone who is
proud to have been part of the United Nations system for
13 years. I do not think enough people realize just how
many people are fed, sheltered, protected and educated
by the United Nations every day of the year. But all
of that good is undermined by the message being sent
in Syria, which is that laws can be flouted, chemical
weapons can be used, hospitals can be bombed, aid can
be withheld and civilians starved with impunity.
So, on behalf of Syria’s refugees, I make three pleas
to the international community. The first is an appeal
for unity. It is time for the Security Council to work as
one to end the conflict and reach a settlement that also
brings justice and accountability for the Syrian people.
It is very encouraging to see ministerial representation
from Jordan, Spain and Malaysia here today. But I
think we would all like to see the Foreign Ministers
from all the Security Council member countries here,
working on a political solution for Syria as a matter of
urgency. In the past few months, we have seen intensive
diplomacy at work elsewhere in the region. Now let us
see what is possible for the people of Syria. And while
these debates are important, I also urge the Security
Council to visit Syrian refugees, to see at first hand
their suffering and the impact it is having on the region.
Those refugees cannot come to the Council, so I ask
that the Council go to them. Please.
Secondly, I echo what has been said about the
support from Syria’s neighbours, which are making
an extraordinary contribution. It is sickening to see
thousands of refugees drowning on the doorstep of
the world’s wealthiest continent. No one risks the
lives of their children in such a way except out of utter
desperation. If we cannot end the conflict, we have an
inescapable moral duty to help refugees and provide
legal avenues to safety.
Thirdly, the barbarism of those who inflict
systematic sexual violence demands a much greater
response from the international community. We must
send a signal that we are serious about accountability for
such crimes, and that is the only hope for establishing
6/35

24/04/2015

any deterrence. So I call on Member States to begin
preparations now so that Syrian women are fully
represented in future peace negotiations, in accordance
with multiple Security Council resolutions.
And if I may make a wider final point to conclude
my remarks, the crisis in Syria illustrates the fact that
our inability to find diplomatic solutions causes mass
displacement and traps millions of people in exile,
statelessness and displacement. Fifty-two million
people are forcibly displaced today — a sea of excluded
humanity. And while our priority must be ending the
Syria conflict, we must also broaden out the discussion
to this much wider problem. Our times will be defined
not by the crises themselves, but by the way we pull
together as an international community to address
them.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Jolie
Pitt for her statement.
I give the floor to Ms. Cousin.
Ms. Cousin: I thank you for drawing the world’s
attention back to the victims of Syria’s ongoing conflict.
Since the beginning of this crisis, the World Food
Programme (WFP) has worked to address the daily
food and nutrition needs of four million people inside
Syria and of 1.9 million people outside Syria. In 2012,
I made my first visit to Jordan’s Zaatari refugee camp.
The WFP was working there with our partners at that
time to provide hot meals to the newly arrived and
monthly food rations to the then 17,000 Syrians who
called the camp home. As I was walking through the
camp, I met women who had walked for miles carrying
small children in search of shelter, food and safety. I
met children who had already been out of school for
weeks or for months — and that was in 2012. I met
husbands who were angry because conflict had forced
them to leave their farms, their livestock and their
small businesses; angry because they could now feed
their families only by standing in lines for food, water
and bread.
Because we recognized the importance of bread
in the diets of Syrian families, we also began baking
and distributing 130,000 pieces of pita bread per day, in
addition to our usual rations. As I walked through the
camp, a man began following me and shouting at me in
Arabic. I asked the translator to find out what the man
was shouting. He began shouting louder and crumbling
a piece of bread in his hand. The translator said, “He is
angry about the bread. He asks if you would feed this
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

terrible bread to your own children”. I said, “Ask him
what is wrong with the bread”. The man shouted back
to me and the crowd that was now growing, “This is
Jordanian bread, not Syrian bread”. He shouted “This
is not our bread. This is bad bread”. I said, “Ask this
man what his business was in Syria”. He said, “I am a
Syrian baker”.
The WFP Syrian response team is working across
the region to appropriately meet the food and nutrition
needs of the most vulnerable victims of the Syrian
crisis. In the five host countries, we are working outside
Syria to serve refugees in camps like Zaatari, as well
as refugees hosted by community neighborhoods, and
we are working inside Syria to serve the displaced in
opposition, as well as in regime-held areas — the whole
of Syria.
As Council members well know, the longer this
crisis continues the more vulnerable its victims
become. People suffer and die from starvation and
malnutrition or from stunted child development; those
deprived of nutrition suffer the long-term consequences
of deteriorating health and broad despair. Those inside
Syria’s highest-priority districts, with the highest
concentration of displaced people, live without
livelihoods, without an income and unable to meet their
basic needs.
Before the conflict began, Syria was a net food
exporter, but drought and conflict have put food
increasingly out of reach. Food is harder to produce
and harder to import. Inside Syria, wheat is twice as
expensive as it was before the crisis; rice is four times
as expensive; bread prices are up 55 per cent. As a
result, any food available is too often, for too many,
inaccessible. Some 6.8 million people require critical
food assistance — more than half a million more than
at this time last year.
The decline in food security and the destruction and
weakening of water and health services have created a
serious nutritional crisis. Four million Syrian women
and children require preventative and curative nutrition
services. Families face and make impossible decisions
to find and access food. Parents pull their children
out of school to search for work.Food becomes part of
negotiations to marry off young daughters or to release
children to fight in armed groups. Gandhi said “to the
mother of a hungry child, a piece of bread is the face of
God”. Gandhi was right. We must not let that piece of
bread be delivered by an armed extremist.

S/PV.7433

We regularly monitor to ensure the appropriate
distribution of WFP food. Despite our diligence, we
did have one widely reported incident where a small
amount of WFP food was stolen by the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham and distributed with much publicity
on social media. Inside Syria, negotiating humanitarian
access for distribution and monitoring within besieged
areas can involve up to 50 parties. Determining which
routes to take, what times to go, the quantities to be
delivered and even the land mines to avoid can take
anything from 10 days to 10 months. Where we reach
today, we too often cannot reach tomorrow. Parts of
Idlib and Ar-Raqqa, once regularly accessible, are now
unreachable. We have not reached Moadamiya in over
a year.
The Council enabled us to make regular cross-line
and cross-border deliveries. In fact, last month alone, we
were able to reach an additional 528,000 people using
the border crossings provided through resolution 2165
(2014). Expanding cross-border activities depends not
only on our ability to safely cross but also on adequate
financial resources. Our 2015 plan is to reach 4 million
people inside Syria and 2.1 million more outside, but
funding shortfalls are putting this already limited
assistance in jeopardy. Current funding commitments
do not reflect the humanitarian needs of this prolonged
conflict. Because of funding shortfalls, as noted by the
High Commissioner, we have been forced to cut the
family food basket inside Syria by 30 per cent. Those
cuts have a significant potential nutritional impact and
can lead to protein energy malnutrition.
Funding shortfalls also limit plans such as those
with UNICEF to reach pregnant and lactating women
and to provide an integrated school feeding programme.
If we fail to provide the school meals that bring children
back to school and keep them in school, we will miss
the opportunity to teach them different lessons from
those this conflict teaches, detrimentally impacting
their futures and the future of the region.
As the Council knows and as the High Commissioner
highlighted, the Syrian refugee crisis threatens stability
across the region. In the five neighbouring countries,
particularly in Jordan and Lebanon, refugees now
compete with their hosts for homes, employment, water
and food. I must warn the Council that when we reduce
food access operations, we reduce stability. We shift
the burden from the international community to host
communities and host Governments — communities
like those in Jordan, where participation in the

15-116387/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

24/04/2015

regional voucher programme, which provides choice
to beneficiaries and cash to businesses in host
communities, has been severely limited. Some 190,000
Syrian refugees living in extreme poverty received food
assistance worth $28 per person per month. Because of
funding shortfalls, we were forced to cut assistance by
half for almost a quarter of a million more refugees
living in absolute poverty. Now, they must try to feed
their families on $14 per person per month, limiting
their ability to purchase nutritious food.

to come. We cannot ask parents to raise their children
in a region without food — a region without peace.
We cannot leave parents to pull their children out of
school in order to search for food, work or protection
from armed groups. We cannot expect parents to raise
children in a region where picking up a gun is easier
than picking up a book. Without the support of the
Council, there will be no food security and without
food security there is no security. We can do better; we
must do better.

We also made cuts in Lebanon, where the refugee
crisis has increased unemployment and overstretched
national health, education and infrastructure services.
A decrease in targeted donor funding forced us to reduce
not only the number of people served but also the level
of assistance we provide to those we serve. We will also
reduce the number of people we serve in Egypt, Iraq
and Turkey. Over the coming months, 400,000 refugees
across the entire region will be completely cut from
receiving food assistance. When we announced the
reductions in Jordan, our hotlines were overwhelmed.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Cousin
for her briefing.

Thousands of appeal calls come in each day — calls
from families that have exhausted their resources and
feel abandoned by all of us. One woman said, “I cannot
stay if I cannot feed my children”. Families like hers
consider once unthinkable options, such as returning
to Syria or illegally trying to make the dangerous
voyage across the Mediterranean into Europe. Without
reliable access to food, people become easy targets for
traffickers and extremists. Without reliable access to
food, the region and its children are in danger.
The conflict rages on without a political solution.
Inside Syria, we ask all parties — the Government and
the opposition groups, as well as the armed actors — to
provide the necessary humanitarian access. And we ask
for the Council’s support because, despite important
improvements in access facilitated by the Council
and Member States, we must do more. We must
maintain essential life-saving food access and nutrition
programmes, and we must ensure that we meet the
nutritional and educational needs of Syria’s children.
To prevent the lack of access to food from becoming a
political issue, the length and complexity of the crisis
mean that we must increase — not reduce — financial
investments in food and nutritional assistance.
Until we deliver the political solutions that will
create peace, we must fully implement the humanitarian
solutions that will create hope and stability across the
region. Failure to do so will haunt all of us for decades
8/35

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions
2042 (2012), 2043 (2012), 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2175 (2014), 2191 (2014) and its presidential
statements of 3 August 2011 and 2 October 2013.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and all
other States affected by the Syrian conflict, and to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council expresses grave alarm
at the significant and rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Syria, including at the fact
that over 220,000 people have been killed, including
well over 10,000 children, since the beginning of
the conflict; around half of the population has been
forced to flee their homes, including over 3.9 million
who have sought refuge in neighbouring countries,
among which are nearly 2.1 million children; and
that more than 12.2 million people in Syria require
urgent humanitarian assistance including 440,000
civilians in besieged areas.
“The Security Council demands that all parties
to the Syrian domestic conflict immediately put
an end to all forms of violence and reiterates that
all parties to the Syrian domestic conflict, in
particular the Syrian authorities, must comply with
their applicable obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law and respect human rights, and reiterates
its demand that they fully and immediately
implement the provisions of its resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), particularly
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

through facilitating the expansion of humanitarian
relief operations and the immediate delivery of
humanitarian assistance to hard-to-reach and
besieged areas across borders and conflict lines.
“The Security Council is alarmed that the
Syrian crisis has become the largest humanitarian
emergency crisis in the world today, threatening
peace and security in the region with diverse
implications on the neighbouring countries and
the displacement of millions of Syrians into those
countries, and calls for addressing further spillover of the conflict in Syria into the neighbouring
countries.
“The Security Council further calls for
coordinated
international
support
to
the
neighbouring countries hosting Syrian refugees,
at their request, in addressing legitimate security
concerns and ensuring the safety and security of
host communities and refugees, and countering
radicalization through, inter alia, the provision
of support for effective border management and
internal security measures.
“The Security Council reiterates its deep
appreciation for the significant and admirable
efforts that have been made by the countries of
the region, notably Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq
and Egypt, to accommodate Syrian refugees and
is mindful of the immense costs and multifaceted
challenges incurred by these countries as a
consequence of the crisis.
“The Security Council notes with deep
concern that the crisis in Syria has had social,
demographic, environmental and economic
effects on neighbouring countries; which have
exacerbated vulnerabilities; overstretched limited
resources and basic social services such as health,
water, sanitation, housing capacities, energy and
education; aggravated unemployment; diminished
trade and investment; and affected regional
stability and security.
“The Security Council emphasizes the strain
placed on host country education systems by the
inflow of refugees and that additional resources
will be required to help the 600,000 children
outside the school system access quality education.
“The Security Council underlines the risk of
further regional destabilization if the conflict,
refugee crisis and the needs of the host countries

S/PV.7433

are not adequately addressed. The Security Council
stresses the importance of funding the humanitarian
and development responses to the refugee crisis,
providing support for national response plans,
addressing the humanitarian needs of refugees,
in particular women and children, both in camps
and urban areas and through capacity-building and
technical support, strengthening the resilience of
host countries and communities as components of
stabilizing the region, preventing radicalization
and countering the threat of terrorism and foreign
terrorist fighters.
“The Security Council notes with concern
that the international response to the Syrian and
regional crisis continues to fall short of meeting
the needs as assessed by host Governments and the
United Nations, and urges all Member States, based
on burden-sharing principles, to support the United
Nations and the countries of the region, including
by adopting medium- and long-term responses to
alleviate the impact on communities, providing
increased, flexible and multi-year predictable
funding as well as increasing resettlement efforts,
and taking note in this regard of the Berlin
Communiqué of 28 October 2014.
“The Security Council urges donors, international
financial institutions and United Nations agencies
to consider financing instruments that effectively
meet the unique needs of middle-income countries
impacted by the Syrian conflict and address its
massive structural impact on neighbouring countries.
“The Security Council emphasizes the importance
of complying with applicable international
humanitarian law and refugee law, promoting and
protecting the human rights of all people affected
by the crisis and respecting the United Nations
guiding principles of humanitarian emergency
assistance, welcomes efforts by host countries in
this regard and urges Member States to continue to
help them in this effort.
“The Security Council welcomes the convening
of the third International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria, generously hosted by Kuwait
on 31 March 2015, and the $3.6 billion pledges
made, and calls on all Member States to ensure the
timely disbursement of pledges.
“The Security Council emphasizes that the
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate

15-116389/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

in the absence of a political solution, expresses its
full support for the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
reiterates that the only sustainable solution to
the current crisis in Syria is through an inclusive
and Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, with
a view to full implementation of the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 endorsed as annex II
of its resolution 2118 (2013).”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/10.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.
In the context of today’s special meeting on the
tragedy in Syria, it is my duty to say that throughout
history — and still today — my country, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, has been a safe harbour for the
countries of our region, taking in displaced people from
their lands when war or calamity has struck.
Today’s meeting coincides with the start of the
fifth year of the Syrian crisis. Over the past four years,
we have seen an escalation in killing, destruction,
terrorism and lawlessness, which has forced millions
of Syrians into exodus, both inside and outside their
country. We in Jordan are at the forefront of this crisis,
with the number of refugees in our country swelling to
1.5 million refugees to date, although before the crisis
there were already 750,000 Syrians living in Jordan.
This overall number represents 21 per cent of the total
population of Jordan.
Undoubtedly, the four-year duration of this crisis so
far and the absence of a political solution have forced
Jordan to turn away from dealing with the immediate
impact of the crisis and led it to attempt to manage
the flow of a large number of refugees who need to
be hosted on an extended basis. This situation has
had many repercussions on us, affecting, as it does,
Jordanian society and the Jordanian State in terms of
infrastructure, services, education, health, energy and
water, putting acute pressure on the country’s already
limited resources.
In our view, finding a political solution has always
been the only way out of the crisis, particularly with
regard to humanitarian assistance and the problem
of refugees and displaced persons. Such a political
solution should meet the needs and aspirations of the
Syrian people and lead them to a new reality in which
10/35

24/04/2015

all the diverse groups that form the Syrian people
play an active part in restoring the social fabric of the
country and in which the displaced feel safe enough to
return home.
The significant impact that hosting the refugees
has had on Jordan can be seen in the education sector,
where, in the 2014-2015 school year, we have hosted
140,000 Syrian students. This has been a major burden
on us and has led to a deterioration in our entire
education sector. We have had to establish two school
sessions per day in order to accommodate such a large
number of students and, even then, thousands of school
children from Syria could not be accommodated at all
owing to the lack of capacity to receive them.
Furthermore, since the start of the Syrian crisis,
Jordan has seen an increase of 22 per cent in water
consumption, and as the Council knows, we are a very
poor country in terms of water.
With regard to health care, our hospitals and public
medical centres treated 700,000 Syrians in 2014,
which represents an increase of 219,000 cases from the
previous year.
Those examples from the three sectors are
replicated in other sectors in Jordan, especially in the
labour market. This is a crisis that touches the Jordanian
people and the countries that host refugees very closely.
These situations lead to tensions and friction between
the refugees and the host societies. They lead to an
imbalance, which threatens the peace and security of
the host communities and could result in the situation
spilling across borders, which could, in turn, threaten
international peace and security. The severity of these
potential outcomes compels the Council to seriously
consider these challenges and the potential development
of these situations. International agencies and donors
should respond more effectively to the needs of the
refugees, but also to the needs of the host countries as
they seek to alleviate the burden created by the inflow
of refugees.
As we enter the fifth year of this crisis in Jordan, we
continue to provide services to our brothers and sisters
from Syria who have come to our country seeking
refuge. We provide them with everything possible, and
we fulfil that role on behalf of all humankind.
Humankind as a whole is also responsible for
meeting the needs of the refugees. The Jordanian
Government has put in place an emergency plan for
2015 and has adopted best practices in assessing the
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7433

needs of the refugees and the host communities. Their
needs have all been integrated into a single plan that
includes all the ministries, United Nations agencies,
donors and local and international non-governmental
organizations. The plan projects the cost of our relief
efforts for this year to be $3 billion. The plan includes
options for financing, such as direct support, trust
funds and other options that are appropriate for the
specific requirements of this crisis. We have signed
an agreement establishing the trust fund to respond to
the crisis in Syria and reduce the burden created by the
increased needs.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Dealing with the refugees outside Syria is
intrinsically connected to the situation in Syria.
Since the beginning of the crisis, therefore, Jordan
adopted an approach aimed at balancing the needs
of the refugees in Jordan and the needs of the Syrian
population in Syria. We have gone to great lengths in
that regard. Through our membership in the Security
Council we have effectively taken part in the adoption
of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014),
concerning humanitarian assistance to Syrians in
Syria. Myriad humanitarian convoys have been sent
to Syria, but these measures are partial and temporary
and will never provide a comprehensive solution to the
crisis in Syria or to the problem of refugees. A lasting
solution that addresses the roots of the problems can be
achieved only through a political solution, as I said at
the beginning of my statement, based on the provisions
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). The
absence of a political solution after four years of crisis
compels the international community to address the
refugee problem by taking a long-term perspective
and considering the development needs of the host
countries, as their development is vital in terms of their
capacities to host refugees. That is the case in Jordan.

The United States would also like to recognize
the dedicated humanitarian workers serving in United
Nations agencies and other organizations who are
putting their lives on the line to get assistance to people
in the worst humanitarian crisis of our time. They are
people like the two Syrian Arab Red Crescent workers
who were killed on 3 April while retrieving bodies of
the deceased and preparing shelters for the displaced in
Idlib, and people who are constantly looking for ways
around the seemingly endless obstacles to delivering
vital aid, like the World Health Organization staff
members who took advantage of a six-hour ceasefire
last month in Aleppo to deliver medical supplies across
the lines. They reached 5,000 people — using pullcarts.

In conclusion, allow me to express Jordan’s gratitude
and appreciation to all the countries and international
organizations, people and bodies that have provided us
with assistance in assuming the burden of hosting the
refugees. In particular, we are grateful to Kuwait for
hosting the three conferences aimed at appealing to the
international community to assume its responsibility
and at expanding donors’ opportunities to effectively
contribute to finding a solution to the problem, until the
refugees voluntarily choose to return to their homes,
which will happen only if a political solution is reached.
I urge all representatives to make every possible effort
to achieve that goal.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Minister Judeh, for dedicating today’s meeting to
a crisis that so urgently demands the world’s attention. I
also thank our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Amos,
High Commissioner Guterres, Executive Director
Cousin and Special Envoy Jolie, for their appropriately
stark, firm and extremely moving briefings.

In Deir ez-Zour, approximately 228,000 residents
are caught between the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), which has encircled the city and
systematically cut off humanitarian access, and regime
forces, which are preventing people from leaving.
On 13 April, a one-year-old infant reportedly starved
to death, and non-governmental organizations are
receiving reports of young girls trading sexual acts for
bread. While the International Committee of the Red
Cross was able to reach Deir ez-Zour with three airlifts
in recent days, the first aid deliveries to the besieged
city in nearly a year, residents of all ages remain on the
brink of starvation.
As ghastly as it is, the situation in Deir ez-Zour is
not an outlier. We are all well aware of the ongoing crisis
in Yarmouk, where many thousands of Palestinians
are still trapped and cut off from vital assistance.
In Yarmouk, it is regime forces that are doing the
blockading, as they have done for more than two years.
Since moving into Yarmouk weeks ago, ISIL and other
armed groups have only exacerbated the suffering of
residents by further limiting their movements.

15-1163811/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

As several of the briefers noted, the United Nations
estimates that 440,000 civilians in Syria are living in
besieged areas where most aid cannot get in and most
people cannot get out. Only 4 per cent of people living
in besieged areas received food deliveries last month.
Health assistance reached less than one-third of 1 per
cent — that is, 0.3 per cent of the civilians living in
besieged areas.
Siege is just one tactic used to prevent vital
humanitarian aid from reaching people in need.
According to the most recent United Nations report
(S/2015/264), nine World Health Organization
requests to deliver health assistance to locations in
Aleppo, Dar`a, Idlib and other governerates have gone
unanswered by the regime. While life-saving medical
supplies sit in warehouses, people die on operating
tables in crowded, ill-equipped field hospitals and
even in their homes, all from wounds and illnesses that
could be treated with adequate resources. Meanwhile,
19 requests for inter-agency conveys, which sought to
reach the hardest-hit areas, are still pending approval
by the regime. Many have been stuck in limbo for
months, exacerbating suffering and even causing death
by bureaucratic delay. What possible excuse is there
not to respond to a United Nations request? There is
no excuse.
Such tactics demonstrate the immense gap between
the demands of the Council and the actions on the
ground by the parties to this conflict, particularly
the Al-Assad regime. Security Council resolutions
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) direct all Syrian parties
to enable the immediate and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance by the United Nations and
their implementing partners. Yet, the regime and ISIL
are deliberately blocking such aid. Rather than fulfil
their obligation to protect civilians, both ISIL and the
regime deliberately target civilians to advance their
aims. We are past the point of highlighting or lamenting
that enduring gap. We must come together to close it.
The survival of millions of Syrians demands it, not
to mention the credibility of the Council’s word. Our
resolutions are currently being ridiculed by the Syrian
regime.
In the immediate term, aid must be allowed to
reach besieged areas, and people must be allowed to
leave besieged areas. Imagine being trapped. Just
imagine being a parent and being trapped. International
monitoring is crucial to ensuring that civilians leaving
such areas are not arbitrarily detained, separated from

12/35

24/04/2015

their families or harmed in any way as happened on
14 February 2014, when hundreds of people disappeared
as they passed through Government-controled areas
while leaving the besieged city of Homs.
Syria’s neighbours have shown remarkable
generosity in helping those trapped in Syria, as well
as those who have managed to escape. Of the nearly
4 million people who have fled Syria, Turkey has taken
in a staggering 1.7 million refugees. One in every
four people in Lebanon is a Syrian refugee, and this
unprecedented influx has demanded that countries take
robust measures to accommodate the new populations.
In Jordan, for example, where the population of some
northern cities has doubled since the arrival of more
than 620,000 Syrian refugees, the Government has
worked with development and humanitarian groups
to come up with a comprehensive plan to respond to
refugees’ diverse needs, from health and education to
security and drinking water.
While Syria’s neighbours have already welcomed
unprecedented numbers of refugees, we strongly urge
those countries to keep their borders open and ease
restrictions that prevent the most vulnerable from
reaching refuge. If the international community is going
to ask more of Syria’s neighbours — neighbours that
have already done so much — we cannot allow them to
shoulder the impact of sheltering millions of refugees
alone. That is why, in addition to the $556 million that
the United States has provided to Jordan to support
refugee programmes and host communities since the
start of the Syrian conflict, we announced our intention
in February to increase annual bilateral assistance from
$660 million to $1 billion over the next three years,
given the extraordinary needs generated by this crisis
and the extraordinary generosity of Syria’s neighbours.
In addition to helping Syria’s neighbours, all
countries, including the United States, must welcome
displaced Syrians in greater numbers. As the recent
catastrophes involving refugees — many of whom have
been Syrian — attempting to cross the Mediterranean
demonstrate, people are willing to take tremendous
risks to escape the brutal violence in their countries.
Just this week, Turkey’s coast guard rescued 30 Syrians
aboard a sinking boat trying to reach Greece.
The disparity between what the international
community is providing and what the Syrian people
need is growing. At the end of last month, the SecretaryGeneral convened a conference, together with the
Government of Kuwait, to raise funds toward the
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

$8.4 billion that the United Nations needs to respond
to the crisis. Only $3.6 billion has been pledged toward
that goal. It is critically important that all countries,
including members of the Council, make more
substantive contributions, and it is important that those
countries that have pledged actually deliver promptly.
The United States announced a new $507 million
pledge in Kuwait last month, which brought our
total contributions to Syria since the crisis began
to $3.2 billion. Today, in response to the devastating
crisis in Yarmouk, we are announcing an additional
$6 million in aid to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
provide urgent assistance, both for the many thousands
still trapped in Yarmouk and for other Palestinians and
Syrians receiving a lifeline from the Agency.
Even as we seek to fill those gaps, we must not lose
sight of the foundational reason that Syria’s population
needs humanitarian assistance, and that is the Al-Assad
regime: a regime that continues to torture, gas, barrelbomb and starve its own people; a regime whose brutality
fed the rise of ISIL and other violent extremist groups
in Syria; a regime that, according to the Syrian Network
for Human Rights, killed an average of five children
per day last month alone. Let us be clear: ISIL could
disappear tomorrow and the regime would still block
United Nations conveys, ignore United Nations appeals
and Security Council resolutions, torture detainees in
its prisons and use barrel bombs and chlorine-based
chemical weapons to attack civilians. Partnering with
a regime of that kind would not help us defeat violent
extremist groups; it would only strengthen their appeal.
The only viable political solution to the crisis is one
without al-Assad in power. A political push at the
highest levels and a sincere and united effort to secure
a political transition are urgently needed and, of course,
long overdue.
In conclusion, National Geographic magazine
recently organized a photography camp in Jordan
for teenage refugees from Syria — 20 children, ages
13 to 15, spent a week, using cameras and words to tell
their stories. A slide show of some of their photos is
available online, and I urge everyone to look at it. A
common thread cuts across the testimonies of the young
Syrians — they want to go home. One participant,
14-year-old Abdullah, fled to Jordan from Dar’a three
years ago. For an assignment to take a self-portrait, he
took one with his face covered — a way, he said, to
make himself anonymous. Speaking about his future,
Abdullah said,

S/PV.7433

“I hope to become an engineer and rebuild Syria,
house by house, and build the biggest hospitals,
the biggest mosques, the biggest schools, build
bakeries and rebuild our home. I hope to become a
good engineer, God willing, we will rebuild Syria
the best we can. We are going to make Syria the
most beautiful country and restore the life in it.”
Abdullah and so many young people from his
generation are waiting to go home and rebuild. Who
would deny them that opportunity? Who better than
Syria’s young to motivate and unite us, the members
of the Security Council, to work relentlessly to enforce
our own resolutions in order to mitigate the suffering of
the Syrian people and to find a political solution to this
devastating conflict?
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank and congratulate the Jordanian presidency
on bringing the Council’s attention to the impact of
the humanitarian crisis in Syria on its neighbouring
countries. While affecting each of those countries, the
implications of that conflict also have an impact on
regional and global peace and security. Consequently,
the challenges that Jordan faces affect us all, and we
must collectively contribute to providing a response.
The presidential statement that we have adopted
today (S/PRST/2015/10) provides clear recognition and
firm support for the extraordinary efforts undertaken
by countries such as Jordan, Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon and
Turkey to host the 3.9 million refugees who have fled
their homes since the beginning of the conflict that
is devastating Syria. They include 600,000 children,
whose basic and educational needs are being barely
covered or not covered at all and who require urgent
attention. The High Commissioner, Mr. Guterres,
his Special Envoy, Ms. Jolie Pitt, and Ms. Cousin of
the United Nations World Food Programme have
eloquently described the plight of the Syrian refugees
and the challenges that their presence poses for the host
countries. We appreciate their briefings and, above
all, the extraordinary work they do as humanitarian
workers.
We are witnessing the greatest refugee crisis
of our time. It is a drama that crosses borders and
challenges the conscience of the entire international
community. It is, above all, a drama that has 3.9 million
faces and names. Let us put ourselves in their place,
and try to imagine spending five years of our lives
uprooted by force from our living environment, often
from the closeness of our loved ones, surviving in

15-1163813/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

precarious material conditions — five years taken
from our professional careers, five years stolen from
our children’s education, five years of our lives living
without hope that the situation is going to change in the
immediate future. That is, until we are able to find a
political solution to the Syrian conflict, which we have
not done. That is our failure and our shame.
What can we do in the meantime? The neighbouring
countries, which have received most of the Syrian
refugees, are giving us an example of solidarity and
humanity under conditions that test the resilience of
their own societies. As I said, we cannot and we must
not leave them to manage alone in that effort. We
are not facing a solely humanitarian crisis, but also a
situation that undermines the development efforts of the
neighbouring host countries. It is vital to keep in mind
the link between the two dimensions, humanitarian
and development, when considering how we can more
effectively aid those countries.
At the recent donor conference for Syria, held
in Kuwait on 31 March, we were able to see at first
hand the magnitude of the amounts needed to respond
adequately to the crisis and to support neighbouring
countries in the two dimensions just mentioned.
Certainly, the generosity of many donors has provided
the opportunity to gather approximately $3.6 billion,
but we are still far from covering the $8.4 billion that
the United Nations requires. Overall in that regard, we
must do more. I am speaking about current and potential
donors, as well as funding from international financial
institutions. Those institutions could consider the use of
financial instruments adapted to the neighbouring host
countries’ needs, taking into consideration that they
are middle-income countries, whose access to funding
under more favourable conditions would be restricted.
The situation of the Syrian refugees is one aspect
of the broader Syrian humanitarian crisis. We are
facing a crisis that affects, within a country of more
than 22 million people, 7.6 million who are internally
displaced. Those figures are from the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2015/264), which UnderSecretary-General Amos presented. We appreciate
her presence among us and value her dedication and
valorous efforts in extraordinary measure. Those are
figures that, again to our shame, have been repeated
and have continued to increase month by month over the
past years. The Council’s actions through resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) have, since

14/35

24/04/2015

their adoption, undoubtedly contributed to improving
the lot of the Syrian population.
But that is not enough. Instead, in debate after debate
we find that the most important requirements of the
resolutions on protection and humanitarian assistance
remain unfulfilled in their entirety. We are especially
but not only concerned about the systematic violations
of the medical neutrality principle and the removal
of medical and sanitary supplies from humanitarian
convoys that are essential to civilian populations. It is
necessary, therefore, to reflect on how to ensure urgent
and effective compliance with the resolutions. Above
all, it is necessary and urgent to act.
As a member of the Council, Spain has insisted
in recent statements on practical measures to realize
that goal. One measure in particular relates to an
area of humanitarian action noted as a priority in the
Secretary-General’s reports. I am referring to access to
areas under siege, where, according to available data,
440,000 people live in poverty and where humanitarian
access has not gotten through or has opened very
sporadically in recent months. One such area is the
Yarmouk refugee camp, on which the Council held two
consultations this month and where the situation has
been described as one of the deepest circles of hell for
the thousands of civilians still trapped inside.
The action proposed by Spain, along with other
countries working on the humanitarian dossier for Syria,
is the launch of a mission to assess the humanitarian
needs in the besieged areas. That mission could at the
same time facilitate humanitarian access. It may be
late for Yarmouk, but it is not for the rest of the people
living in similar conditions elsewhere in Syria. Such a
mission could be at a level that the Council determines,
but it would in any case have to be supported by a clear
mandate that included three essential elements. First, it
must appeal to the parties concerned not to obstruct it.
Secondly, we must determine its level and composition.
Thirdly, the expected results must be delivered within
a defined time frame and be reported in a timely
manner to the Council. I am outlining its design for
the Council’s consideration, and the Spanish delegation
is ready to begin work on it immediately with other
Council members.
I conclude by reiterating my congratulations and
thanks to the Jordanian presidency for convening this
timely and much needed debate.

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): I wish to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his monthly
report to the Council (S/2015/264) and to the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Baroness Valerie Amos,
for her briefing to the Council on the humanitarian
situation and the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) regarding
humanitarian assistance and access into Syria. I also
wish to thank the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme, Ms. Ertharin Cousin, for her briefing
on the work of the WFP and its partners regarding
its monthly food assistance programme in Syria. I
further thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. António Guterres, for his updates to
the Council on the situation of the Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.
We are also very privileged to have heard a briefing
by Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, the Special Envoy of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who
has devoted much effort to raising the international
community’s awareness of the plight of the Syrian
refugees. We share Ms. Jolie Pitt’s concerns that too
many innocent people are paying the price of the
conflict in Syria and that the international community
must step up and do more.
Despite the international community’s efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people, the
on-the-ground humanitarian situation has, we deeply
regret to say, deteriorated significantly. Indiscriminate
attacks and the deliberate targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure by both Government and armed
opposition forces have continued without respite. We
are perplexed that the parties to the conflict, each
claiming to be representing or fighting for the Syrian
people, are seemingly oblivious to the suffering and
destruction that they are inflicting on the Syrian people.
The ever-increasing numbers of civilian deaths and
injuries, displaced persons and refugees are evidence
of the destructive toll inflicted by this conflict.
While the humanitarian statistics may speak for
themselves, the Council must continue to speak for
the victims of the conflict, namely the millions of
Syrians who continue to suffer. The strategy by the
parties to the conflict of besieging and starving entire
cities, designed to ensure the submission and surrender
of whole populations, has added another horrifying
dimension to the Syrian conflict. It is appalling that
the parties to the conflict have increasingly employed

S/PV.7433

this practice as a strategy of war, one that we condemn
unequivocally.
The barbarity of such strategies is unprecedented
and unparalleled in modern history. Entire populations
not only face death and injury, they are also subjected to
inhumane and horrific conditions in the course of their
daily survival. When we think about those physically
trapped and besieged in cities and deprived of and
denied basic essentials such as food, water, health
care and medicines, it is beyond our imagination to
comprehend the daily struggle and hardship they have
to go through in order to survive.
Despite the adoption of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014), we are deeply concerned that the
delivery of humanitarian aid, especially when it requires
access across borders and combat lines, continues to
encounter security and administrative obstacles. While
we acknowledge the Syrian Government’s cooperation
in facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid, we
believe that the continued administrative obstacles it
places in the way of lifesaving humanitarian aid are
becoming increasingly unsustainable. The prohibition
against bringing in medical and surgical supplies
intended for the treatment of the already suffering
Syrian population is unacceptable. The international
community cannot tolerate such obstacles any longer.
Such humanitarian aid and supplies must be allowed to
reach their intended destinations and recipients.
We commend the work of the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and other humanitarian partners
to ensure the delivery of aid to the Syrian people in the
face of an extremely challenging security environment.
The dedication and commitment of their personnel is
highly admirable. In the light of the obstacles put in
the way of the delivery of humanitarian aid and relief,
intentionally or otherwise, we are of the view that
the international community’s concerns should be
reflected in continued monitoring by the Council in
order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid. The
Council can ill afford to sit back and simply hope that
the parties to the conflict will respect international
law, international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions.
The escalation of the situation in besieged Yarmouk,
near Damascus, has further sensitized the international
community to the humanitarian situation of those in
besieged cities. In what was once a refuge and safe
haven for more than 160,000 Palestinian refugees, the
worsening conflict has now trapped the approximately

15-1163815/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

18,000 Palestinians remaining in Yarmouk. It is
deeply disheartening for those who had sought refuge
in Syria to now be embroiled in and directly affected
by the conflict. But this is not unique to Yarmouk, as
many other cities throughout Syria are facing similar
situations. We cannot in good conscience continue
to allow the people in these besieged cities to suffer,
whether in Yarmouk, Aleppo, Homs or elsewhere in
Syria. We recognize that the Government of Syria
has the primary responsibility for the protection of its
people. We hold the view, however, that in the light of
the Government’s continued inability, unwillingness
and failure to fulfil its obligations, the Council has
an imperative to ensure that civilians are protected
and that efforts undertaken to enable the organization
of humanitarian pauses for the delivery of aid, the
establishment of humanitarian corridors and the safe
passage of civilians out of besieged areas.
We fully acknowledge that the humanitarian
situation in Syria is intrinsically linked to a political
settlement of the conflict. We therefore remain hopeful
that the parties to the conflict will positively consider
the freeze proposal made by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Syria.
Nevertheless, there is mounting frustration in the
international community about the fact that, despite
its efforts, the parties to the conflict have remained
obstinate about finding a sustainable solution to the
conflict. Malaysia reiterates its view that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. We believe
firmly that the future of Syria should be determined
by the Syrian people themselves through a Syrian-led
political process. In that regard, we are supportive of
efforts to support, promote, encourage and facilitate
an inclusive political transitional process aimed at
fostering national reconciliation in Syria.
We cannot allow our humanity to be lulled or
desensitized by the horrors of the Syrian conflict.
Neither can we allow our humanity to be corrupted
by accepting that such horrors are corollaries of or to
be expected in the course of conflict. In the light of
the ongoing and worsening humanitarian situation in
Syria, we have an imperative, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure
that international law, international humanitarian law
and the relevant resolutions are respected by the parties
to the conflict.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand is
grateful to Jordan for presiding over today’s debate.

16/35

24/04/2015

Jordan’s positive role in the region, and the generosity
it has shown to Syrian refugees, is highly appreciated.
It is increasingly apparent that the burden of the
Syrian conflict for Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon, Egypt
and Iraq is unsustainable. We cannot expect countries
in the region to absorb its effects indefinitely. The
economic and social impact will seriously damage
basic institutions and the social fabric. We are already
seeing the devastating impact on children who are
unable to access basic education and are losing hope
for a productive and dignified future.
Over the past four years, the Council has watched
Syria disintegrate from a stable middle-income country
to one of ruin and despair. The adoption of resolution
2139 (2014) gave hope that the humanitarian situation
would improve. However, more than a year later, and
in the fifth year of the conflict, it is clear that there has
been little improvement. Non-compliance has become
the new norm. As we heard this morning, possible
responses to the unfolding catastrophe, such as an arms
embargo, a no-fly zone or boots on the ground, have
not come to fruition. This afternoon, we will hear more
on Special Envoy de Mistura’s freeze proposal, but we
cannot be optimistic about that, either. We all know
what is off the table; the time has come to ask what is
on the table.
As the carnage in Syria continues to unfold,
the Council must find renewed will to put aside
its differences. We must think creatively about the
pragmatic things we can do to make a difference in
the lives of the Syrian people and those affected by
the crisis in the region. New Zealand will continue
to work with Jordan and Spain, as co-penholders on
Syrian humanitarian issues, to pursue concrete action
on medical neutrality, humanitarian access to besieged
areas and other options outlined by Under-SecretaryGeneral Amos this morning. We encourage fellow
Council members to join us in doing so.
The terrible situation in Yarmouk has served to
remind us why wider action on humanitarian access
to the 440,000 people trapped in besieged areas
throughout Syria is so important. As well, as we heard
this morning, the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2015/264) informs that only 0.3 per cent of besieged
areas had access to medical assistance in March. That
is completely unacceptable.
In eastern Ghouta, 10 patients have died due to a
lack of dialysis equipment, with remaining supplies

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7433

expected to run out in the next few weeks, thus
threatening the lives of 23 more patients awaiting
treatment. That is why we support calls that, as a
concrete step, the Council should request the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a humanitarian assessment mission
to besieged areas and report its findings to the Council
as soon as possible.

France welcomes the success of the Kuwait
conference, where donors mobilized $3.6 billion. But
the humanitarian response plan for 2015 is currently
covered only up to 16 per cent. It is therefore important
that the pledges made be promptly disbursed, which will
help in tackling the urgent needs of the United Nations
agencies in Syria and in the neighbouring countries.

Many here will recall that before there was Security
Council action on chemical weapons and on crossborder humanitarian access, it was all deemed too hard.
Yet, still, progress was made. Let us do the same with
other aspects of resolution 2139 (2014).

Beyond the financial means, however, which
we must meet collectively, there is the crucial issue
of access to people in need, which continues to
deteriorate in Syria. The Syrian regime has the primary
responsibility in that regard. It continues to deliberately
target civilians, to pursue a deliberate siege strategy
and to impose all types of obstacles on the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, in direct violation of
international humanitarian law.

Donors have been generous in responding to
humanitarian appeals. Neighbouring countries’
attempts to alleviate the consequences of the conflict
are to be saluted. However, a lasting solution will be
found only by addressing the root causes of the conflict
and finding a sustainable political solution.
Today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/10)
demonstrates that the Council can speak with one voice
on Syria. Now it is time for Council members to act
with unanimity.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first thank the Jordanian presidency for organizing
this necessary debate. I also thank all of the
briefers — Ms. Valerie Amos, Mr. António Guterres,
Ms. Ertharin Cousin and Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt — for
their poignant statements. There is no doubt: the Syrian
tragedy is like a black hole that relentlessly obliterates
human life and sets back all of our values. The civilian
population is the primary victim of the conflict, which
each day reveals new horrors, fuels extremism and
marks the return of barbarity. The numbers speak
volumes: since the conflict began, 220,000 people have
been killed, 12.2 million are in need of humanitarian
assistance, half of the Syrian population have fled
their homes and at least 3.9 million people have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries.
I commend the considerable efforts made by
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey — as well as by Iraq and
Egypt — to host Syrian refugees. Those countries
have been directly affected by the conflict. For them,
the ongoing flow of refugees is a veritable tidal
wave — socially and economically — and very often
places additional pressure on their social services and
natural resources. That is why we have an obligation
to act.

In its national capacity, France has fully mobilized
to support Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries.
Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, French
humanitarian aid amounted to €18 million for Lebanon,
€18.5 million for Jordan, €3.8 million for Turkey and
€2 million for Iraq. The aid is intended for Syrian
refugees as well as for host communities, which bear the
brunt of the massive increase in population. For example,
in Lebanon, France’s support to host communities
amounts to more than €12 million, primarily via the
trust fund of the World Bank. A significant part of
our assistance will also support the work of the World
Food Programme in the region. Faced with the growing
challenge of educating millions of Syrian children,
France will also contribute to scholastic programmes of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon, and those of UNICEF
in Jordan. Finally, we will continue to host Syrians on
our territory, as we have done since the beginning of
the crisis, in response to the appeal of UNHCR.
Moreover, it is essential to bolster the link between
humanitarian aid and development policies. France
responds to that challenge by funding development
projects aimed at supporting host communities and
enabling refugees to not only survive, but to live
in decent socioeconomic conditions. All countries
and development actors must mobilize to meet this
challenge.
As mentioned by French Foreign Minister Laurent
Fabius at the ministerial meeting of the Security Council
on 27 March (see S/PV.7419), our collective efforts must

15-1163817/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

also allow those exiled, especially victims of ethnic and
religious violence, to return home in safety and dignity.
However, all efforts come up against the absence
of a political solution to the conflict. As long as the
conflict persists, along with its burden of barbarities,
our efforts are simply a drop in the bucket. That is the
reason that the best assistance we can provide to the
Syrian people is to put an end to this heinous conflict. It
is a difficult path, but a familiar one, with an inclusive
political solution based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). Only a transition that safeguards
the Syrian State and protects its minorities — without
Bashar Al-Assad — will generate a solution capable of
halting the conflict and quelling extremism in the long
term. For many months, France has spared no effort
in appealing for a renewed political process under the
aegis of the United Nations. Only the United Nations has
the legitimacy to restart a dialogue on the basis of the
Geneva communiqué, which is the only internationally
agreed basis defining the crucial parameters of a
lasting political solution. France welcomes Staffan de
Mistura’s initiative to hold consultations in that regard,
and is ready to lend its full support. Let us collectively
rise to meet our responsibilities. We simply cannot fail.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Jordanian presidency for its initiative in
convening today’s meeting. We also thank Foreign
Minister Judeh for presiding over today’s meeting
during his visit to New York.
China has listened attentively to the briefings by
Under-Secretary-General Amos, High Commissioner
Guterres, Special Envoy Jolie Pitt and Executive
Director Cousin.
The Syrian crisis has now entered its fifth year.
Over the past four years, war has been waged in Syria,
resulting in profound suffering to vast numbers of
civilians, in particular vulnerable groups such as women
and children, and leading to serious consequences,
including a deteriorating humanitarian situation and an
exploding number of refugees.
Presently, the Syrian crisis has expanded well
beyond its domestic borders, thus posing a serious
threat to the peace and stability of its neighbouring
countries and the region at large. The international
community has made unremitting efforts to address
the grim security and humanitarian situation in Syria.
Its neighbours — Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and
Egypt — have accepted nearly 4 million Syrian refugees

18/35

24/04/2015

and provided them with basic services. The United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies have overcome
myriad difficulties in conducting humanitarian relief
operations in Syria and the neighbouring countries,
in an effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people. International donors have been most generous
in lending support to the relevant countries and the
United Nations. Last month, at the Syrian humanitarian
assistance donor conference held in Kuwait, donors
pledge contributions totalling $3.6 billion. China
appreciates those efforts.
Rome was not built in a day. For the Syrian crisis to
develop into what it has become today is the result of a
combination of convoluted factors involving historical
grievances and present-day frictions. Therefore,
a solution simply cannot be found overnight. The
international community should take a comprehensive
approach to try to find a practical, feasible and longlasting solution — one that tackles both the symptoms
and root causes and mitigates the pressures and the
burdens on Syria, its neighbours and the Middle East
region. For that purpose, China wishes to make the
following three points.
First, the top priority is to step up assistance, based
upon the needs of host countries. At present, the Syrian
humanitarian situation is continuing to deteriorate.
Syria and its neighbours have increasing needs for
humanitarian assistance. The range of that assistance
has expanded from the traditional forms — material
and funding — to infrastructure, education, social
order, border control and so forth. In accordance
with the priorities as decided by the host countries,
the international community should extend targeted
support, to match the needs of the host countries, with
an eye on coordination. The assistance efforts of the
international community should abide by the guiding
principles of the United Nations on humanitarian
relief, while respecting the will of the host countries.
China calls upon the donors to promptly honour their
commitments in full so as to mitigate the pressures
resulting from the shortage of funds facing the United
Nations.
Secondly, pushing for a political solution to the
Syrian question is the fundamental way out. The
international community should unswervingly pursue
a political solution, give full play to the mediation
of the United Nations as the main channel, and lend
full support to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and
his Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in their

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

mediation efforts, while promoting an immediate end
to hostilities and violence among the Syrian parties.
Through negotiations and dialogue, a middle way should
be found that is in keeping with the circumstances
in Syria, while accommodating the various interests,
thereby providing a definitive solution to the Syrian
question. During this process, it is imperative to
consistently comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations as well as the
basic norms governing international relations, while
maintaining the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.
Thirdly, stepping up counter-terrorism efforts is
key. Lately, terrorist organizations and extremist forces
have been ravaging and wreaking havoc in Syria and
other countries, harming and killing people while
deliberately blocking the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and interrupting the implantation of
ceasefire agreements. As such, they have become the
main reason for the deteriorating situation in Syria.
The international community should give full play to
the central role of the United Nations and the Security
Council while categorically stepping up its efforts to
roll back and fight against terrorism.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We sympathize with the Syrian
people for their suffering. Through various channels
and in various ways, we have extended material and
cash support to the Syrian people, including assistance
for refugees outside Syria, in amounts totalling over
¥230 million. In accordance with the developments in
the situation and actual needs, China will continue to
lend assistance to the Syrian people, including Syrian
refugees outside the country, to the best of its ability.
Together with the international community, we will
vigorously push for a political solution to the Syrian
question and contribute to realizing a comprehensive,
sustainable and proper solution to it.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Jordanian presidency for convening this briefing
on the situation in Syria and its neighbourhood. I also
thank the briefers for their passionate contributions.
In 2014, the number of people forcibly displaced
reached the highest total recorded since the Second
World War, a staggering 51.2 million. United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres
called it a quantum leap in forced displacement in the
world. Destitute, desperate people trying to escape
extreme poverty, persecution and war pay thousands

S/PV.7433

of hard-earned dollars to traffickers to be loaded onto
cattle ships, shoddy boats and crumbling barges, only to
find death in the middle of the Mediterranean. Images
of capsized boats and boats abandoned midway by the
traffickers have become almost daily news. Last year
alone some 3,500 died trying to reach the other shore.
Among those trying to escape, conflict-affected
Syrians account for about a third. Even more Syrians
flee to neighbouring countries or remain inside Syria,
trapped by the Government’s barrel bombs, mortar
fire and shelling and suffering chlorine attacks and the
brutality of terrorist groups, in hard-to-reach or besieged
areas, constrained to survive on tree bark, grass and
leaves and occasional humanitarian deliveries.
At this time and day in the twenty-first century,
starvation and death by starvation are not something
we read in history books, it is a reality for those trapped
in besieged areas. Twice this month we have spoken
about Yarmouk, where when aid even reaches people,
400 calories per day are allotted to them, well below
even the most minimal nutritional requirements. Aid
deliveries have not been seen in Darayya since October
2012, in eastern Ghouta since January of this year, and
in Mouadamiya for over a year. It is frightening to even
try to imagine how people survive there.
The Syrian Government’s failure to protect its
own population is astounding. Bureaucratic and other
obstacles compound the humanitarian suffering.
Ms. Valerie Amos has spoken repeatedly about the
obstacles, and she did so again today very eloquently.
Just recently, nine World Health Organization
requests to deliver assistance to locations in Aleppo,
Dar’a, rural Damascus, Idlib and other areas have gone
unanswered. Last month, United Nations agencies were
able to reach only 4 per cent of the people under siege
with food, and only 0.3 per cent with health assistance.
More than 60 per cent of hospitals have been damaged
or destroyed; doctors have fled or been killed. Even the
very basic services are often unavailable. The regime
continues to systematically remove surgical supplies
and other necessary items, including, as we have heard
today, even polio vaccines — what harm does polio
vaccine do to any one? — from humanitarian aid. Why?
The shameful constraints imposed on humanitarian
operations and the attacks on humanitarian and medical
workers are a clear breach of international humanitarian
law and show blatant disregard for resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). If the Security

15-1163819/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

Council does not take its own resolutions seriously, how
can it expect others to implement them? The Council
must be firm in its demand for the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions and seek accountability for
the failure to do so. After four years of lawlessness and
impunity, it is time to increase the pressure.
The stakes are high, and not only the stakes
pertaining to the credibility of the Council, which
has certainly been dented by the crisis in Syria. The
stakes are particularly high for the people of Syria
and Syria’s neighbours who have absorbed the largest
numbers of refugees. Lebanon, for example, has the
most refugees per capita in the world. Jordan must
have received 1 million. That is a huge strain on their
economies and stability. Tensions between refugees and
host communities risk destroying local infrastructure,
complicating services and fraying the social fabric. If
that happens, the consequences will be overwhelming
and spill well beyond the region. Today’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2015/10) speaks clearly of these
risks.
Children under the age of 17 make up almost
50 per cent of the refugee population. They struggle
with multiple challenges, including family separation,
exposure to physical and psychological violence, child
labour and exploitation, early forced marriages and
recruitment by armed groups. According to Save the
Children, four out of five Syrian children who fled to
Lebanon are out of school. Inside Syria, a fifth of schools
were either destroyed, damaged or are used for military
purposes. An entire generation is being lost. Children
grow up deprived of access to education and therefore
of a future — a future that is also Syria’s lost future.
Women refugees are forced to break with the traditional
familial and social roles and become breadwinners for
their children in a highly hostile environment and are
much more likely to become targets of abuse, rape and
prostitution. Ms. Cousin referred to these issues very
eloquently. Refugees are easy prey to traffickers and
organized criminal gangs; while refugee camps, a boon
for radicalization and terrorist recruitment. Given the
much too common marriage of convenience between
transnational organized crime and terrorism, the
risks posed by such extended crises, as in Syria, are
enormous.
We therefore welcome the adoption today of the
comprehensive presidential statement S/PRST/2015/10,
which stresses the importance of comprehensive
responses, including sustainable funding; providing

20/35

24/04/2015

support for national response plans; addressing the
humanitarian needs of refugees, in particular women
and children; strengthening the resilience of host
countries; preventing radicalization and countering the
threat of terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters.
Mrs. Kawar took the Chair.
As much as we may seek to curb the flows of illegal
migrants and refugees, the core of the issue is the
political settlement of the crises that plague the region.
The only sustainable solution to the current crisis in
Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people, with a view to the full implementation
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) of
30 June 2012.
Likewise, viable political solutions must be found
in Libya and elsewhere in the region and existing
legitimate grievances must be addressed. We shall
choke and run out of funds at an increasing pace if
conflicts themselves are not tackled. Inclusiveness,
justice and accountability are the key building blocks
necessary to tackle the crises that are at the core of the
unprecedented refugee flows.
The Council must throw its full weight behind the
ongoing mediation and peace efforts in order to change
the current deadly calculus. At the same time, it must
be ready to use all the instruments at its disposal to
put an end to impunity and bring the perpetrators
of ongoing horrific crimes and abuses to account,
including through the International Criminal Court.
Failure to act condemns new generations to a life of
destitution, displacement and violent death. Failure to
act increasingly questions the relevance of the Council
in today’s world. Is this a legacy we are willing to leave
to the future?
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate.
I welcome the powerful contributions of UnderSecretary-General Valerie Amos, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres, Special
Envoy Angelina Jolie Pitt, and Executive Director
Ertharin Cousin. I am particularly pleased that we are
holding this meeting in an open format, so that we
can bring greater profile to the catastrophe facing the
Syrian people and the region.
The plight of people displaced in Syria and the
region is the greatest humanitarian crisis of our day.
Four years of fighting have left Syrians among the
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

poorest, most vulnerable people in the world. At the root
of their suffering is Al-Assad’s tyranny, exacerbated
more recently by the barbarity of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist
groups. In the past four years, we have also seen great
generosity — particularly from countries that have
become a safe haven for refugees: Jordan, Iraq, Egypt,
Lebanon and Turkey. I will focus my statement today
on three ways that we can support these countries and
the refugees who have found shelter in them.
First, we must address the immediate financial
requirements of humanitarian agencies and Governments
in the region. Funding is simply not keeping pace with
needs. There are almost 4 million Syrian refugees in
the region. All of them needed access to water, food,
sanitation and shelter when they arrived and many need
ongoing support. I want to pay tribute to the work of
host Governments, to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to UNICEF, the
World Food Programme and other agencies assisting
the immediate needs of the displaced. The $3.6 billion
raised in Kuwait is a lifeline for such work and we are
grateful for Kuwait’s leadership.
The United Kingdom is proud to have contributed
$1.2 billion in recent years for the humanitarian crisis,
but more is needed. Donors must disburse their pledges
promptly to ensure that funds reach the agencies
helping those most in need. We must also recognize the
enormous strain that is being placed on the resources
of those accepting refugees. The United Kingdom is
helping to build capacity in the education sector and
supporting thedelivery of health and municipal services
in Jordan. We call on all members to lend their expertise
to Governments in the region.
Secondly, we must do all we can to help those who
remain in Syria and work together to bring peace to
the country so that refugees can one day return. No
one here will underestimate the scale of that challenge.
Al-Assad’s brutality knows no bounds and shows no
signs of abating. One hundred years on from the first
use of chemical weapons, Al-Assad stands alone in his
use of chlorine as a weapon against civilians. Shelling
and barrel bombs continue to be weapons of choice
and hundreds of thousands of Syrians remain under
siege, deprived of basic services and food. Camps in
Yarmouk, which remains besieged by Al-Assad, and
Deir ez-Zor now lie exposed to the barbarism of ISIL.
Those responsible must be held to account and the

S/PV.7433

situation in Syria must be referred to the International
Criminal Court.
We must do all we can to alleviate the suffering of
those remaining in Syria. We call for all sides to the
conflict to respect international humanitarian law. They
must ensure free, unimpeded access for humanitarian
agencies to evacuate the wounded and provide vital
assistance to all those in need. We encourage the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners to
scale up humanitarian deliveries to besieged areas,
including through cross-border routes, and we should
look seriously at the further ideas that Valerie Amos set
out earlier today.
The only sustainable chance of ending the
humanitarian crisis lies in a negotiated political
solution by mutual agreement of the Syrian parties
and supported by the international community. Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura continues to have our
strong support and we look forward to his briefing this
afternoon. But we must be realistic about the timescale
of political change, so, thirdly, we should consider what
long-term support we can offer the region. Establishing
refugees’ self-sufficiency, supporting their education
and fostering social cohesion with host communities
are important steps. As António Guterres pointed out,
new financing instruments to support middle-income
countries affected by conflict should also be explored.
The United Kingdom is working with its partners
on more efficient and cost-effective projects. In Jordan
we have invested resources in water supply and waste
water infrastructure, mindful that it will not only
provide a more cost-effective means of supporting
refugees in the medium term, but also a longer-lasting
asset for Jordan in the long term. The United Kingdom
also strongly supports the No Lost Generation initiative
that can provide sustainable, long-term education and
protection to children. We have given $140 million in
support as we recognize that the futures of 5 million
Syrian children are at stake. We call on all members to
work with host countries to support access to services
for refugees and ensure a durable settlement solution.
Today is my final day as the United Kingdom’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. I
want to thank all members past and present for their
cooperation, their advice and their support over the
past five and a half years. But it is sadly fitting that
I make my last statement to the Council on the tragic
situation in Syria. It is the greatest regret of my time in

15-1163821/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

24/04/2015

New York that we in the Council have failed to end the
fighting and stop the humanitarian catastrophe in the
region.

reflection on the scope of protection that refugees
require and the challenges that meeting the particular
needs of this vulnerable group poses to host countries.

In the past four years, I have seen four vetoes that
have prevented the Council from taking meaningful
action on Syria. And yet, I have also seen glimpses
of what we can achieve when we are united. Three
resolutions last year helped to secure access to
thousands of those in need from across international
borders. It can be done, but only if we put aside our
narrow, national interests for the sake of the greater
good and the future of the Syrian people. It is this unity
of purpose that all Council members will all need to
draw on in the coming months and I wish them every
success in their efforts.

To address this reality is to uphold an ethical
imperative of solidarity that should be expressly
recognized by the international community, but we
must also bear in mind the resources and humanitarian
coexistence within host societies. This requires support
from public and private institutions alike. The figures
we have heard today are alarming, heartbreaking and
compelling, but no longer surprising. The humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate, with growing
consequences for the region. In 2013, Mr. Guterres
expressed his concern before the Security Council at
the alarming growth in the number of Syrian refugees,
then approaching 1.8 million people. Less than two
years later, that figure has more than doubled.

The President: On behalf of the entire Council,
I wish Ambassador Sir Mark Lyall Grant all the best
in his future plans. He has been a vital member of the
Security Council, and I wish him good luck.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I commend Jordan’s leadership of the work of the
Security Council during the month of April. We also
express our particular gratitude for the compelling and
comprehensive briefings by Valerie Amos, António
Guterres, Angelina Jolie Pitt and Ertharin Cousin.
On behalf of the Chilean Government, I express
my appreciation for their work out in Syria and the
countries of the region, and for that of all agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations and their
humanitarian assistance implementing partners.
We welcome the presidential statement that we have
just adopted on the impact of the humanitarian crisis
in Syria and neighbouring countries (S/PRST/2015/10).
However, experience has shown that it alone will not be
enough to end the suffering of millions of people. As the
Secretary-General has said, year after year, the world
has watched Syria being torn apart. Syria will continue
to be torn apart if we fail to encourage progress towards
a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
That is why today the Security Council has
a responsibility that goes beyond the political; a
responsibility to call on all actors to do everything
possible to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
It is a moral obligation of the body responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, as derived
from the Charter of the United Nations. The discussion
of the humanitarian impact of the Syrian crisis in
neighbouring countries should lead us to a deeper

22/35

Neighbouring countries have shown commendable
solidarity in accepting refugees, a massive test of
their resources and their populations. However, this
is no longer sustainable, even in the short term, and
the effects of the Syrian humanitarian crisis threaten
to damage the economic structures, social fabric and
even political institutions of these countries. It is also
essential to recognize the challenges involved in the
coexistence of host societies and migrant flows.
But this crisis is not affecting only neighbouring
countries. The recent tragedies in the Mediterranean Sea
remind us that many men, women and children fleeing
the Syrian conflict chose to undertake such a journey
given the hopelessness of their homeland. As noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/264), in much
of Syria violence has intensified, rather than decreased.
This factor has increased the number of deaths, injured
and displaced as a result of the conflict. We vigorously
condemn the perpetration of such violence against the
civilian population by any party, which is in violation
of international humanitarian law. Those responsible
must be held accountable before the law, including
the International Criminal Court. We will therefore
continue urging all parties to unequivocally implement
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
concerning the humanitarian situation in Syria, and all
other relevant resolutions of the Council.
I must address the situation in Yarmouk, a tragic
example of how the vulnerability and specific protection
needs of the Palestinian community have recently
intensified yet further. We share the assessment of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Refugees in the Near East that supporting Palestinian
refugees is of humanitarian, political and strategic
importance from a regional perspective. We reiterate
our call on the Council to monitor developments in
Yarmouk carefully.
Finally, it is essential that the international
community support the funding requirements set out
in the strategic response plan for Syria and the regional
refugee and resilience plan, which seek to address
the humanitarian and development needs. However,
while humanitarian assistance can help alleviate the
symptoms, it does not address the root cause of the
disease. That is why we encourage efforts seeking an
inclusive, Syrian-led political solution to the conflict,
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex),
recognizing the role entrusted to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, who has our full support.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I too wish to
thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. António Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Ertharin
Cousin, Executive Director of the United Nations World
Food Programme; and Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their briefings.
The situation in Syria is unfortunately continuing
to deteriorate seriously despite the numerous alarm
calls sounded by humanitarian actors and the messages
sent to the parties to the conflict through the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We are powerless
witnesses, almost on a daily basis, to scenes of
bombardments and mortar attacks against civilians,
including women and children, with disregard for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
It is time for all the parties to assume their
responsibilities
and
contain
the
devastating
consequences of their actions —soon five years of
murderous conflict — in particular the suffering
inflicted on the people, killing, injuring and besieging
millions, and creating millions of refugees and displaced
persons. In addition to these human and humanitarian
disasters, there has been significant destruction of vital
national infrastructure, jeopardizing the future for
generations to come.
The tragedy in Syria must call on our collective
conscience. We must not stand passively by watching
the security situation deteriorate further. It is time for

S/PV.7433

the Security Council and the international community
as a whole to express its solidarity with the Syrian
people by taking specific and effective measures to
bring an end to the violence in Syria and to hold the
parties accountable for the acts they have committed
in clear violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
We reiterate our appeal to the parties to the conflict
to ensure that they comply with the provisions of
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
by ending all attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, so as to allow access for humanitarian
aid to those in need. They Syrian Government has the
primary responsibility in that regard. We also call upon
the international community as a whole to increase
assistance to United Nations agencies and partners in
order to enable them to reach all civilians in Syria as
well as in refugee camps in neighbouring countries. In
that connection, we welcome the donor conference held
in Kuwait on 31 March, and hope that all international
partners will honour their commitments by releasing
the funds needed to face up to the increasingly urgent
humanitarian needs.
The countries hosting Syrian refugees, in spite
of limited resources, must be supported, especially
Lebanon and Jordan. That means that the international
community should bear the burden with those countries
and finance projects already begun, particularly
the construction of new infrastructure designed to
strengthen the capacity of the host countries. We
welcome the efforts deployed by United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners, which, in
spite of extremely difficult and hazardous conditions,
continue to provide aid to millions of people in need
in Syria.
The Syrian humanitarian disaster once again brings
to mind the crucial need to urgently find a political
solution to the crisis through direct talks between
warring sides, with no preconditions, on the basis of
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex). In that regard, we reiterate our support for
the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, to bring the parties to the
negotiating table.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees António
Guterres, Executive Director Ertharin Cousin and

15-1163823/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

Special Envoy Angelina Angelina Jolie Pitt for their
briefings.
Today’s briefings and the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2015/264) indicate to us that the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire. The
conflict continues to take a toll on the civilian
population. Non-combatants, especially women and
children, face grave hardship. Large numbers of people
are trapped in besieged in hard-to-reach areas. The
difficult security situation in Syria is exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis. UNICEF has been unable to
deliver water treatment materials to Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa
and other areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria. The World Food Programme had to halt food
deliveries to the same areas, leaving 700,000 people
without the food aid they desperately need. Nigeria
urges the parties to the conflict, as a matter of urgency,
to lift sieges and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
supplies to those in need. That is indeed their obligation
under international humanitarian law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Inadequate funding has been a major factor
hampering the 2015 Strategic Response Plan for
Syria. It is in that light that I welcome the generous
pledges made by participating countries at the third
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
donors, held in Kuwait on 31 March. We look forward
to the expedited disbursement of the funds to the
humanitarian organizations operating in Syria. It is our
expectation that the injection of funds will in time bring
about an improvement in the humanitarian situation in
the country. We also see a need for increased support
to countries hosting large numbers of refugees from
Syria. We pay tribute to the humanitarian actors for
their efforts in executing the 2015 Strategic Response
Plan. We note the important role that international and
national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are
playing in the delivery of aid inside Syria. We encourage
the Syrian authorities to continue to cooperate with the
humanitarian agencies and NGOs.
The long-term solution to the humanitarian crisis
in Syria lies in ending the conflict. That point has been
made by various delegations around the table in the
Chamber today. We therefore encourage the parties to
lay down their arms and return to negotiations, based
on the Geneva communiqué of June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex).
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Jordan for convening
this meeting. We are grateful to Ms. Valerie Amos,
24/35

24/04/2015

Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme; and Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and thank them for their briefings. We were
deeply touched by their remarks regarding the tragic
plight of the Syrian people.
The Government of Angola remains deeply
concerned by the lack of progress in reaching a
settlement to the conflict in Syria. We are especially
worried about the widespread conflict and the high
level of violence throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
In fact, the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/264) portrays a situation of tragedy that raises
serious doubts whether Syria will be able in future to
stand again as the relevant Arab and Middle Eastern
country we once knew.
As reported this morning by the briefers, the dire
situation in Syria is heartbreaking. Millions require
humanitarian assistance. There are internally displaced
persons in Syria and refugees in neighbouring countries
and all over the world. Many countries continue to
contribute generously to the humanitarian effort in
Syria. The fact is that the Syrian crisis is the largest
humanitarian emergency in the world. Providing
emergency humanitarian assistance to 12 million
people is an unsustainable effort. We commend the
efforts and solidarity of Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq
and Egypt for receiving so many Syrian refugees and
for their support to those communities. However, the
spillover affect of the Syrian conflict is a critical issue
that must be urgently addressed, as it has the potential
to destabilize those countries and the entire region. The
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/10) adopted today
is clear on that critical issue and on the need to support
those countries’ efforts in favour of the Syrian refugees.
As mentioned yesterday during the very important
and timely debate on new and violent extremism
(see S/PV.7432), armed conflicts and poverty have
devastating effects on the psychological well-being
of young people and are breeding grounds for violent
extremist groups to spread their ideas of hatred and
intolerance. Those terrorist organizations are well
funded and have very sophisticated networks for
recruiting vulnerable men and women. Unfortunately,
Syria has become a primary battleground for terrorists
of many kinds, whose barbaric and criminal methods of

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

war and terror add a terrible dimension to the conflict
and have the potential to impede any political and just
settlement.
At the present stage of the Syrian conflict, among
the 7.6 million people who have been forced to flee
their homes, including the 3.9 million who have fled to
neighbouring countries in North Africa, are extremely
vulnerable individuals. Eventually, many of them may
be susceptible to recruitment by the terrorist networks.
Thousands of these refugees are attempting to reach
Europe, where they seek asylum to start a new life,
an endeavour not always easy to accomplish. Many
Syrians were involved in Sunday’s tragedy off the
coast of Libya, adding an even more tragic dimension
to the plight of Syrians who were forced to undertake
an adventure by travelling thousands of kilometres in
search of peace and freedom from war and want, only
to meet death in equally horrific circumstances.
The violence in Syria is growing worse; 440,000
people remain in besieged areas. We witnessed the
tragedy of the Palestinian refugees in Yarmouk,
where water is being denied to the inhabitants, as are
electricity and other basic necessities and services.
The warring parties have a complete disregard for the
lives of men, women and children and the basic tenets
of international humanitarian law. The plight of the
Syrian people is tragic indeed, and the international
community could and should do much more by
intensifying its efforts to attain real unity of purpose
in brokering a political situation to the Syrian conflict.
The international community has an inalienable
responsibility to prevent the conflict from dragging
on indefinitely, find specific ways to bring an end to
the violence and human rights abuses, and to launch
a Syrian-led political process leading to a transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people and enables them to determine their own future
independently and democratically.
It is regrettable that the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, to negotiate a cessation of hostilities in
Aleppo have so far been unsuccessful. The opposition
representatives rejected the plan unless it was linked
to a comprehensive solution based on the June 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). We firmly
believe that the political track must involve both the
Government and the opposition, keeping in mind
that ending the suffering of the Syrian population is
paramount.

S/PV.7433

At these meetings, we must do more than repeat
ourselves about the necessity of finding a political
solution to this conflict. It is time to act decisively
and coherently to show the Syrian people that the
international community, and the Security Council
in particular, have their best interests at heart. As
Ms. Amos remarked, it is absolutely necessary for the
Council to take bold measures to advance the cause
of peace in Syria. In that regard, we hope that Cairo
and Moscow initiatives to mediate talks between the
opposing parties will continue, and that we, along
with Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, will carry on
applying the necessary pressure on all parties involved
to lay down their arms and conduct meaningful
discussions about the future of Syria.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014) on humanitarian assistance.
We extend our greetings to Ms. Valerie Amos of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; Mr. António Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Ertharin Cousin,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme;
and Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and thank
them for their briefings.
In addressing the tragic humanitarian situation
in Syria, we cannot fail to refer to the causes that
unleashed the armed conflict and its devastating
effects on the country, especially on civilian victims
of terrorist violence. In contravention of international
law, the agents of foreign Powers have provided
backing and financing to armed groups and terrorists
to violently overthrow the legitimate Government
of Syria, in disregard for that country’s right of
self-determination. Such illegal actions have also
endangered the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Syria. The existence and
strengthening of terrorist groups is not just a problem
in Syria. The proliferating actions of such groups affect
neighbouring countries and threaten to extend their
presence and control over other territories.
Venezuela rejects war, the violation of human
rights and atrocities arising from religious, political
and ethnic intolerance. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates that the only way to end the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is through a political,

15-1163825/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

negotiated and inclusive solution to the armed conflict.
In that regard, we firmly support the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by Moscow, leading to a second round of
negotiations among the parties to the Syrian conflict.
We also support all the efforts and initiatives of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to achieve a ceasefire, albeit
a partial one, in order to open the way to talks among
the parties and to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people. An immediate ceasefire would make it possible
to address the humanitarian crisis and allow a pause for
peace and for the political effort. We urge all countries
and parties involved in the conflict to support the
diplomatic efforts and initiatives for dialogue. This
effort should include all Syrian parties, especially the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad. We affirm
our commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on
the humanitarian issue in Syria (S/2015/264) offers a
critical overview of the situation. There is probably
no way to describe the suffering of the Syrian people.
What is happening in that sister nation is without
doubt a tragedy. It is a people martyred by the horrors
of war. Our country condemns the massive violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law there. We reject the sectarian violence
and the cruelty perpetrated by terrorist groups against
civilians in their campaign of terror and their crimes in
the territories they occupy. The brutal practice of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) of beheading
those they consider to be enemies of their creed is an
example of this.
Given the challenges resulting from this protracted
conflict, we value the work of humanitarian agencies
and rescue and medical workers, and we reject their
falling victim to violence. They cannot be military
targets. We encourage the international community to
promote all efforts in order to stop attacks on medical
staff. We also value and acknowledge the work and
efforts of neighbouring countries to host Syrian
refugees. We urge the international community to
support those efforts. We are very concerned by the
report’s information concerning the recruitment of
children by terrorist groups, particularly ISIS, which
has opened a school for the so-called Cubs of the

26/35

24/04/2015

Caliphate to indoctrinate and train children and young
people to join the war effort.
As indicated in the report, the number of civilians
under siege is truly alarming. Some 440,000 people are
in this situation, which is unacceptable. In addition, the
refugees remaining in the Yarmouk Camp are currently
suffering the effects of the strategic alliance between
the Al-Nusra Front, ISIS and associated groups, which
are working together under the umbrella of the socalled non-State armed groups.
The weak implementation of the measures adopted
to control the presence of international terrorists in the
Middle East, especially in Syria, is clearly reflected
in the most recent report (S/2014/815, annex) of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004), as
forwarded by Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.
The report indicates that more than 25,000 foreign
combatants from more than 100 countries have crossed
the border from neighbouring countries. The report
also indicates the lack of commitment on the part of
those countries that have become bridges for terrorism
to stop the flow of extremist militants. As a result, it
has now become necessary to prevent and combat the
presence of foreign terrorists in order to prevent Syria
and other countries in the Middle East and beyond the
region from falling victim to the terrorists’ criminal
acts, which are based on ethnic and religious hatred.
We would like to express our gratitude for the data
in the report that refers to the bombing carried out by
the anti-ISIS coalition in Syria. Unfortunately, that
information has not been reflected in previous reports.
However, it strikingly calls attention to the fact that
the central command responsible for such attacks has
been calling into question the credibility of the public
sources that have been denying the existence of civilian
casualties in those bombings. That is an issue that
must be clarified, since those public sources have been
the principal sources for the reports prepared by the
Secretary-General.
We also assert that the humanitarian crisis in Syria
must not be used to promote political agendas in third
countries. The situation in Syria is a tragedy, and it
should be understood as such by the various actors who
inflame and sustain the conflict. The main factor that
has escalated and deepened the war derives from the

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

fact that terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida, ISIS, the
Al-Nusra Front and their associates, have taken over
the military and political leadership in the conflict
with the help and logistical assistance received from
foreigners, despite the fact that many wish to overlook
that fact. We once more ask: How much must the Syrian
people suffer? How many men, young men, women and
children must lose their lives? How many more must be
martyred by terrorism, until those who influence the
conflicting parties understand the urgency of working
decisively towards a political solution to the tragedy, a
solution that must include all parties?
In conclusion, the United Nations and the Security
Council have a moral obligation to work impartially
and decisively to seek a political solution to put an end
to the war. Otherwise, history will blame us for what is
happening to the Syrian people today.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank all
our briefers today for their stirring and substantive
statements. However, we were, to tell the truth, a
little surprised that the briefings by United Nations
high officials referred to the issue of terrorism only
in passing. Recently, the Council has been paying
increasing attention to the topic, and we would expect
that from United Nations officials as well.
For four years, the armed conflict in Syria has
brought the Syrian people untold suffering and has
become the cause of a humanitarian disaster. We highly
value the steps taken by the international humanitarian
community to alleviate the suffering. The Government
of Syria faces the difficult task of providing fullscale humanitarian assistance to the people in the
territory they control. Neighbours of Syria — Lebanon,
Turkey and Jordan — are hosting the largest number
of refugees and providing for their needs. Russia
is providing the people of Syria with humanitarian
assistance on a bilateral basis. We attach great priority
to the humanitarian issues in Syria, both within the
Security Council as well as on the ground, where the
Russian Embassy in Damascus is in daily contact with
United Nations humanitarian agencies, as well as with
the Syrian Government.
The support given by donors to the plan for a
humanitarian response is invaluable. We also pay due
tribute to the Government of Kuwait for hosting a donor
conference, to which, unfortunately, representatives of
the Syrian Government were not invited, even though
three fourths of the humanitarian assistance for the

S/PV.7433

needs of the country’s population has been provided
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic itself.
We note that the Syrian Government recently took a
number of additional steps in the humanitarian field.
The United Nations received a “green light” for the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the majority
of the 33 locations that the United Nations requested,
except for eight locations. For security reasons, the
United Nations staff does not wish to send convoys
to five of the eight. In the territory controlled by the
Government, there is no significant lack of essential
items, and medical institutions are functioning. With
respect to opposition-held areas, the lack of assistance
for the provision of basic services to the population has
resulted in all of the ensuing harmful consequences.
Equally important on the humanitarian issue
in Syria is the Security Council’s unified approach,
demonstrated by the unanimously adopted resolutions
and statements, including today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/10). An important indicator of such unity
was the adoption last year of resolution 2165 (2014) on
trans-border humanitarian access to Syrians in need
through crossing points on the borders with Turkey and
Jordan. Unfortunately, the provision of humanitarian
assistance through those crossing points is still very
problematic, owing in part to the whims of the terrorists.
We call upon humanitarian actors to better coordinate
humanitarian assistance with Damascus.
Any impartial observer can see clearly that today
terrorism is the essential issue and threat in Syria. It
is terrorism that imposes the most suffering on people
in Syria. The position of the international community
with respect to terrorists is enshrined in resolutions
2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015). Terrorists,
according to the Secretary-General, have been waging
war on the values of the United Nations and its Member
States. Hundreds of thousands of people arbitrarily
find themselves in the hands of a barbarous so-called
caliphate, cut off from humanitarian assistance. In those
territories it is impossible to truly assess humanitarian
needs. The presence of the most odious terrorist groups,
the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and Jabhat
Al-Nusra, is noted in almost all regions — Ar Raqqah,
Deir ez-Zor, the south of Al Hasakah, the outskirts of
Aleppo, Idlib and eastern Ghouta. Recently, the recent
arrival of the Jabhat Al-Nusra in Dar’a led to 60,000
internally displaced persons, and in Idlib, to another
77,000. In an attempt to spread their influence, the
terrorist organizations are creating alliances.

15-1163827/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

That is a dangerous trend. Of particular concern is
the attempt by terrorists to intervene in the Palestinian
conflict, in particular, by taking the Syrian camp for
Palestinian refugees in Yarmouk. We call upon all
sides to ensure the security of civilians. We support
the combat against the Islamic State as well as against
other terrorist groups. Only the final eradication of
jihadist fighters in Syria will allow normalcy to return
to the country. We think that the trend of events in Syria
requires emergency measures to ensure the protection of
the country from terrorist aggression and the restoration
of its unity. Russia has, from the very beginning, called
for the implementation of local truces or freezes in
Syria. We are convinced that effective humanitarian
actions, including those in line with Security Council
resolutions, are possible only with a truce. We call upon
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to
more actively engage in achieving local agreements
and to do more to rebuild destroyed infrastructure and
reestablish normal life in residential areas.
In conclusion, I would like to look at the root causes
of the problem. We fully agree with those who feel that
the Syrian crisis has gone beyond all imaginable or even
unimaginable limits. The international community
really must come together to solve the crisis. But for
the time being, there does not seem to be a feeling of
urgency to the task that is shared by all. Some seem to
be planning, for the years to come, programmes to arm
and train the so-called moderate opposition. However,
given current information, there is not any moderate
opposition. ISIS and Al-Qaida have taken over too
much control in Syria for that. For any conflict, there
are two solutions — a military and a political one.
Attempts at a military solution in the absence of a
Security Council veto was something we saw in Libya
in 2011. As a result, the country is in free-fall, sending
shock waves throughout the entire Sahel and the North
Africa region — and now even to the Mediterranean
region as well.
Steps continue to be taken towards a political
settlement in Syria, but lack consistency owing to the
fact that too many influential actors have priorities based
on their political agendas. The Geneva II conference,
convened with much difficulty, was halted after just
two short rounds of talks between the Government and
the opposition. Why? Because the opposition and those
supporting it were not happy that the Government of
Syria was insisting on the priority of jointly combating
terrorist organizations. While such a position by the

28/35

24/04/2015

opposition was strange then, today it looks absolutely
ridiculous as the entire world knows about the insanity
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Russian diplomacy throughout the entire Syrian
crisis has endeavoured to achieve a halt to the
violence through dialogue with the Government
and the opposition. We met twice in Moscow with
the Government and various opposition groups.
Unfortunately, those meetings did not include the
participation of the opposition organization created
and backed by some influential international players.
But it would seem that that was actually the time when
the international community could have — and should
have — demonstrated its unity in the political process.
But we are not giving up. Our basic hope now relates
to the Geneva context, as planned by Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General De Mistura. We are giving him
all possible support in that regard. We hope that other
conscientious members of the international community
will do likewise.
Given that today we are discussing humanitarian
problems, we would like to express our deep concern
with regard to the humanitarian situation in another
country, namely, Yemen. The conflict there could
become a Syrian one. Over the past month, the situation
in Yemen has worsened significantly. According to the
United Nations, there are serious issues with regard
to the provision of water, food and energy to people.
Many homes, schools and medical facilities have
been destroyed. Two million children do not attend
school. Approximately 1,000 civilians have been
killed, including 115 children. I would like to take the
opportunity provided by the presence of Ms. Amos and
Ms. Cousin to ask for an assessment of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): The sad
images we are seeing tug at the feelings of Syrians
everywhere in the world. The political situation is
increasingly dire and perilous, inflicting more pain on
Syrians, tormenting Syrians everywhere and further
entrenching their suffering.
The second paragraph of the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2015/10) states:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

unity and territorial integrity of Syria and all
other States affected by the Syrian conflict, and to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.”
Those noble words are being constantly violated today
by States that are members of the Security Council,
whose Ambassadors approved the statement.
Much of what has been said today is important.
We heard similar statements prior to the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011), concerning Libya, which,
members will recall, served to open the door to the
dismemberment of Libya, causing it to become a failed
State and turning its destiny over to groups of terrorists
who spread terrorism throughout Africa, as well as
in Syria, Iraq, Lebanon and Egypt. In addition, Libya
has now become the central hub for gangs engaged in
human trafficking. Many have spoken of that fact with
deep feeling, and have been right in saying that this has
led to the loss of thousands of lives, including many
youths, in the waters of the Mediterranean.
The main problem we are encountering today has
to do with the fact that some people are exploiting, in an
evil way, the extremely painful humanitarian situation
in order to interfere in the internal affairs of others.
I shall explain that very clearly in the course of my
statement.
However, before proceeding with my statement,
I should like kindly to commend to all members the
second part of a report whose first part I mentioned
to the Council a few months ago, which contains
the names and photographs of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters killed by the Syrian army inside
our country. I have part two here in my hand. It lists
thousands of names of terrorist from various parts of
the world, including all the Member States represented
in the Security Council, with the exception of Angola
and Venezuela. This is the “moderate armed Syrian
opposition”.
Let us imagine that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) or the Al-Nusra Front — or any other
terrorist organization mentioned in this report — were
to storm a city in a country that refers to terrorist
groups in Syria as the “moderate armed opposition”.
Let us furthermore imagine that such a group began
to wreak havoc and kill people. How would those
countries react? How would they deal with such a
“moderate” situation? Would they extend bouquets
of flowers and shower them in perfume? Would they

S/PV.7433

provide them with humanitarian aid and medical
treatment? Above all, would they in the first place
accept calling them — American, British, French or
Turkish— “moderate armed opposition”? Would they?
Of course not.
What absurd irony it is that those same States
turn the world upside down whenever they discover
even a single terrorist on their own territories. They
also use military force in the territories of other States,
thousands of miles away, under the pretext of protecting
their national security against the threat of terrorism.
However, the deny us Syrians our legitimate right
and duty to fight the very same terrorism targeting
our people on our own land and within our own
borders — not in places thousands of miles away from
us. To make the situation even worse, the terrorists
whom we target on our national territory suddenly
become, in their eyes, innocent civilians exposed to
what they call “barrel bombs”. Similarly, cross-border
foreign terrorism — condemned by resolution 2178
(2014) — miraculously becomes the result of the Syrian
crisis, rather than the cause.
Moreover, even today, a speaker described the
situation in Syria in an absurd manner and politically
immature way, stating that the Government and ISIL
were targeting civilians. In that regard, it seems
necessary for us to remind the colleague in question
that his country’s air force bombed a centre for deafmute children in the city of Raqqa, destroying it and
killing scores of innocent children there under the
pretext of fighting ISIL in an open-ended time frame.
Another speaker, a colleague of ours, said that the
political solution in Syria must not include President
Bashar Al-Assad. However, he then said that his State
supports the mission of Mr. de Mistura. That strange
paradox in itself shows a lack of understanding of
the content of the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2015/10) and a very primitive reading of the
current political situation in Syria, in addition to which
it violates the Charter of the United Nations, which
prohibits States from intervening in the affairs of other
States.
Can anybody explain to us the relationship between
the crisis in Syria and the presence of tens of thousands
of foreign extremists and terrorists on our land? These
terrorists have come through international borders
and airports with official entry visas issued in dozens
of States, including Australia, the United States of
America and the countries of Europe, to my country,

15-1163829/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

with the assistance of the intelligence services of those
countries. Some of those intelligence services are
quite known to us; some even belong to members of
the Security Council. Those facts have been confirmed
by the report of the Council’s Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2014/815, annex) on
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. That is,
then, what the Council is saying.
So, could the Council explain to us exactly what the
Syrian crisis has to do with the smuggling of all types
of weapons from Libya, Lebanon, Turkey and other of
Syria’s neighbours in the very early stages of the crisis?
Is there a relationship between the crisis in Syria and the
religious fatwas based on a state of jahiliyyah that were
issued in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and other countries on
jihad, on fighting infidels in Syria and on the slaughter
of so-called minorities?
It is not possible to talk about ending the suffering
and pain of Syrians inside and outside Syria and about
ending the humanitarian crisis in the country while
remaining silent about the fact that some countries
continue to allow their territories to be used as a base
and a crossing point for terrorists heading into Syria.
It is not possible to end the humanitarian crisis while
some continue to use terrorism as an instrument
to implement their own political agendas. It is also
obvious that an end to this crisis will not be achieved
as long as some persist in refusing to believe that the
solution can only come through Syrian-Syrian national
dialogue led by the Syrians themselves without any
external interference. The sponsors of terrorist groups
caused the Geneva II conference to fail and sought to
make the first and second meetings in Moscow also fail,
and recently even caused Special Envoy de Mistura’s
proposal to “freeze” the conflict in the city of Aleppo
to fail, whereas the Syrian Government had agreed to
it in the hopes that it would improve the humanitarian
situation there.
Last but not least, is it consistent for certain
countries to claim to be eager to improve the
humanitarian situation while they impose illegal
coercive measures on the Syrian people? Is that
eagerness to improve the situation also consistent with
the fact that some countries prefer to generously — very
generously — fund so-called moderate terrorism rather
than fund the humanitarian response plan, which has
only received 16 per cent of the funds pledged for 2015?
Some colleagues in this Chamber insist on claiming
that the Syrian Government is besieging some areas and
30/35

24/04/2015

preventing the entry of humanitarian aid to civilians
there. Such claims are both naive and misleading. The
areas in question were previously safe and stable, with
no crises — humanitarian or non-humanitarian — at
all, until so-called moderate terrorist groups entered
those areas, using civilians as human shields, and
seized or prevented the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Those areas then became besieged from within rather
than from without — by those moderate terrorist
groups, including ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. Faced
with that situation, it was necessary for the Syrian
Government, pursuant to its duty — like that of any
responsible Government — to protect its citizens, to
fight the terrorist groups and work to prevent them
from expanding into other secure civilian areas, thus
preventing them from creating new humanitarian crises
in those areas.
The best evidence of the validity of what we have
been reporting to the Council in that regard is what
happened recently in the Yarmouk camp, which some
here have accused the Syrian Government of besieging.
How could that camp be under siege by the Government
when it was ISIL that managed to break into it with
the help of the Al-Nusrah Front? If the camp was being
besieged by the Syrian Army or the Government, how
did the Al-Nusrah Front manage to enter it?
Among those who accuse the Syrian Government of
besieging the Yarmouk camp, is there anyone who can
answer that question? Is there anyone who can explain
to us why terrorist groups continue to get into and out
of those areas, including Yarmouk camp, areas that are
referred to as being under siege by the Government?
Is there anyone who can explain to us how it is that
civilians are being displaced from within those areas
that are said to be besieged and that those people find
their way out, seeking refuge in areas controlled by
the Government? If the Syrian Government is the one
that is shelling those people, why are those people then
seeking refuge in areas under the control of the Syrian
Government in order to flee the acts of terrorists?
I would like to explain the facts to those who are
trying to distort the situation in Yarmouk today and who
are trying to mislead people through their poisonous
attempts to demonize the Syrian Government. In the
Yarmouk camp before the crisis, that is, before 2011,
there were 500,000 people, 200,000 of whom were
Palestinian refugees from the Israeli aggression in
Palestinian lands, people who had been expelled from
their land; the remainder were Syrian citizens. In other

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

words, the number of Syrians in the Yarmouk camp was
larger than the number of Palestinian refugees in that
camp. The Syrian Government helped all the residents
to safely leave the camp after it was stormed by the
terrorists. The Government provided them with shelter
and basic living necessities.
The Government of Syria, and not the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs nor Ms. Amos,
secured a decent livelihood for the 500,000 inside the
Yarmouk camp. Today, there are only 1,000 people in
the camp, and not 18,000, as has been alleged. There are
no children or women among the residents there. There
are only terrorists and some male citizens, totalling
fewer than 1,000. They are the ones in the camp today,
at the very moment that I am speaking here before the
Security Council.
Syria has hosted millions of refugees from several
neighbouring countries. I shall not name those countries,
as this is not charity that we extend. We have never
used the plight of our brothers for financial or political
manipulation. We have not established refugee camps
along our borders — something that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East have both acknowledged.
Unfortunately, however, it seems that some States have
not benefited from this noble Syrian experience. On the
contrary, since the beginning of the crisis, some have
sought to create a refugee and displaced persons crisis
in Syria in order to use it as a pretext to exert political
pressure and financial manipulation and in justifying
their interventionist agendas.
I have already mentioned that the storming of the
safe neighbourhoods by the armed terrorist groups
is what forced the residents in those areas to leave
their homes and become internally displaced persons
or refugees in camps that were prepared for them in
advance. I say in advance because we have evidence
of that fact, the latest of which comes from a recently
published book by a former French Ambassador,
entitled Tempête sur le Grand Moyen Orient. In it, the
author tells of visiting Iraqi Kurdistan in 2009, where
he saw many camps being built. When he asked why
the camps were being built, he was told they were for
the Syrian refugees who would come to Kurdistan later.
At the time, there was no crisis in Syria and no Arab
Spring. There was nothing at all in 2009.
Asylum-seeking and displacement happen only
in areas infiltrated by terrorists, as is the case in Idlib

S/PV.7433

and Aleppo and several other cities. The best way to
help Syrian refugees and displaced persons is to enable
them to return to their homeland by addressing the
reasons that led to their displacement or their becoming
refugees. To that end, there must be serious and full
implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014)
and 2199 (2015). It also requires genuine political will
on the part of some powerful Member States on the
Security Council to exert pressure on States such as
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and others to stop funding,
arming, training and providing logistical support to
terrorists. Would it not be better to spend the funds
pledged to the response plan on helping Syrian refugees
and displaced persons return to their homeland?
Once again, I would like to reiterate that the
Syrian Government is committed to its duties and
responsibilities to alleviate the humanitarian burden of
its people. We are fully ready to take all the necessary
steps at the national level to achieve that. In that
regard, we will continue our cooperation with the
United Nations and to facilitate its tasks. However,
that cooperation is not a one-way street; the United
Nations is required to abide by the Organization’s
guiding principles on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, as set out in General Assembly resolution
46/182. It must also cooperate and coordinate with
the Syrian Government on the various humanitarian
issues, rather than resorting to suspicion, provocation
and criticism, which are fruitless. The United Nations
and other international organizations did not succeed
in delivering humanitarianmanitarian assistance
to around 4 million Syrians per month without the
cooperation and facilitation of the Syrian Government.
Finally, I heard no comment or criticism of the
relationship between Israel and the Al-Nusra Front in
the area of disengagement in the occupied Syria Golan.
I heard no comment or criticism of the relationship
between Turkey and the terrorists, in particular given
that, as mentioned by one of our colleagues, the head
of one of the biggest terrorist gangs in the Douma
suburb of Damascus is now carrying out a secret visit
to Turkey to meet with the intelligence services with a
view to perpetrating further terrorist acts in Damascus.
By the way, that man is responsible for the killing of
scores of innocent civilians in Damascus via rockets
and shelling.
I heard no comment or criticism — or even a
statement by the Security Council — two days ago
(see S/PV.7430) in connection with the Saudi arrogance

15-1163831/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

and insolence in threatening my country here in the
Council, including the intention on the part of that
country’s rules to carry out in my country the same
absurdity that they carried out in Yemen. I heard no one
stopping that Ambassador and telling him that he had
transgressed the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. I have not heard the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs speak about the barrel bombs
in Yemen. Why should Yemenis die as a result of
Saudi barrel bombs? Why would the Under-SecretaryGeneral remain silent on the killing of Yemenis? I am
not comparing, as barrel bombs are not in the military
terminology. But cruise missiles do exist, and they can
kill hundreds and even thousands of innocent civilians.
Last but not least, I would like to remind
representatives of the scandal of the leaking of an audio
recording that took place in the office of the Foreign
Minister of Turkey, who is now Head of the Government,
in the presence of the Chief of Intelligence of Turkey
and the Chief of Staff of the Turkish army, wherein they
discussed a plan to order operatives within the Syrian
Government to launch mortars against the tomb of
Suleyman Shah in order to create a pretext for a Turkish
attack on Syria. And what is the status of Turkey’s — and
neighbouring countries’ — implementation of the
criminalization of the facilitation of the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters into Syria? Is it possible that
Turkey enjoys the silence of the Council merely because
it is implementing NATO policies?
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): As the
subject of this meeting is the humanitarian situation
and the consequences of the Syrian crisis, I would
like to extend my condolences to the victims and to
the bereaved families, in particular the victims of the
capsized boat in the Mediterranean who were seeking a
better life for their children.
(spoke in English)
We, like Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, wished that the
refugees she spoke to in the region could have been
with us today to tell their stories. But let me thank
all the briefers for having spoken so genuinely and
convincingly on their behalf. Let us hope that the
resonance of their messages in the Chamber will be
acted on expeditiously.
Last February, as we approached the fourth
anniversary of the eruption of the crisis in Syria, I
32/35

24/04/2015

addressed the Council (see S/PV.7394) and expressed
our disappointment at its continuing failure to facilitate
the realization of a political solution that would put an
end to the tragic cycle of violence that has engulfed the
country for four consecutive years, leaving more than
250,000 people dead and many more wounded, leading
to the destruction of many of the most ancient urban
centres in the history of humankind, and scarring the
fabric of its society for generations to come.
Two months later, we are back in the same
Chamber discussing the same issue, without any
realistic prospects for ending the crisis, which seems
to be escalating rather than winding down, spreading
to new areas inside the country and affecting the lives
of more civilians, including Palestinian refugees in
Yarmouk. Moreover, the crisis in Syria is contributing
directly and/or indirectly to increasing sectarian and
extremist rhetoric and violence in the region, adding an
unwelcome complication to the multiple political and
socioeconomic problems fueling many other crises.
The humanitarian impact of the crisis continues to
grow. Today, more than 7.6 million Syrians are internally
displaced; 3.9 million are refugees in neighbouring
countries. Lebanon, the smallest country in the region,
is alone hosting more than 1.2 million registered
Syrian refugees — not to mention the unregistered,
whom we cannot count — and 350,000 Palestinian
refugees, including 45,000 Palestinian refugees from
Syria, representing about one-third of my country’s
total population. To illustrate the magnitude of this
unprecedented demographic impact, I shall quote a
tweet posted a few days ago by Ambassador Angelina
Eichhorst, Head of the European Union Delegation to
Lebanon. She said:
“In 2013-2014 the EU admitted 116,263 refugees
from Syria. UNHCR Lebanon registered more than
1 million, ten-fold the number for a country 400
times smaller.”
In Lebanon, the crisis has had a devastating impact
on the security, development, economic activity,
social progress and the environment, overstretching
the capacity of our social services, health-care and
education systems, housing, water and sanitation
facilities, and the energy infrastructure. Poverty has
increased by 61 per cent, unemployment has doubled
and the average personal income of the local population
has significantly decreased. In this regard, I call one
more time on the donor community to meet Lebanon’s
humanitarian and development needs, which that have
15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

been identified in the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
2015-2016, which was crafted by my Government in
coordination with the relevant United Nations agencies
and other partners and adopted in December 2014.
While we welcome Kuwait’s leadership in hosting
a third international pledging conference for Syrian
refugees last month, and the generosity shown by the
donor community, we note that out of the $8.4 billion
identified by the relevant United Nations agencies to
implement the regional and national response plans,
only $3.6 billion were pledged. And, as Council
members know, not all pledged money is always
actually dispensed.
It is our belief that, unfortunately, tackling
humanitarian crises through the narrow channel
of humanitarian assistance has proven to be
insufficient; hence, there is a need to tap the wider
purse of development funds, and we call on donors,
international financial institutions and United Nations
agencies to provide neighbouring countries, including
middle-income countries like Lebanon and Jordan,
with adequate development assistance that would meet
their needs, strengthen their resilience and alleviate the
impact of the crisis.
I conclude my statement by quoting from a recent
op-ed essay by Baroness Amos in the Washington Post:
“Countries look to the United Nations to
exercise moral authority. Time after time, they are
disappointed. They want an international system
that is just, promotes equality, champions the
vulnerable and oppressed, protects human rights
and holds its members to account. In the modern
world, with the complexity of the challenges
facing us, this is becoming harder and harder. But
it is possible. It is a challenge, but one that, with
determination and commitment, we can overcome”.
Finally, the call on the Council to visit the region
was powerfully articulated and reiterated today. Jordan
was a pioneer in calling for such a visit long ago.
Lebanon and Turkey supported that call then. We hope
that, after our deliberations today and in the remaining
days of Jordan’s presidency, you, Madam, will succeed
in convincing your colleagues of the need for and
timeliness of such a visit, in the hope that in addition
to their political interests, they will see with their heart
and listen with their humanity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

S/PV.7433

Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to extend our
appreciation for your invitation, Madam, to take part
in today’s meeting. We also thank Emergency Relief
Coordinator Ms. Valerie Amos, High Commissioner
António Guterres, and the Executive Director of
the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP),
Ms. Ertharin Cousin, as well as Special Envoy Angelina
Jolie Pitt, for their continuous advocacy for ending the
plight of the Syrians.
Last month, following the powerful call issued by
the heads of United Nations agencies, we all asked a
question: “What will it take to end the crisis and the
suffering in Syria?” The appalling conflict in Syria has
entered its fifth year. Hundreds of thousands of people
have died and millions have been displaced. Some, in
an attempt to flee the violence, try the Mediterranean
sea route and tragically lose their lives.
The situation in Syria has only gone from
bad to worse. Three Security Council resolutions
have been adopted on humanitarian access and the
protection of civilians in Syria. Sadly and frustratingly,
non-compliance with those resolutions goes unpunished.
The crisis has provided a fertile ground for the rise
of terrorist groups such as Daesh and caused the
deepening of sectarian fault lines in the region. The
grave situation in Yarmouk refugee camp, which has
been under siege by the regime, is one of the latest
examples of exacerbated suffering.
There can be no sustainable humanitarian solution
to the crisis without a political solution. A genuine
political solution is the only alternative. Thus, the
answer to the question “What will it take?” is crystal
clear. And it largely rests here, with the Security
Council.
In the absence of any progress on the political
front, millions of Syrians are trapped in a vicious cycle
of conflict and need for relief. We, as the neighbours of
Syria, have been bearing the brunt of this humanitarian
disaster. From the beginning of the crisis, Turkey has
put the Syrian people, regardless of their ethnic and
religious backgrounds, at the heart of its humanitarian
approach. This approach is based on three tracks.
First, we maintain an open-border policy and
comply with the principle of non-refoulement. More
than 1.7 million Syrians are now living in Turkey. Over
256,000 Syrians are registered in 25 shelters. All their
needs are provided for by the Turkish Government.

15-1163833/35

S/PV.7433

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, we assist the Syrians who live in various
towns outside the shelters. We are taking measures
to provide them with basic services, including free
health care. The temporary protection regulation that
came into force last year reinforced our humanitarian
response by allowing Syrians to enjoy additional rights
to sustain their livelihoods.
The third track pertains to extending humanitarian
relief items to the northern parts of Syria, also through
the zero point of the border, in conformity with
our international obligations and in support of the
United Nations campaign. The total value of the aid
channelled to Syria through that type of operation is
almost $365 million. Also, our cooperation with the
United Nations to enable United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations in northern Syria continues.
The financial burden of the crisis for Turkey has
exceeded $5.6 billion, whereas the total contributions
we have received bilaterally and multilaterally so far
stand at only $300 million.
The multifaceted effects of the crisis to Syria’s
neighbours, including Turkey, which has become a
shelter for the highest number of displaced Syrians,
is increasing. It must be recognized that a just sharing
of the burden is the fundamental responsibility
of the international community. The gap between
the humanitarian and development needs versus
the contribution of the international community is
widening. The pledges made at the Kuwait conference
and elsewhere need to be mobilized in a timely and
sustainable manner. Innovative assistance mechanisms,
such as the World Food Programme’s e-food card
voucher system in place in Turkey, requires urgent
international support. Scaling down the funding to
basic but effective United Nations programmes similar
to this one increases the strain on the shoulders of host
communities. If not even the most basic food needs
cannot be funded, then what?
Addressing the education needs of Syrian children
has to occupy a central role in our response. In Turkey
alone, there are 550,000 Syrian children of school age,
350,000 of them are awaiting international support for
their enrolment. Syria’s future cannot lose a generation
of children to a cycle of violence. The international
community should support this cause.
Lastly, stronger action is needed to ensure
humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
against the crimes of the regime as well as terrorist
groups such as Daesh. Examples of the means and ways
34/35

24/04/2015

to achieve that purpose, as depicted in a recent report
by Under-Secretary-General Amos, should serve as an
eye-opener.
Time and again, we have stressed at the Council
that the current situation is unsustainable, for Turkey
and for any other country in the region. The United
Nations regional response plans will only be as good as
their level of funding. Syrians and Syria’s neighbours
should not be left alone in coping with the humanitarian
tragedy, which requires a genuine partnership by the
international community, including civil society and
the private sector. That partnership has to include
addressing the needs of forcefully displaced Syrians,
building the resilience of the host communities and
increasing resettlement efforts.
I particularly deny the Syrian regime’s baseless
accusations. We will continue to stand by the Syrian
people, as once more acknowledged by the briefers and
others today. Syrians from all backgrounds are together
waging a struggle for survival and their future. The
members of the Council and all actors should keep
in mind that the ongoing atrocities and humanitarian
disaster in Syria can be overcome only by addressing
the root cause of the problem, that is, the regime’s
violent oppression of the democratic aspirations of
Syrians.
In an attempt to prolong its grip on power, the
regime continues to employ all kinds of force and
violence through all the instruments and measures
available to it, be they chemical weapons, barrel
bombs, ballistic missiles, targeted killings, systematic
abuse or torture. The international community should
increase its pressure on the regime without further
delay, so as to pave the way for a political solution,
which can be achieved only through a genuine political
transformation based on the legitimate demands and
aspirations of the Syrian people, in line with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has requested the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I am sorry for taking the floor again. It is
nobody’s concern, be it Turkey or anyone else, to talk
about who leads Syria and about the Syrian people’s
choices, just as nobody has the right to talk about the
choices of the Turkish people, or those of any people, of
the States Members of the Organization. It would seem

15-11638

24/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

that the Turkish Government has neither understood,
nor will it understand, this principle. I will spare the
Council the many instances of the Turkish Government’s
complicity, some of which have appeared in Council
documents, in the crimes that have been and continue
to be committed in my country.
A little while ago, I cited the example of the head of
a terrorist group, a takfiri group linked to Daesh and the
Al-Nusra Front, who is now in Turkey. He is planning,
in coordination with Turkish intelligence, to bring the
situation in Damascus to a head once again. This is
only one example. Nonetheless, the most devastating
example is the Turkish regime’s complicity in the use
of chemical weapons at Khan Al-Assal, in Aleppo, two
years ago. When we requested the assistance of the
Secretary-General to investigate the use of chemical
weapons at Khan Al-Assal and to identify those
responsible for their use, he replied to us regarding only
the first part of our request, saying that he would help us
determine whether or not chemical weapons were used
at Khan Al-Assal, but that he could not help us identify
those who used chemical weapons. That is what the
Secretary-General told us after holding consultations
with some influential States on the Council.
But now we have the proof: Turkey allows weapons
to be smuggled from within. High-ranking Turkish
customs officials were fired for stopping and inspecting
a truck full of weapons, contrary to the directives of
the Turkish President. Trials have been taking place in
Turkey, and the media is discussing them. The Turkish
regime — frankly, I do not like using the word regime
in this forum of legitimacy; I will call it the Turkish
Government, not the Turkish regime — has spared no
effort to undermine the Syrian people. It built refugee
camps for Syrians before the crisis, as was the case in
Iraqi Kurdistan. It used chemical weapons and accused
the Syrian army of doing so, in order to incite President
Obama to attack Syria. That is also what the French did.

S/PV.7433

There is an important book everyone should read. It
was also published in Paris, and it is titled Les Chemins
de Damas, written by Georges Malbrunot and Christian
Chesnot. In it, they demonstrate the complicity of
the French Minister for Foreign Affairs in the use
of chemical weapons in Ghouta, near Damascus, in
August 2012, at a time when Mr. Sellström was on his
way to Khan Al-Assal to investigate the use of chemical
weapons there. Mr. Sellström was unable to visit Khan
Al-Assal and that remains the case to date. We still do
not know what happened at Khan Al-Assal. And now
the Ambassador of Turkey comes to us making grand
statements about his desire to assist the Syrian people.
Is that how he helps the Syrian people?
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Turkey asked for the floor to make a further statement.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I will be very brief. I do not
want to take up the valuable time of the Council on these
baseless accusations. But I would make three points.
First, with regard to the Al-Nusra Front and
Daesh, those two organizations have been on Turkey’s
terrorism list since 2013. The track record of Turkey on
fighting terrorism is very well-known.
With regard to the accusations by the Syrian
regime, I would like to point out that barrel bombs are
being used all over Syria — although the regime denies
it.
Lastly, I would like to draw the attention of the
entire international community to the fact that the
terrorist Abdullah Öcalan was known to be in Syria for
many years up until 1998. When it comes to harbouring
terrorists, I think the facts are clear in the eyes of the
whole world.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

15-1163835/35
