Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Conunittee

ference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, held
at Geneva from 6 to 16 September 1971 ;11
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director-General of the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency the records of the twenty-sixth session
of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities;
6. Invites the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency
to take these records into account in its future work.
1979th plenary meeting,
8 November 1971.
2782 (XXVI). Proclamation of United Nations
Day as an international holiday

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the need to enhance the purposes and
principies of the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful that in its resolution 168 (11) of 31 October
1947 the General Assembly declared 24 October, the
anniversary of the coming into force of the Charter,
as "United Nations Day",
Believing that the anniversary of the United Nations
should be an occasion for Governments and peoples
to reaffirm their faith in the purposes and principies of
the Charter,
Declares that 24 October, United Nations Day, shall
be an international holiday and recommends that it
should be observed as a public holiday by all States
Members of the United Nations.
2000th plenary meeting,
6 December 1971.
2793 (XXVI). Question considered by the Security Council at its 1606th, 1607th and
1608th meetings on 4, 5 and 6 December
1971

The General Assembly,
Noting the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 and
4 December 1971 12 and the letter from the President
of the Security Council13 transmitting the text of Council resolution 303 (1971) of 6 December 1971,
Gravely concemed that hostilities have broken out
between India and Pakistan which constitute an immediate threat to international peace and security,
Recognlzing the need to deal appropriately at a
subsequent stage, within the framework of the Charter
of the United Nations, with the issues which have given
rise to the hostilities,
Canvinced that an early political solution would be
necessary for the restoration of conditions of normalcy
in the area of conflict and for the return of the refugees
to their homes,
Mindful of the provisions of the Charter, in particular of Article 2, paragraph 4,
Recalling the Declaration on the Strengthening of
Intemational Security, particularly paragraphs 4, 5
and 6,
11 See A/8487.
12 Official Records

of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971,
documents S/10410 and Add.l and S/10412.
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Annexes, agenda itero 102, document A/8555.

3

Recagnizing f urther the need to take immediate
measures to bring about an immediate cessation of
hostilities between India and Pakistan and effect a
withdrawal of their armed forces to their own side
of the India-Pakistan borders,
Mindful of the purposes and principies of the Charter and of the General Assembly's responsibilities under
the relevant provisions of the Charter and of Assembly
resolution 377 A (V) of 3 November 1950,
1. Calls upan the Govemments of India and Pakistan to take forthwith all measures for an immediate
cease-fire and withdrawal of their armed forces on the
territory of the other to their own side of the IndiaPakistan borders;
2. Urges that efforts be intensified in order to bring
about, speedily and in accordance with the purposes
and principies of the Charter of the United Nations,
conditions necessary for the voluntary return of the
East Pakistan refugees to their homes;
3. Calls for the full co-operation of all States with
the Secretary-General for rendering assistance to and
relieving the distress of those refugees;
4. Urges that every effort be made to safeguard the
lives and well-being of the civilian population in the
area of conflict;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly and the Security Council promptly and
currently informed on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Decides to follow the question closely and to
meet again should the situation so demand;
7. Calls upan the Security Council to take appropriate action in the light of the present resolution.
2003rd plenary meeting,
7 December 1971.
2794 (XXVI). Admission of the United Arab
Emirates to membership in the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 8 December 1971 that the United Arab
Emirates should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations, 14
Having considered the application for membership of
the United Arab Emirates, 15
Decides to admit the United Arab Emirates to membership in the United Nations.
2007th plenary meeting,
9 December 1971.
2799 (XXVI). The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Deeply cancerned at the continuation of the grave
situation prevailing in the Middle East, particularly
since the conflict of June 1967, which constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security,
14 lbid., agenda item 25, document A/8561.
16 A/8553. For the printed text of this document, see Official

Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year, Supplement far October, November and December 1971, document
S/10420.

4

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

Convinced that Security Council resolution 242
(1967) of 22 November 1967 should be implemented
immediately in all its parts in order to achieve a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East in which every
State in the area can live in security,
Determined that the territory of a State shall not be
the object of occupation or acquisition by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force, which is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and to the
principles enshrined in Security Council resolution 242
(1967) as well as in the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security adopted by the General
Assembly on 16 December 1970,
Expressing its appreciation of the efforts of the Committee of African Heads of State undertaken in pursuance of the resolution adopted on 23 June 1971 by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its eighth ordinary session,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of Israel's
occupation of the Arab territories since 5 June 1967,
Having considered the ítem entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
1. Reaffirms that the acquisition of territories by
force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories
thus occupied must be restored;
2. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the
application of both the following principies:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
( b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency, and respect for and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of every State in the area and its right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries free from
threats or acts of force;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to reactivate the mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to tbe Middle
East in order to promote agreement and assist efforts to
reach a peace agreement as envisaged in tbe Special
Representative's aide-mémoire of 8 February 1971;16
4. Expresses its full support for all the efforts of
the Special Representative to implement Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
5. Notes with appreciation the positive reply given
by Egypt to the Special Representative's initiative for
establishing a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
6. Calls upon Israel to respond favourably to the
Special Representative's peace initiative;
7. Further invites the parties to the Middle East conflict to give their full co-operation to the Special Representative in order to work out practica! measures for:
(a) Guaranteeing freedom of navigation through
intemational waterways in the area;
( b) Achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem;
(e) Guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and
political independence of every State in the area;
B. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly, as ap16 A/8541. Por the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971, document
S/10403, annex l.

propriate, on the progress made by the Special Representative in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Security Council to consider, if
necessary, making arrangements, under the relevant
Articles of the Charter of the United N ations, with
regard to the implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
2016th plenary meeting,
13 December 1971.
2817 (XXVI).

Scientific work on peace research

The General Assembly,
Considering that the fundamental purpose of the
United Nations is to save mankind from the scourge of
war and to maintain international peace and security,
Considering that scientific research on the problems
of war and peace has expanded and that many national
and international institutions have made them the subject of their studies,
Noting with interest the work undertaken in this field
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations lnstitute for
Training and Research,
Conscious of the importance tbat States attach to
the study of the means and recourses to implement
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to build peace, security and co-operation in the world,
Considering it desirable to bring to the notice of the
international community the work done in the field of
peace research by national and intemational institutions and to promote on a permanent basis, in the light
of the purposes and principies of the Charter, a recording of the studies devoted to this subject,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare every
other year an informative report on scientific works
produced by national and intemational, governmental
and non-governmental, public and private institutions
in the field of peace research;
2. Invites the Governments of Member States and
the institutions referred to in paragraph 1 above to
provide the Secretary-General, to the best of their
ability and competence, with all the information he may
require;
3. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Researcb and those specialized agencies which
are active in the field of peace research to lend their
assistance in the drafting of the report referred to
above;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at the beginning of its twenty-eighth
session, the first report prepared under paragraph 1
above.
2018th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2833 (XXVI). World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for disarmament and the consolidation of peace,
Convinced that all peoples of tbe world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
