S/PV.8772

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8772

nd meeting
Thursday, 22 October 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Cedano
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Bynoe
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2020/1019)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-28244 (E)
*2028244*

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2020/1019)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Onanga-Anyanga are joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/1019, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM) and response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I shall also update the
Council on the latest developments since the publication
of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Abyei (S/2020/1019).
The reporting period was marked by enhanced
collaboration between the Sudan and South Sudan.
On 3 October, a historic peace agreement was signed
between the transitional Government of the Sudan,
the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the Sudan
Liberation Movement-Minni Minnawi in Juba, South
Sudan. The South Sudanese authorities facilitated
the negotiation process that led to the signing of the
2/15

22/10/2020

agreement. Also, in a positive development, the Sudan
and South Sudan have broached their intention to
relaunch the political process, with senior officials
from South Sudan travelling to Khartoum to meet with
Sudanese authorities to discuss the final status of Abyei
and border areas.
However, despite this continued rapprochement
between the Sudan and South Sudan, the peace process
has made little progress in Abyei. The main developments
at the local level were the appointments by Juba and
Khartoum of their respective chief administrators. On
29 June, President Kiir Mayardit appointed Lieutenant
General Kuol Diem Kuol as Chief Administrator for the
Abyei Special Administrative Area. On 20 August, the
Chairman of the Sudan’s Sovereign Council, Lieutenant
General Abdel Fattah Abdelrahman Al-Burhan,
signed a decree appointing engineer Gumaa Dawood
Musa Hamdan as Chief Administrator for the Abyei
Administrative Area. This constitutes an unprecedented
political development as it is the first time Abyei has
two appointed chief administrators.
The general security situation in Abyei during the
reporting period remained rather volatile, with four
attacks against UNISFA personnel being of particular
concern and four instances of intercommunal violence,
including armed attacks on villages. Two of the attacks
against UNISFA personnel occurred on 24 April, and
the third attack on 12 May, when two soldiers from
the Force Protection Unit assigned to the JBVMM
headquarters in Kadugli were fired upon while driving
from the Kadugli base to Murta. In the fourth attack,
an unknown armed group opened fire on an UNISFA
convoy between Goli and Todach in Sector North,
injuring three peacekeepers, one of them critically, who
was subsequently airlifted to Addis Ababa for treatment.
UNISFA continued to engage Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya authorities and community leaders to further
the local-level peace efforts. However, the incidents at
Nainai and Kolom on 19 and 22 January, respectively,
as well as the incident in Mabok on 13 April and the
Ngok Dinka attack on Ibrahim village on 8 August
2020, compounded intercommunal tensions and
negatively impacted peace efforts at the local level.
UNISFA’s efforts to have community representatives
engage within the framework of the joint community
peace committee were unsuccessful.
In order to address potential violence at the local
level during the migration season, a technical committee
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the 2020 pre-migration conference was formed,
comprising UNISFA, the International Organization
for Migration and the non-governmental organization
Concordis International, to discuss the pastoralist
movement along the three migration corridors in Abyei.
The pre-migration conference is aimed at resolving
issues that could lead to conflict between herders
and host communities along migration routes. On
17 October, members of the team met with officials of
the Juba-appointed local administration in Abyei. The
discussion centred around the need for the resumption of
the joint community peace committee meeting and the
proposed ore-migration conference for the forthcoming
season. On 19 October, the team met with members
of the Misseriya joint community peace committee at
the Amiet market as part of the consultations towards
the proposed pre-migration conference. The Misseriya
warned that any delay in reaching an agreement
between the two sides might lead to clashes and loss
of lives along the migration corridors. They urged
UNISFA to convene the traditional leaders conference
before 1 November. UNISFA has emphasized the need
to resume regular joint community peace committee
meetings for the sake of peace and security within
the communities.
During the reporting period, minimum progress was
made on JBVMM benchmarks and the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism (JPSM) decisions, due to
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. That affected
progress in the opening of the crossing corridors as
agreed in the JPSM resolution of 19 February and
border demarcation activities by both the Joint Border
Commission and the Joint Demarcation Committee.
The JPSM was unable to hold meetings as scheduled.
Furthermore, planned JBVMM operational activities
and meetings were suspended. Aerial and ground
monitoring missions were also put on hold due to
COVID-19-related restrictions imposed by the host
countries. While ground monitoring missions resumed
on 27 July, the onset of the rainy season rendered most
areas inaccessible.
Under resolution 2519 (2020), the Security Council
mandated the deployment of 640 police personnel,
including three formed police units of 160 members
each and 160 individual police officers. Currently,
the staffing of the United Nations police stands at 35,
out of which 16 officers are finishing their two-year
assignment in October or November. Since no visas
have been issued for any new officers who could be

S/PV. 8772

deployed as replacements, the strength of the police
component will decrease to 19 officers. Consequently,
this situation will inevitably lead to the closure of some
team sites in UNISFA and have a very negative impact
on mandate implementation.
The process of generating and deploying the three
authorized formed police units has been hampered
by the travel restrictions related to the COVID-19
outbreak, as well as the non-issuance of entry visas for
the officials from those identified police-contributing
countries (PCCs) intending to visit the Mission. On
4 October, two notes verbales were sent to the relevant
authorities of the Sudan, requesting entry visas
and travel permits to Abyei for the members of the
reconnaissance teams from China and Tanzania. Those
reconnaissance visits are mandatory for the PCCs,
within the process of the deployment of their formed
police units. The reconnaissance visit for the Chinese
official delegation was scheduled from 18 October and
the Tanzanian official delegation is expected to conduct
its field visit from 1 November. So far, the entry visas
and travel permits to Abyei have still not been granted
by the Sudanese authorities.
Regarding COVID-19, the mission has reported
11 COVID-19 confirmed cases since the pandemic
started, including one national civilian staff member,
four international staff, two international contracted
staff, two military staff officers and two members from
troop-contributing countries. There was one suspected
death of a female soldier. Locally, on 6 October, the
Abyei Health Cluster meeting for COVID-19 was held
at Ameth-bek Hospital. The Minister of Health of the
Juba-appointed administration chaired the meeting,
which was attended by representatives of UNISFA,
the GOAL non-governmental organization and Save
the Children. During the meeting, it was reported that
2,702 people had been screened within the Abyei Area
to date and the cumulative number of confirmed cases
since the outbreak of the pandemic was 52, while the
cumulative number of related deaths was five. Since
July to date, no new positive cases have been recorded
in the Abyei Area.
UNISFA has continued to engage with the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of
South Sudan to facilitate the implementation of the
pending aspects of their previous agreements, despite
the obstacles posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The newly appointed acting Head of Mission/Force
Commander has visited Khartoum to address a number

20-282443/15

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

22/10/2020

of substantive issues pertaining to UNISFA’s mandate
and the peace process. He has also visited Juba, where
he interacted with the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
the Minister of Defence and the South Sudan People’s
Defence Force Chief of Staff, as well as with the Deputy
co-Chair appointed by South Sudan of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee. He is committed to continuing
his engagement with both parties.

Irrigation; the Chairman of the opposition National
Unionist Party; the Deputy Chairman of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army/Movement -North; the chief
negotiator of the Justice and Equality Movement; and
the Peace Commissioner. A projected visit to South
Sudan could not take place before this briefing. I was
nevertheless able to speak with Minister Deng Alor,
who is responsible for the Abyei file, in South Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks
for the continued support by the Security Council
to UNISFA and seek the Council’s support for the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the
mandate of UNISFA for a further period of six months,
until 15 May 2021.

I am happy to report that the relationship between
the Sudan and South Sudan continues to strengthen. It
is in that context that at the beginning of September,
the Sudan and South Sudan agreed to review all their
2012 cooperation agreements with immediate effect.
Following a 2 September meeting, South Sudan
dispatched a high-level mission to Khartoum on
6 September to initiate bilateral discussions, including
on Abyei. While neither party disclosed the outcomes,
there was an understanding that further talks on Abyei
would take place alternately in both countries. I would
like to take this opportunity to recognize the pivotal
role that the Interim Security Force for Abyei continues
to play in maintaining stability in Abyei under very
challenging circumstances.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on progress in the implementation of resolution
2046 (2012), which concerns outstanding bilateral
issues between the Sudan and South Sudan and the
situation in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
The global coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has continued to impact health and human
and socioeconomic developments in Sudan and South
Sudan. With the closure of airspaces and land borders
and the continuous enforcement of other restrictive
measures to contain the spread of the virus, even
our in-person engagements with the authorities were
severely limited. Nevertheless, thanks to virtual
communication, I was able to engage substantively
with a significant number of high-level officials in the
two countries and the region.
The drastic preventive measures applied by
countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development at the start of the pandemic appear to
have been successful in weakening the spread of
COVID-19 in the region. The focus of the response
has now shifted to economic recovery and restoring
people’s livelihoods. With the reopening of airports,
I was able to visit the Sudan from 13 to 16 October.
I held very fruitful consultations with Government
officials, including Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok;
the Chairperson of the Sovereign Council, General
Abdel Fattah Abdelrahman Al-Burhan; and with
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, of Defence and of
4/15

The flagship event during the reporting period was
the signing in Juba of a peace agreement on 3 October
between the Government of the Sudan, the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front alliance and the Sudan Liberation
Army-Minni Minawi faction. The agreement was
the culmination of a peace process launched in Juba
in October 2019 under the auspices of President Kiir,
who is also its guarantor, alongside President Idriss
Deby Itno of Chad. Among other things, the agreement
covers key region-specific and national issues related
to governance, security arrangements, land ownership,
transitional justice and the return of displaced persons.
During my visit to Khartoum, I gathered that there
is a strong will to make the Juba agreement a real
success. There is commitment and clear political will to
accelerate the implementation process and demonstrate
to the non-signatory movements of Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu
and Abdel Wahid Al-Nur that peace is the only way
forward for a prosperous, stable and just Sudan that
caters for all its people.
While in Khartoum, I was also able to meet with the
deputy chief mediator for the Juba process, Mr. Dhieu
Mathok of South Sudan. He expressed optimism that
the core demands of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North faction under Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are being considered for resolution. Building on Prime
Minister Hamdok’s peace efforts and the signing
in Addis Ababa with Al-Hilu of a joint declaration
subsequently endorsed by the High Council of Peace in
the Sudan, informal workshops to flesh out the details
of the issues of secularism, the status of the Sudanese
People’s Liberation Army during the transition, selfdetermination in case the peace agreement is not
honoured and terms for a national constitutional
conference to endorse those provisions will start soon
in Juba, I am told next week, between the Government
of the Sudan and Al-Hilu.
Furthermore, during my meetings in Khartoum,
the Chair of the Sovereign Council, the Prime
Minister, members of the negotiation team, the Peace
Commissioner, the leadership of the Forces for Freedom
and Change, and the South Sudanese mediators all vowed
to spare no effort to bring onboard the Sudan Liberation
Movement faction led by Abdel Wahid Al-Nur, so as to
ensure a fully comprehensive agreement.
One immediate effect of the Juba agreement will
be the reactivation of the four freedoms between the
Sudan and South Sudan, namely, freedom of residence,
freedom of movement, freedom to undertake an
economic activity and freedom to own and dispose of
property. That will enable citizens to move, conduct
business, settle and transfer or own assets in either
country freely or with minimal transaction costs.
The Sudanese Minister of Defence pledged that the
Sudan would meet its commitment to open the border
crossing points on 27 October. I am told, as we speak,
that the two Ministers of Defence are currently meeting
in Khartoum. Measures taken to open the dry port
in Kosti and to relaunch commercial river transport
operations and other crossing points would allow for
the free movement of goods and services between
the two countries. They would also enable the Sudan
to accelerate trade with South Sudan and compete in
this market with other neighbouring countries. In the
meantime, the African Union has indicated its intention
to convene the Joint Border Commission soon and
has encouraged both countries to resume high-level
meetings such as the Joint Security Committee and the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism.
In his address at the agreement-signing ceremony
on 3 October, President Kiir reiterated that he agreed
to mediate the conflict also because he was aware
that peace in the Sudan would have a positive bearing

S/PV. 8772

on South Sudan’s security. As the countries are now
strengthening their relationship, they are no longer
likely to pursue activities that undermine each other’s
stability. On the contrary, I am aware that, building
on the Rome peace efforts led by the Sant’Egidio
community, the Sudan is currently embarking on an
attempt to mediate between General Thomas Cirillo
of the National Salvation Front and the Government
of South Sudan. Authorities in both countries are
confident that all outstanding bilateral issues between
their countries, including Abyei and the resolution of
the situation in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states,
will benefit from the friendly relationships and the
mutual trust they are now enjoying.
Meanwhile, the two countries have continued
to develop fruitful cooperation in the area of oil. On
28 September, they signed a protocol to resume oil
production in the Unity and Toma South fields, with
15,000 barrels per day expected to be produced very
soon. The deal includes details on the transfer of
crude oil to the Sudan for its domestic use. In return,
the Sudan will provide technical support. Before the
agreement, South Sudan was providing 30,000 barrels
per day of crude oil to the Sudan. The deal is in line
with South Sudan’s plan to return to its pre-conflict
production level of 350,000 barrels per day from its
current 150,000 per day.
To conclude, the warm relations that I have outlined
between the Sudan and South Sudan also provide
an opportunity for the international community to
strengthen further its engagements with both countries
as they continue to grapple with their internal challenges,
which have always constrained their bilateral relations.
In South Sudan, the implementation of the peace
agreement remains deadlocked on several substantive
issues on which the parties may need some support to
move forward.
For its part, the Sudan has embarked on the right
path and demonstrated the political will to resolve its
multiple conflicts. Now more than ever before, it also
needs our collective support to overcome some of the
obstacles that are likely to hinder a smooth transition
and the implementation of the peace process. It is in
that context that we welcome the announcement by the
United States Government on 20 October to initiate
the removal of the Sudan from the States sponsors
of terrorism list. Nowhere is such support more vital
than on the economic front, in order both to advance

20-282445/15

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

much-needed reforms and meet the basic needs of the
population. I left Khartoum last Friday with mixed
feelings — hopeful about the unprecedented drive
for peace and deeply concerned about the sight of
endless fuel and bread queues. Without concrete peace
dividends, the legitimate aspirations for freedom and
shared prosperity of the Sudanese people may be
in jeopardy.
My Office will continue to engage with the
authorities of both countries and, as appropriate, with
key regional actors, including the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
encourage further progress on the implementation of
all cooperation agreements and the peace processes in
both countries.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
I welcome Mr. Mills to the Security Council. We
congratulate him on his first Council meeting and wish
him every success.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for that warm welcome. I am
pleased to be here with my colleagues today. As the
new Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States Permanent Mission to the United Nations, I am
very pleased that my first appearance in the Council
is on this very important topic — the situation along
the Sudan/South Sudan border. Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy OnangaAnyanga for your briefings and for all your efforts
to date.
In recent years, we have seen a dramatic
improvement in relations between South Sudan and
the Sudan, as we have just heard. The signing of the
Juba peace agreement, on 3 October, was a significant
milestone, and we believe that, if implemented, it can
help stabilize not only the Sudan but the entire region.
The United States commends South Sudan for its role
in mediating the negotiations that led to the agreement.
Now the Sudan and South Sudan should maintain
that positive momentum and turn their attention to
resolving the political status of Abyei and agreeing to
security and administrative arrangements that can be
implemented in the near future.
6/15

22/10/2020

Security in Abyei remains fragile. We have
previously stated, in the Council, that the people of
Abyei deserve better. That remains true today. We
commend the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA), the most remote peacekeeping
mission in the world, for supporting stability and
security in Abyei and along the border between the
Sudan and South Sudan. We also want to recognize
Ethiopia’s leadership role in supporting UNISFA.
The United States calls for the Sudan and South
Sudan to lift restrictions that negatively impact
UNISFA’s ability to carry out its mandate. Denying
visas for United Nations police and a civilian deputy for
the mission, blocking UNISFA’s access to the Athony
airstrip and refusing to provide national police to join
Abyei’s joint police service is simply counterproductive.
We very much regret the limited progress on those
issues and expect additional steps to be undertaken by
the parties in the coming weeks in that regard.
The Under-Secretary-General just reported to us
that, out of a total of 640 mandated United Nations
police officers for UNISFA, only 35 officers are present,
due to delays by the Sudan in granting visas. The lack
of police is causing community policing sites to close.
Denying access to Athony airstrip also poses a risk
to peacekeeping, as it hinders medical- and casualtyevacuation capabilities. Those restrictions together are
undermining stability in Abyei and endangering both
civilians and peacekeepers.
We look forward to working together with our
fellow delegations to renew UNISFA’s mandate.
While the mission’s presence should continue, given
the warming relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan, we believe that now is the time to consider a
future in Abyei that does not require an international
peacekeeping operation — either because there is
a final resolution or because the parties themselves
develop joint security and administrative mechanisms
on their own.
A transition from UNISFA will need to prioritize
the safety and security of civilians and support
communities to achieve a more peaceful coexistence.
The concerns of women must be at the forefront
of such efforts. South Sudan and the Sudan should
look to build on UNISFA’s leadership in promoting
women’s participation in decision-making processes,
which, as many of us know, recently led to community
leaders nominating women for positions in the local
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

administration. Those are important steps if we are to
build a durable peace in the region.
UNISFA was created as an interim force. Almost
10 years later, the Council, the Sudan, South Sudan,
Ethiopia, the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) should all re-evaluate how Abyei’s status can
be resolved and how security can be provided. In my
delegation’s view, the mission’s indefinite continuation,
especially while the Sudan and South Sudan place
restrictions on its operations and staffing, is untenable.
In the near term, the AU and the United Nations
should strengthen their support in order to develop
administrative and security arrangements for Abyei.
They should also encourage the parties to support
local communities to engage in meaningful dialogue.
Regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism should inform that process.
In conclusion, let me state that the United States
will continue to support stability in the Sudan, South
Sudan and the greater Horn of Africa. I was pleased
to hear Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga mention
President Trump’s recently announced decision to
remove the Sudan from the United States State Sponsors
of Terrorism list. We agree. This is a tremendous step
forward for the Sudan and a recognition of the clear
progress made on the ground. We hope that progress in
the region continues and the parties come together to
provide the people of Abyei the opportunity to live free
from violence.

S/PV. 8772

We are also encouraged that last month saw a highlevel meeting between representative of the Sudan and
South Sudan to discuss the final status of Abyei and
other border areas. The indicated willingness of both
Governments to seize this opportunity is long overdue.
However, it is disappointing that this rapprochement has
yet to translate into progress on the ground in Abyei.
We call on both countries to build on this renewed
engagement at the senior and local levels towards
resolving the final status of Abyei.
Turning to the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the United Kingdom
commends the role that the mission has continued to
play in supporting peace and security in Abyei. We
welcome UNISFA’s ongoing engagement with the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of South
Sudan, the implementation of the quick-impact projects,
the removal of explosive hazards and the continuation
of humanitarian support. UNISFA’s continued efforts
to support women’s empowerment in Abyei are
also critical.

Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy OnangaAnyanga for their comprehensive updates.

We regret, however, that the mission continues to
face obstacles to delivering its mandated activities.
It is clear that those blockages are severely affecting
the stability and security of the region. This comes
at a time when there have been increasing incidents
of violence, including attacks on peacekeepers and
criminal acts, alongside the continued appalling rates
of sexual and gender-based violence in the region. We
urge both parties to work with the mission to make
progress on the establishment of the Abyei police force
as a mechanism to ensure that stability and security
issues are addressed.

I would like to start by welcoming the improvements
in bilateral relations between the Government of the
Sudan and the Government of South Sudan. The United
Kingdom also wishes to commend the role that the
Government of South Sudan played in facilitating the
negotiations that led to the signing of the Juba peace
agreement on 3 October. The United Kingdom calls for
the swift implementation of that agreement, including
in the two areas.

There is a clear need to boost the civilian and police
components to empower UNISFA to best support the
local community. We therefore repeat our call on the
Government of the Sudan to facilitate the issuance of
all outstanding visa requests, especially those for police
personnel. The Security Council has also repeatedly
called for the Governments of both the Sudan and
South Sudan to facilitate the operationalization of
Athony airstrip.

We also welcome the resumption of negotiations
between the Government of the Sudan and the Al-Hilu
faction of the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth. We continue to urge all parties to engage
constructively, without preconditions, in order to
deliver a peaceful and swift resolution.

The coronavirus disease has served to underline
the importance of ensuring the provision of swift
medical evacuations for United Nations personnel.
This is particularly the case for UNISFA, given its
remoteness. The continued denial of this request
unfortunately shows the disregard for safety of United

20-282447/15

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations personnel. We repeat our call for all parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law and allow
humanitarian actors to deliver aid to those in need
without hindrance.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom commends
the vital role UNISFA plays in the maintaining the
stability of Abyei and the assistance it provides to the
achievement of a final settlement on its status. We urge
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to see
the United Nations as a key partner in supporting their
efforts on this matter.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Onanga-Anyanga for their respective briefings.
The political settlement of the Abyei issue, which
has the consensus support of the Security Council,
requires the Sudan and South Sudan to reach a solution
through dialogue and negotiation. I would like to make
the following three points.
First, China welcomes the continued rapprochement
between the two countries. The Sudan and South Sudan
have demonstrated their willingness to resolve the
final status of Abyei and appointed their respective
chief administrators for the Area. China acknowledges
those developments. The Security Council should
fully respect the leadership of the Sudan and South
Sudan on the Abyei issue and encourage both parties
to engage in closer consultations and direct dialogue.
The international community should support mediation
efforts of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and other regional and
subregional organizations and their good offices and
facilitate cooperation between the Sudan and South
Sudan in the establishment of administrative, judicial
and security institutions in Abyei.
Secondly, China is concerned about the ongoing
intercommunal clashes in Abyei and hopes that all
the parties concerned will put peace and stability first
and refrain from taking any actions that may increase
tensions. China urges all local communities to actively
respond to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global
ceasefire, commit to silencing the guns in Africa by
2020 and promote intercommunity consultations and
dialogue among traditional leaders, with the support of
the United Nations.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated
the already grim humanitarian situation in Abyei.
8/15

22/10/2020

Tens of thousands of people have been displaced, and
hundreds of thousands are in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. The international community should
provide targeted aid to help the Sudan and South Sudan
alleviate the plight of the people in Abyei.
Thirdly, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is an important force for
the maintenance of peace and stability in the Abyei
Area and plays an indispensable role in the political
settlement of the Abyei issue. China supports UNISFA’s
continued discharge of its mandate.
Attacks against UNISFA personnel have occurred
from time to time, seriously threatening the safety of
peacekeepers. We hope that UNISFA will make every
effort to minimize the security risks to peacekeepers.
Medical evacuation remains a major challenge that
hampers UNISFA’s capabilities, and therefore requires
timely remedial measures. We call on the Government of
the Sudan and the Government South Sudan to facilitate
the performance of UNISFA’s mandated activities. The
mission should also maintain close communication
with the two Governments and enhance mutual trust.
China supports the extension of UNISFA’s mandate as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to welcome our new colleague, the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United States of America,
Ambassador Richard Mills. We are of course looking
forward to working closely with him.
I would like to make a joint statement on behalf of
the member countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the Security Council,
namely, Indonesia and Viet Nam.
Allow us to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga for their important briefings.
We commend the peace agreement signed earlier
this month in Juba, which was possible due both to the
active engagement between the Sudan and South Sudan
in facilitating each other’s transitions and to effective
mediation. That is a testament of the tremendous
progress that could be achieved by the engagement of
the two countries. We look forward to the continuation
of such engagement and momentum in resolving the
Abyei issue, thereby contributing to long-term peace,
stability and development in both countries. On that
note, I would like to highlight three important issues.
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, on improving law and order, we emphasize
that the absence of the rule of law in Abyei remains
one of the contributing factors to persistent violence,
including intercommunal clashes, in the Area. We are
also concerned about the security and humanitarian
situation in the Area due to the impact of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). Our two delegations therefore
urge all parties to accelerate the deployment of the
remaining authorized additional United Nations
police and formed police units. We highlight what the
Secretary-General has emphasized, namely, that this
deployment is critical in maintaining the capability of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) to maintain the rule of law in the Area.
Our two delegations also attach great importance
to UNISFA’s provision of capacity-building to the
community protection committees in the absence of
an Abyei police service and its support for traditional
justice mechanisms. It is also important to strengthen
efforts in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well
as facilitating mine-action activities.
The second issue is on promoting peaceful
dialogue. As members of ASEAN, we firmly believe
in the virtue of peaceful dialogue in nurturing trust
and confidence between all parties. We would like to
commend, and reiterate our support for, the efforts of
the United Nations, UNISFA, countries of the region
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, in supporting peaceful dialogue on Abyei.
Our two delegations welcome UNISFA’s active
engagement with local communities, including
its intention to convene a peace meeting between
community representatives before the end of the year.
We call for all parties to support and encourage that
peace meeting as part of confidence-building measures
among all communities ahead of the migration cycle
in Abyei. We therefore emphasize the dire need to
maintain and further enhance this role in the coming
UNISFA mandate renewal.
The third issue is that of the safety and security of
UNISFA personnel. Our two delegations firmly believe
that UNISFA’s presence is essential to maintaining
stability in Abyei. We commend UNISFA for its
work in maintaining security and stability in Abyei,
including through its continued engagement with Area
residents and the community protection committees.
As police- and troop-contributing countries to many
United Nations missions, Viet Nam and Indonesia

S/PV. 8772

join the Secretary-General in condemning the attacks
that target UNISFA personnel in Abyei. Such attacks
are unacceptable. Enhancing the ability of UNISFA to
fulfil its mandate should remain our utmost priority,
especially the safety and the security of its personnel.
To that end, we call for all parties to maintain and
facilitate their support to UNISFA, including the
operationalization of the Athony airstrip, as well as
other outstanding issues.
Ultimately, our delegations reaffirm their longstanding support for the Sudan and South Sudan in
finding a timely and peaceful solution in Abyei as
an inseparable part of their journey towards peace.
We support the renewal of the UNISFA mandate,
as recommended by the Secretary-General, in order
to continue promoting long-term stability in Abyei
and facilitating dialogue, cooperation and friendship
between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I very much thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special
Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings. I,
too, would like to extend a warm welcome to Richard
Mills here back in New York.
We see light and we see shadow for Abyei. Let me
start with the light. With regard to the political process,
we see some major positive regional developments.
The signing of the Juba peace agreement between the
transitional Government of the Sudan and the armed
groups is a historic achievement. There is a huge
potential to move the Sudan towards comprehensive
peace. We urge those that continue to stand outside that
process to become part of the solution.
In that context, we commend the role of South
Sudan in helping to bring about the peace deal. We
believe that the Sudan and South Sudan should now take
advantage of the high level of confidence in bilateral
relations to seriously engage in joint talks that would
lead to improving the situation in Abyei, especially at
the intercommunal level.
In the meantime, the presence of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
remains key to ensuring peace and security. That brings
me to the shadow to which I referred. The security
situation in Abyei remains tense. We have heard that
in the briefings. The deadly intercommunal clashes
in recent months and attacks against peacekeepers
underscored that. Like other speakers before me, I
strongly condemn any violence. That includes all

20-282449/15

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

attacks against peacekeepers. In that context, let me
make it very clear that the host nation must investigate
any attacks against UNISFA, and it has an obligation to
hold those responsible to account. We thank Ethiopia
for its long-standing commitment as a troop contributor
to UNISFA in that context.
Let me make some remarks on the UNISFA
mandate and its implementation.
First of all, we agree with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the mandate should be
extended by six months. However, it is important for us
that there be no business as usual. The Security Council
has sent a clear message that UNISFA needs to adapt.
It is therefore with disappointment that we note that the
adjustments to the mandate made by the Council have
not yet been implemented on the ground.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/1019) shows that the mission is not fit for
purpose. That is mainly due to obstruction by the host
nation. The mission must be able to fulfil its mandate
and respond to emerging challenges. A stronger police
component within UNISFA is essential for that. We
therefore again strongly urge the Sudan to issue visas
without further delay, particularly to allow the mandated
increase in the UNISFA police personnel. Mr. Lacroix
strongly underlined that point in his briefing, and we
fully share that reading. Without an effective police
capacity, we simply run the risk of a deteriorating
security situation.
Furthermore, we support the call of the SecretaryGeneral and urge the Sudan and South Sudan to work
together with UNISFA on a road map to establish
an Abyei police service. Tangible progress in the
establishment of joint interim institutions, such as the
Abyei Area administration and the Abyei police service,
is crucial to building enhanced national capacities. We
also see a continued need to strengthen the civilian
component of the mission in order to support the efforts
of the communities in Abyei to reconcile and create
enduring peaceful relations.
On the positive side, we note the efforts of the
South Sudan co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee and the Juba-appointed Chief Administrator
in promoting women’s participation in the peace
process. We encourage further steps by both sides
towards the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women at all stages of the peace process. Above and
beyond, we highly recognize the crucial and visible role
10/15

22/10/2020

of Abyei’s women in the prevention of the coronavirus
disease at the local level.
Let me conclude by drawing the Council’s attention
to human rights monitoring. The mandate needs to
ensure continued and effective human rights monitoring,
including of any sexual and gender-based violence and
violations and abuses of human rights, including those
committed against women and children. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
deploy human rights expertise to UNISFA, as mandated
by the Council.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I also join other speakers
in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews.
Estonia warmly welcomes the continued
improvement of relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan. We commend the important role that South
Sudan played in facilitating the Sudan peace talks,
which led to the signing of the Sudan peace agreement
on 3 October. We recognize that the political transitions
in both countries require much of the attention of the
respective Governments. However, we also urge the
parties to use the momentum created by the historic
peace agreement to facilitate progress towards resolving
the question of Abyei.
The Secretary-General said in his report
(S/2020/1019) that the status quo cannot continue, and
we agree. The people of Abyei deserve better than the
status quo, as they continue to suffer from numerous
episodes of violence, a lack of access to basic State
services and dire socioeconomic conditions. For
anything to change on the ground, there is no substitute
for a meaningful political process between the parties.
Therefore, we welcome all the steps taken in that
direction, and we call on the Sudan and South Sudan
to continue to build a viable political process that leads
to the implementation of security and administrative
arrangements to which both can agree. The political
process could be significantly aided by the appointment
of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission, and we call on all
parties to help to make that a reality. We also encourage
regional actors to actively engage the parties on the
Abyei question.
We are concerned about the increased violence and
criminality, including the recent trend of attacks on
United Nations troops and contractors. Six months ago
when speaking in the Council on the Abyei question
(see S/2020/351, annex VI), the representative of
Estonia articulated three specific asks: to expedite the
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

deployment of the police component; to conduct joint
investigations into the deadly incidents of violence with
the purpose of bringing the perpetrators to justice; and
to deploy human rights expertise to United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). These
asks remain as valid today as they were six months ago.
Estonia
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for
the next six months. Moving forward, we need to start
the discussions of how the United Nations can be most
helpful, given the current realities.
In conclusion, at the heart of our deliberations
must be the fact that any delays in resolving the Abyei
question will only continue to prolong the plight of
the people Abyei. Therefore, we call on the parties to
capitalize on their improved relationship to push for
progress on the question of Abyei. We also call for the
removal of any impediments to the implementation
of the mandate of UNISFA. Finally, I would like to
express our gratitude to UNISFA and Ethiopia for their
invaluable contributions.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.
The signing of the agreement in Juba on 3 October
was a milestone for the people of the Sudan and an
important step towards the stabilization of the region.
We welcome the appointment of the chief administrators
by Juba and Khartoum, and we take this opportunity to
commend the parties, and in particular South Sudan, for
the arduous work undertaken in making this a reality.
We also welcome the conversations that took place
in Khartoum in September. We know that the final
status of Abyei and border demarcation are delicate
issues that have often been overlooked in the face of
more pressing bilateral issues. However, we understand
that these broader considerations of relations between
the two countries should not prevent the definitive
establishment of the status of Abyei.
Therefore, we join the Secretary-General in calling
for a resumption, as soon as possible, of discussions in
the framework of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee,
as well as the meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism. It is imperative to encourage discussions
on border demarcation and facilitate the implementation
of the decisions of the Joint Mechanism, including the
establishment of checkpoints and the reactivation of

S/PV. 8772

the Joint Military Observer Committee and the joint
military observer team.
We commend United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for providing bilateral
forums for conflict prevention and its willingness to
jointly draft a road map for the establishment of the
Abyei police service. We encourage both Governments
to participate actively in this initiative.
It is essential that UNISFA be equipped with the
appropriate tools. To that end, the appointment of the
civilian Deputy Head of Mission and other civilian and
police personnel, the operationalization of the Athony
airstrip and the issuance of the pending visas for the
police units are essential.
We remain very concerned about incidents of
intercommunal violence and the presence of armed
elements in the Area, which have had devastating
effects for the civilian population. We applaud the
efforts of UNISFA, in collaboration with the community
protection committees, to keep Abyei free of weapons,
despite the restrictions imposed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We reiterate the need to
ensure sustainable and unimpeded humanitarian access
to alleviate the needs of that population.
We also recognize the commitment of UNISFA
with the authorities to promote and defend the women
and peace and security agenda. Those efforts have
resulted in the identification and nomination of women
for possible appointments to local administrations.
The collaboration between UNISFA and Concordis
International to strengthen gender and youth issues in
the Abyei Area is an important step in this direction.
We remain concerned about the increase in sexual
and gender-based violence involving minors. The
establishment of a joint office and a service with a
direct telephone line for victims is a fundamental tool
to protect them.
We congratulate UNISFA for its handling of
the COVID-19 pandemic and the support it has
given to communities, together with humanitarian
personnel, non-governmental organizations and United
Nations agencies.
Lastly, we urge both countries to recognize their
geographic and historic links. There is no shortcut to
lasting peace. Both countries must affirm their bonds
and develop good economic, social, political and
security relations. To do that, they must be willing to

20-2824411/15

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

make a commitment and honour those commitments for
the benefit of their peoples.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.
I will be brief, and focus on three points.
First, France regrets that the political process today
remains deadlocked and calls for the resumption of
dialogue between the parties. Although both parties
named their chief administrators for Abyei last summer,
the same issues have seen no progress. The absence
of local governance has prevented the resolution of
disputes and the efforts of United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) are hampered
by the lack of cooperation among the parties. I recall
that this peacekeeping operation was conceived as
an interim force and is not intended to permanently
entrench a situation devoid of political prospects for
conflict resolution.
Turning to my second point — and this has been
emphasized by a number of speakers — the current
dynamic between Khartoum and Juba is encouraging
and should be crystallized in Abyei. The signing
of agreements in Juba on 3 October, as part of a
process facilitated by Southern Sudanese mediation,
is an example of this. The resumption of discussions
in September between the two parties on the final
status of Abyei is also positive. We therefore hope
that these positive signals between capitals will soon
be concretely reflected on the ground. We call on the
African Union in particular to encourage the parties
in that regard through its political mediation efforts.
We also welcome the efforts of UNISFA to maintain
dialogue between the communities and the conditions
for a lasting settlement of the conflict. The mission is
operating in particularly difficult circumstances and
the coronavirus disease crisis has further exacerbated
the constraints.
In this context, and I will conclude on this point,
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
in his latest report (S/2020/1019) provide a real
opportunity for the parties to provide assurances of
their re-engagement. The resumption of dialogue at the
local level to address security-related issues and move
towards the establishment of joint administrations
in the area is essential. Coordinated action by both
parties is also necessary to successfully carry out
the investigations into the violence that broke out
12/15

22/10/2020

in Nainai and Kolom on 19 and 22 January. Finally,
the operationalization of the Athony airstrip and the
issuance of visas necessary for the deployment of police
units, and the arrival of a Deputy Head of Mission are
equally important and reflective of the willingness of
the parties to bolster the action of UNISFA.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African members of
the Security Council — the Niger, South Africa,
Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
I would like at the outset to thank the UnderSecretary General for Peace Operations, Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Horn of Africa, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for
their comprehensive briefings. I wish also to welcome to
the Council the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
The A3+1 commends the stabilizing role of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) in the Area and along the Sudan-South
Sudan border, including its support to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
We also express our appreciation to Ethiopia and its
peacekeepers for their commitment and dedication to
ensuring security and building confidence in the area
and the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone.
The African Union recognizes these commendable
efforts and continues to stand by the Governments
of the Sudan and of South Sudan and their people as
they move along the path to comprehensive peace
and sustainable development, while relying on the
partnership and support of the Security Council and the
wider international community.
The A3+1 notes with appreciation the mutually
reinforcing relations between the Governments of
the Sudan and of South Sudan, in light of the signing
of the peace agreement between the Sudanese
parties on 3 October in Juba, as well as the Sudan’s
constructive engagement as the incumbent Chair of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the
peacebuilding process in South Sudan. We believe that
it remains useful for the Sudan and South Sudan, and for
the Security Council, to capitalize on such dynamism
so that the pursuit of just and lasting peace in both
countries extends to the Abyei Area and reciprocally.
We urge the two Sudans to continue to foster
rapprochement and mutual trust with a view to fully
implementing their cooperation agreements and
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reaching a positive-sum settlement to the final status
of Abyei. In this regard, the A3+1 is encouraged by
senior-level visits held over the last two months in
Juba and Khartoum, and the commitment expressed
by both sides to reinvigorating the peace process and
addressing the final status issue. We look forward to
joint and swift progress on the issue.
We are further encouraged by the novel designation
by Khartoum and Juba of their respective chief
administrators for Abyei. We stress the paramount
importance of swiftly resuming, in the coming
months, regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee, as per the decision reached at the 19 February
Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting.
The A3+1 takes note that the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has ground to a halt
a number of UNISFA-mandated activities, affected
meaningful engagement of the mission at the local and
traditional-leader levels, and circumscribed progress on
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
benchmarks and Joint Political and Security Mechanism
decisions, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/1019).
We express our support for UNISFA’s ongoing
efforts aimed at energizing local peace processes and
monitoring intercommunal reconciliation. Further, we
praise UNISFA’s role in empowering women and youth
participation at the local and grass-roots levels so as to
enhance prospects for preventing conflict, COVID-19
and human rights abuses.
We underline the necessity of heeding potential
new cycles of hostilities along communal lines, and
of working together to address the drivers of such
violence and defuse tensions. It is essential, too, that
the utmost efforts be made to ensure that Abyei and its
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone become free of crime
and of weapons.
We further stress the importance that UNISFA’s
mandate and operational activities be facilitated and its
personnel protected so that it may perform its tasks at
full capacity and in an efficient manner.
On the way forward for the United Nations presence
in Abyei, the A3+1 sees continued relevance for the
UNISFA mandate in stabilizing the Abyei area and
along the border, and in bringing certainty amid these
uncertain times. Accordingly, we would like to endorse
the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his

S/PV. 8772

report on the extension of UNISFA’s mandate and its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism for a further period of six months
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank Mr. Lacroix and Mr. OnangaAnyanga for their very comprehensive briefings.
Recent events have proven just how much relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan have improved.
I am, of course, referring to the peace talks among
Sudanese authorities and groups held in Juba.
Belgium also welcomes the discussions concerning
the Abyei Area held in Khartoum in September. They
were a further positive signal that the will exists to
find a political solution for the status of the Abyei.
However, these signals are not enough. A number of
discussions must resume on several levels to achieve
progress on certain points. I am thinking, in particular,
of the decisions taken by the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, the points relating to the Athony airstrip,
as well as the pending visas for police units.
The situation in the Abyei Area remains fragile.
Belgium condemns the attacks on the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the
intercommunity violence. These incidents, as well
as those related to criminal activity, underline the
importance of maintaining the current force strength
of security and police forces within the mission so as
to uphold the rule of law and protect civilians. This
situation amplifies our concern already mentioned
regarding the issuance of the visas pending for the
three formed police units and the 108 police officers
in addition to those formed units. Despite numerous
appeals from the members of the Security Council in
this regard, the risk of a situation of understaffing and
an absence of police in most operational bases remains.
We commend the Mission’s efforts to promote
dialogue towards conflict resolution, for example,
involving local leaders. We also welcome the actions in
favour of an increased role for women and young people
in local political life. The European Union is also active
in this field — for instance, in the peacebuilding project it
funds, carried out in collaboration with the International
Organization for Migration and the non-governmental
organizations Concordis International and the Green
String Network. It has recently made it possible to
organize training courses for women and young people
in conflict resolution and negotiation. We are also

20-2824413/15

S/PV.8772

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

pleased to note the commitment of UNISFA in the area
of sexual violence, with several prevention activities.
In conclusion, we cannot envisage the drawdown of
UNISFA without a solution to the Abyei issue, but the
mission cannot play the role of the State indefinitely.
We call on the parties to redouble their efforts to close
this chapter in the history of the Sudans.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
for their detailed briefings. We are pleased that the
gradual improvement in bilateral relations between
Khartoum and Juba. The mediation efforts of the South
Sudanese authorities, specifically those of President
Salva Kiir, in the conduct of negotiations between the
Government of the Sudan and opposition groups led
to the signing, on 3 October, of peace accords. This
stands as a further testament to the effectiveness of the
formula “African solutions to African problems”. We
hope that, in resolving the Abyei question, the parties
will be guided by that very same principle.
We welcome the gestures made by both capitals
to signal their readiness to generate new momentum
in contacts between their Governments, including on
Abyei. We hope that the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel will continue working with the
Sudanese sides. We value the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
in the establishment of constructive relations with
local communities.
At the same time, it is worth bearing in mind that for
a number of years already there has been considerable
friction between the communities. Our hope is that
the Blue Helmets will pursue their efforts towards the
advancement of national reconciliation. We believe
that the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM) is an integral component of the
mechanism for the prevention of incidents between
the parties; support for the JBVMM by UNISFA plays
an important role in terms of the entire subregional
security architecture.
We have taken note of what the SecretaryGeneral set out in his most recent report (S/2020/1019)
with respect to the reasons for a certain degree of
inertia in the mediation efforts of UNISFA and the
14/15

22/10/2020

implementation of the JBVMM benchmarks, which
have been linked largely to the coronavirus disease
restrictions. We appreciate those difficulties and are
confident that the efforts will be revitalized as soon as
the situation allows.
In that connection, we support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNISFA, including support for the JBVMM, for a
period of six months. At the same time, we trust that
consideration of the proposal of the Secretariat on the
civilian component of the mission should be done in a
way that reflects the opinions of Khartoum and Juba, as
stipulated in the core principles of peacekeeping.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Allow me to congratulate you,
Madam President, on leading the deliberations of the
Security Council this month. I wish also to congratulate
the Niger for the exemplary role that it played in steering
the work of the Council last month. I should also like
to commend the Permanent Representative of the Niger
for the excellent job he did last month and also to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, and the Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, for their briefings. I also
thank the members of the Security Council for their
statements regarding the situation in Abyei.
Over the past month and since the formation of the
Transitional Government in the Sudan, the bilateral
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan have been
improving steadily. Some features of that progress are
reflected in the regular exchange of visits between the
two countries at various levels, as well as by the crossborder movement of people, goods and services. In
addition, South Sudan hosted the peace talks between
the Government of the Sudan and the armed groups,
which led eventually to the significant signing of the
peace agreement earlier this month.
The continued rapprochement between the two
countries is something that reflects positively on the
Abyei final-status negotiations. Just three weeks ago, a
Sudanese delegation led and headed by the minister of
East African Community Affairs visited Khartoum for
talks on Abyei. In a statement issued after the meeting,
the Deputy President of the Sudanese Sovereign
Council pledged the readiness of the Government of the
20-28244

22/10/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan to resolve the Abyei issue in the same spirit in
which the Juba negotiations were conducted among the
Sudanese parties.
The Government of the Sudan is committed to
building on the new political dispensation in the bilateral
relations between the two brotherly neighbours so as
to promote communal peaceful coexistence in the area
and expedite discussions to reach an understanding on
the final status of Abyei.
That being said, I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, the political and legal terms that govern the
current and future agreements and arrangements in
Abyei, including the existence of the Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), are based on the agreement
on temporary arrangements for the administration
and security of the Abyei Area reached on 20 June
2011. The terms of that agreement should be strictly
respected and followed by the two countries as well as
by regional and international partners. For its part, the
Sudan reaffirms its commitment to the letter and the
spirit of the agreement.
Secondly, the agreement of 20 June 2011 provides
for the temporary local mechanisms and institutions
to administer the Area. That includes local executive
and legislative bodies and a local joint police force. The
Sudan has always been ready to adhere to the terms
of the agreement. In that context, my Government
appointed last month its representative in the Abyei
joint oversight committee, a move widely welcomed
by the local communities in the area, especially the
community leaders of the Ngok Dinka. In addition, the
Sudanese authorities are ready to take part in forming
the local joint police force to combat criminality in and
around Abyei.

S/PV. 8772

Thirdly, we commend UNISFA’s personnel for
their efforts to preserve peace and stability in Abyei
and condemn any attacks against or directed at
peacekeepers in Abyei. We call on the mission to
further improve civilian protection, protect the Area
from incursions by unauthorized armed elements,
ensure security and stand at an equal distance from all
communities in the area.
Fourthly, I would like to bring to the attention
of Council members that the issue related to the
operationalization of the Athony airstrip was discussed
at the most recent meeting of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism, which was held in Juba last
February. It was agreed among the parties that this
matter should be referred to the presidencies of the two
countries to take a decision on it. It is to be noted that
in order to improve UNISFA’s logistical capacities, the
Sudan agreed a couple of weeks ago to the transfer of
two helicopters from the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to UNISFA, in Abyei. The
secretariat was duly notified of that approval.
To conclude, the Government of the Sudan reiterates
its commitment to strengthening cooperation with the
Government of South Sudan and UNISFA with a view
to enhancing the work of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
as well as establishing the remaining joint mechanisms
between the two countries based on the terms of the
agreement signed by both sides on 20 June 2011.
I wish to end by welcoming the extension of the
mandate of UNISFA for six months, as proposed by the
Secretary-General.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

20-2824415/15
