S/2023/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 January 2023
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of good
offices in Cyprus
I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2646 (2022), requested me to submit, by
3 January 2023, a report on my good offices, in particular on progress towards
reaching a consensus starting point for meaningful results-oriented negotiations
leading to a settlement. In the resolution, the Council encouraged the leaders of the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities to provide written updates to my
mission of good offices on the actions they had taken in support of the relevant parts
of the resolution since its adoption, in particular with regard to paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and
8, with a view to reaching a sustainable and comprehensive settlement, and requested
me to include the contents of those updates in my report. The updates submitted by
the two leaders are contained in annexes I and II to the present report.
2.
The present report is focused on developments from 15 June 2022 to
12 December 2022. It provides an update on the activities carried out by my mission
of good offices under the leadership of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Colin
Stewart. It also includes an update on my ongoing engagement with the sides, as well
as discussions that have taken place on my behalf related to exploring common
ground on the Cyprus peace process.

II. Background and context
3.
Due to the ongoing lack of progress by the two sides towards finding common
ground during the reporting period, public confidence in prospects for reaching a
negotiated settlement in Cyprus remains low island-wide. Polling commissioned by
my mission of good offices reflects this low confidence but also indicates that a
majority of the population in each community still urgently desires a mutually agreed
settlement. The positions of the two sides remain far apart, and both sides maintain
their opposing views about the way forward. In the absence of constructive or
harmonized messages from the two leaders that could resonate with both
communities, the climate between the two sides and vis-à-vis the United Nations has
deteriorated.
4.
The political landscape has been further complicated by disputes and statements
regarding areas in and adjacent to the buffer zone and in Varosha, including over
civilian activities, as described in the latest report on the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) (S/2023/3). The situation on the island is

22-29366 (E)

120123

*2229366*

S/2023/6

compounded by ongoing tensions in the eastern Mediterranean region, including with
respect to competing maritime zone claims and a worsening of relations between the
guarantor powers Greece and Türkiye.
5.
The reporting period began with a renewed commitment from the sides to move
forward with energy on measures that would build trust between the sides, as a means
of creating conditions conducive for eventual settlement talks. Beginning in October,
however, hardening demands related to the status of the north and political rhetoric
in the south in the context of electoral campaigning increased perceived psychological
barriers to cooperation.
6.
While the overall climate has become increasingly negative, with a further
deepening of mistrust, some progress has nonetheless been achieved by the technical
committees in reducing existing barriers to intercommunal contact and trade, as called
for by the Security Council. Although official data was not available, this included
increased trade volume seen after the Republic of Cyprus eased certain restrictions
on the trade of processed food items of non-animal origin under the European Union
Green Line Regulation. Such progress was achieved also owing to the intensive
engagement of my mission of good offices with the two sides, supported by weekly
trilateral meetings at the working level and with the Deputy Special Adviser, and
separate bilateral meetings several times a month between the Deputy Special Adviser
and each of the representatives of the leaders. This intensive engagement schedule
provided an ongoing dialogue between the sides on the initiatives of the 12 technical
committees, as well as other issues affecting the daily lives of Cypriots. On
7 December, despite the polarized political environment, both leaders attended an
end-of-year reception organized by the mission and had a warm informal exchange.
This was the first time the two leaders had met on the island since April 2022.
7.
In separate meetings with the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and the
Turkish Cypriot leader, Ersin Tatar, following the start of the seventy-seventh session
of the General Assembly, I underscored my commitment to supporting the parties in
finding common ground to address the Cyprus issue, including through high-level
engagement from the Secretariat for a comprehensive settlement on the island. I also
stressed the importance of the technical committees and mutually acceptable
confidence-building measures.
8.
Dialogue, meetings and cooperation continued among religious leaders of
Cyprus, who sustained their commitment to peacebuilding, reconciliation and human
rights within the framework of the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace Process,
under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden. During the reporting period, changes
took place in the leadership of the faith communities. The late Archbishop of the
Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus, who had played an essential part of the Religious
Track since its inception in 2009, passed away in November 2022. Notably,
representatives of Christian and Muslim faith communities among others gathered for
the wake and attended the funeral of the Archbishop, where they were joined by
religious and world leaders and by the Deputy Special Adviser. Efforts to further
reinforce the dialogue in the Religious Track continued, on the basis of the
commitment of the relevant stakeholders to this peacebuilding process and their
willingness to be at the table engaging in dialogue.
9.
Representatives of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political parties
continued their meetings under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia. Beginning
in October 2022 with a meeting addressed by my Deputy Special Adviser, the
bicommunal dialogue returned to its full-fledged mode of operation, which had been
suspended more than two years ago owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Approximately once a month, a different political party assumes the role
of host, suggests a topic for the dialogue and prepares a draft joint communiqué. The
2/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

participation of political parties in the dialogue also changed during the reporting
period, with a new member, the Greek Cypriot Democratic Alignment, joining and
the Turkish Cypriot National Unity Party in returning to the dialogue after an
extended absence of two years. The need to create a better political atmosphere,
de-escalate tensions and return to the negotiating table were the most dominant shared
messages expressed by the political parties. In their dialogue, they also expressed a
heightened sense that the two sides should move forward urgently on the Cyprus
issue.

III. Status of the process: United Nations Headquarters-based
efforts and engagement with the parties
10. Discussions have continued on the way forward with the leaders of the two
communities and their representatives, as well as representatives of Greece, Türkiye
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. In addition to my
separate meetings with the two leaders as well as Greece and Türkiye, the Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central Asia and the Americas, Miroslav Jenča, visited
Cyprus from 30 June to 1 July and from 16 to 17 November, and visited Türkiye from
27 to 28 June. He had also visited the other guarantor powers in the previous reporting
period (Greece from 3 to 4 May, and the United Kingdom from 5 to 6 May). All
interlocutors expressed support for the continued efforts, and engagement continues
in the search for a way forward.

IV. Status of the process: activities of my mission of good offices
11. My mission of good offices continued to reach out to a broad network of
interlocutors, both on the island and in the relevant capitals, to promote intra-island
interaction, cooperation and trust-building. The Deputy Special Adviser held 86
meetings with the two leaders and their representatives, political parties, religious
leaders, civil society organizations and actors, the European Union, the World Bank
and the diplomatic community, as well as with visiting senior officials from a range
of Member States. These discussions covered a broad range of issues related to
creating conducive conditions for the peace process, advancing mutually acceptable
confidence- and trust-building measures, reducing obstacles to greater
inter-communal interaction and trade and supporting the work of the technical
committees. Staff from my mission of good offices held another 211 me etings with
the same categories of interlocutors at the working level and conducted working-level
visits to Ankara, Athens, London and Brussels for meetings with Greek, Turkish,
United Kingdom and European Union officials.
12. The 12 technical committees formed by the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
leaders to build confidence and improve the daily lives of Cypriots continued their
important work, albeit with uneven success and with growing challenges later in the
reporting period. The mission of good offices continued to coordinate, facilitate and
support the work of the committees, with support from UNFICYP, and to sustain
dialogue and cooperation between the two sides. Despite the difficult political
environment, a number of the technical committees continued to implement approved
projects and submit new projects.
13. Renewed positive dynamics in the Technical Committee on Culture led to more
regular meetings among committee members. Two project proposals – a networking
and mapping event for the arts in Cyprus entitled “Connecting Arts” and a video and
drawing competition for children and young people – were formulated and approved
for implementation. While implementation of the video and drawing arts competition
22-29366

3/29

S/2023/6

has begun, the “Connecting Arts” project was delayed owing to the expiration on
4 October of the European Union funding facility. Nonetheless, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) was able to secure funding to allow the project to
be implemented by December 2022, although it was ultimately delayed by the Turkish
Cypriots owing to electoral cycle timing.
14. As per the agreement reached between the two leaders on the extension of the
Joint Contact Room in Pyla/Pile and its subsequent launch in April 2022 (more details
are set out in the latest report on UNFICYP, S/2023/3), one Greek Cypriot and one
Turkish Cypriot work together to ensure an ongoing exchange of information. Two
raids on illegal casinos took place, resulting in the closure of both. The co-chairs of
the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters and the Joint Contact Room
in Nicosia continued their exchange of information on crime and criminal matters,
and such exchanges reached new levels.
15. The Technical Committee on Economic and Commercial Matters met regularly
to identify ways to make advances on its list of priorities. It finalized a pre -feasibility
study on the management of electronic and electrical waste, which it hopes to kick start soon through a business-to-business trade model. The Technical Committee also
played a key role in broader efforts to increase Green Line Regulation trade volume,
which reportedly reached record levels in 2022, albeit from a very low baseline.
Longstanding efforts to allow direct bank transactions between the two sides,
facilitate the crossing of commercial vehicles and exchange old Euro banknotes from
the north had still not borne fruit. Efforts were also under way to allow Turkish
Cypriots to open bank accounts in the south.
16. The Technical Committee on Broadcasting and Telecommunication maintained
a productive role in addressing issues requiring their attention, including frequency
interference in civil aviation and radio frequencies. The implementation of the project
to pave the way for the deployment of 5G networks on the island has continued, with
the clearance of the 700 MHz frequency bandwidth and introduction of 5G in the
south since May. The project is now estimated to be finalized towards the third quarter
of 2023.
17. The Technical Committee on Health successfully implemented its project on
mapping risks for vector-borne disease and organized an event on 30 September to
disseminate the main findings of the project related to a new invasive species of
mosquitoes, including measures taken to contain it in the interest of public health and
safety across the island. The co-chairs of the Technical Committee on Health
continued to exchange information on the epidemiological situation on both sides,
including vaccination data and sanitary measures that could be instituted as necessary.
The Committee continued to ensure delivery of European Union-approved COVID-19
vaccines to the Turkish Cypriot community, albeit on a small scale owing to the
overall reduced demand for COVID-19 vaccination.
18. Following the experience earlier in the year during a large forest fire in the
north, when assistance was provided by the south and neighbouring countries, with
ad hoc coordination assistance from UNFICYP, the representatives of the two lea ders
requested the Technical Committee on Crisis Management to work with the United
Nations in Cyprus to develop recommendations on more efficient standing protocols
to manage future crises. UNFICYP, in collaboration with my mission of good offices,
developed a paper on the lessons learned from that exercise for consideration by the
Technical Committee, with a view to operationalizing crisis management
coordination processes, possibly establishing crisis coordination desks on both sides
and collaborating with the Technical Committee on the Environment on crisis
situations that have environmental consequences. Thus far, while discussions have
been held, no progress has been achieved, with an absence of serious engagement on
4/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

substantive issues from the Greek Cypriot side noted at the Committee level. On
22 September, the Committee held a seminar on earthquakes.
19. The Technical Committee on Gender Equality continued to engage, including
on how to implement further the “Action Plan on ways to ensure women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in the settlement process/an eventual settlement
process” in Cyprus that was adopted by the two leaders in January 2022. A year after
an agreement was reached on the Action Plan, no significant progress had been made,
notwithstanding frequent discussions both at the level of the Technical Committee
and at the level of the two leaders’ representatives. An understanding between the two
sides was finally reached at the end of the reporting period for an event to be held on
women’s participation in early 2023.
20. Apart from its regular joint visits to assess and propose ways to address
environmental island-wide issues, the Technical Committee on the Environment also
exchanged information on an ongoing basis on situations and activities with
environmental impacts. The co-chairs of the Technical Committee also gave a wellreceived presentation to the third cohort of the United Nations Youth Champions for
Environment and Peace programme, described in more detail below. Despite the
positive dynamics among Committee members and the full commitment of the
co-chairs, however, the long-standing project for the rehabilitation of carob trees
suffered delays and blockages owing to terminology issues and the locations
involved. The Committee had plans to hold a public launch of the environment
website in the coming months, which had also been delayed.
21. The Technical Committee on Crossings met regularly. The Committee agreed to
work on improving the flow at the existing crossing points, especially the busiest
Agios Dometios/Metehan crossing, and addressing delays, complaints of ill-treatment
of individuals by officials belonging to the other community and other ad hoc
crossing-points matters.
22. The Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage continued to pursue actively its
important work, benefitting from the close and productive relationships betwee n the
co-chairs and among its members as a whole. Since 2012, the Committee has
conserved, structurally supported, physically protected or restored heritage sites
island-wide, including Orthodox, Maronite and Armenian churches, mosques and
minarets, fortifications, hamams, aqueducts and watermills. It is currently finalizing
the implementation of several projects, including the full renovation of the White
Church in Risokarpaso/Dipkarpaz. Given its busy agenda, new project proposals and
the rising cost of materials and service charges, my mission of good offices worked
closely with the co-chairs of the Committee to secure new funding from the
International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas. As a result of
those efforts, the Alliance agreed to partner with the Technical Committee on Cultural
Heritage and UNDP, under the auspices of the mission of good offices in Cyprus, to
work on the conservation of two important cultural heritage sites: St. George of the
Latins church in the walled city of Famagusta and the Tuzla Mosque in Larnaca. On
24 October, an event was organized to mark the signing of a grant of $840,000 from
the Alliance for this project. This initiative marks the first funding partnership
between a private foundation and a technical committee in Cyprus.
23. The Technical Committee on Education did not meet during the reporting
period, and no projects were implemented. There was also no movement on
intensifying efforts to promote peace education across the island or empowering the
Committee to implement the recommendations contained in its 2017 joint report, as
called for by the Security Council. On 31 October, the Turkish Cypriots suspended
their participation in the award-winning peace education project “Imagine” under the
auspices of the Technical Committee on Education. Implemented by the Association
22-29366

5/29

S/2023/6

for Historical Dialogue and Research and the Home for Cooperation, the project
aimed to increase contact and collaboration among the communities in Cyprus and
the fight against racism and xenophobia. Since its inception in 2017, more than 6,100
students from both sides of the divide have been educated, with more than 700
teachers who accompanied their students to bi-communal meetings in the buffer zone.
In addition to activities with students, more than 500 teachers were trained in peace
education both mono-communally and bi-communally.
24. For the first time since October 2021, the Technical Committee on Humanitarian
Affairs met once in late November.
25. The Support Facility, a mechanism created in 2019 in cooperation between the
European Commission, my mission of good offices and UNDP to strengthen the
capacity of the committees and enhance the impact and visibility of their work,
expired in early October 2022. As noted in my previous reports, since its creation, the
Support Facility had played a key role in support efforts aimed at reinvi gorating the
work of the technical committees. Earlier in 2022, in anticipation of its expiry, UNDP
advised the technical committees and my mission of good offices that the European
Commission would not approve new project proposals from the committees wit h
implementation periods past early October. This created delays and uncertainty, with
certain projects being put on hold until there was clarity on funding. UNDP secured
internal funding for certain activities as an interim measure, lasting from October t o
December. While the European Union had advised of its decision to launch a second
phase of the facility, consultations with all concerned, including the two sides, were
still ongoing.
26. As previously reported, on 20 May 2022, Mr. Anastasiades presented a letter
containing a package of previously presented confidence-building measures, last
proposed in its current form in 2020. In response, Mr. Tatar presented his own letter
to Mr. Anastasiades on 20 June, outlining the Turkish Cypriot position regarding the
conditions necessary to resume “meaningful and formal negotiations”. In the letter it
was also stated that the Turkish Cypriot side would put forward ideas for “cooperation
of mutual benefit” between the two sides in the following weeks. In two subsequent
letters sent to me on 1 and 8 July, Mr. Tatar conveyed multiple suggestions for
“cooperation on pressing issues”.
27. The confidence-building proposals put forward by the Greek Cypriot and the
Turkish Cypriot leaders cover areas of interest and potential mutual benefit to both
sides, and throughout the reporting period the Deputy Special Adviser held
discussions with the sides on possible steps forward. An understanding between the
representatives of the two leaders to focus initially on a European Un ion-backed
proposal for a photovoltaic park potentially to be located in the buffer zone, and on
irregular migration, a pressing issue for both sides, had not yet produced progress on
a way forward.
28. Given the relevance of civil society actors for the achievement and sustainability
of an eventual settlement, my mission of good offices maintained extensive contacts
with civil society, and the Deputy Special Adviser has accorded them a prominent
place in his outreach efforts, supporting and encouraging their mobilization, advocacy
and participation in wider peacebuilding activities on the island. Regular briefings to
students and young people also took place on the mission’s mandate and activities.
29. My mission of good offices continued to work with UNFI CYP to support
environmental peacebuilding initiatives and activities to highlight and address
environmental challenges in the buffer zone, throughout the island and regionally.
Mission staff supported UNFICYP in the United Nations Youth Champions for
Environment and Peace programme, which just had its third successful year with a
new cohort of young people from both communities who engage together in climate
6/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

action and advocacy. Representatives from the Technical Committee on the
Environment also participated in the Youth Champions programme, discussing
environmental peacebuilding opportunities and challenges on the island.
30. My mission of good offices supported a series of public engagements on the
need to bring Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots closer together to build ties and
foster trust. On 29 September, the Deputy Special Adviser delivered a keynote address
at the third annual Cyprus Forum, highlighting how the growing separation on the
island was undermining the prospects for a mutually agreed settlement and the need
for urgent action to strengthen day-to-day ties between the people on the two sides.
On 18 October, at the 18th Annual Economist Cyprus Summit in Nicosia, the Deputy
Special Adviser delivered a speech entitled “Revitalizing peace talks through
increased intra-island trade”, conveying the message that expanding trade and
business ties between the two sides of the island, as well as providing the
infrastructure to support these ties, is critical to creating conducive conditions for a
future settlement in Cyprus. An additional event organized by the mission of good
offices as part of the Cyprus Forum took place on 23 September and brought together
the World Bank, the European Commission and representatives of the two Chambers
of Commerce on the same theme. On 17 October, the Deputy Special Adviser also
hosted the heads of the two Chambers of Commerce in the United Nations Protected
Area for their first in-person meeting in over two years. The mission remains engaged
in the activities of the working group on entrepreneurship and innovation, together
with UNFICYP, which organized the second business and networking fair on
3 December, under the overall theme of women and entrepreneurship. All of the above
events provided platforms to promote and underline the urgency of strengthening ties,
especially economic, between the two communities on the island as a way of keeping
hopes and possibilities alive for a future comprehensive settlement.
31. Also at the Cyprus Forum, staff of the mission of good offices facilitated a
public discussion on sport and peacebuilding, with four Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot sport experts and practitioners, as well as a representative from the United
Nations Office at Geneva. This discussion helped to shed light on sport as an
underutilized vehicle for encouraging people-to-people interactions across the island
and fostering mutual understanding and respect.
32. During the reporting period, a polling exercise was commissioned by the
mission and conducted in the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities.
Similar to polling results in 2021, a majority of respondents from both communities
reconfirmed their aspirations for a mutually agreed settlement and expressed the
belief that it was imperative to reach one as soon as possible. Despite the desire and
urgency expressed, however, significantly fewer respondents of those polled had
confidence that a settlement could be reached. The exercise also showed that
respondents who had contact with members of the other community, in general,
wanted a settlement more urgently, had higher trust and less fear of the other
community and foresaw fewer problems in case of a settlement, compared with the
respondents without contacts. Many of these findings contrast with anti -settlement
viewpoints disseminated in the two sides in certain political circles and amplified in
the media.

V. Observations
33. Over the past six months, difficult political and economic developments and
regional tensions have impacted both communities. The situation has both reflected
and exacerbated the current lack of political space for finding common ground for

22-29366

7/29

S/2023/6

formal negotiations, with the positions of the two sides growing further apart, as can
be evidenced in the written updates of the two sides, annexed to the present report.
34. Despite the worsening atmosphere, the continued absence of full-fledged
negotiations and limited space for engagement on substantive issues in the peace
talks, United Nations senior officials have continued to engage with the two sides and
the guarantor powers with a view to finding common ground towards negotiations.
Furthermore, the two leaders and their representatives have continued to engage with
my Deputy Special Adviser on the ground. Given the continuing absence of fullfledged negotiations, the leaders’ presence at the 7 December reception in Nicosia
sent a positive signal to the broader public. As we continue to support the sides in
seeking common ground, the parties’ flexibility, political will and forward-looking
view in the best interests of Cypriots will be of paramount importance.
35. My mission of good offices remained firmly engaged in facilitating dialogue at
various levels and promoting contact and rapprochement between the communities.
Early in the reporting period, my Deputy Special Adviser urged the acceleration of
efforts to build goodwill between the two sides by registering meaningful
bi-communal achievements. This strategy was well received by the two
representatives of the leaders, and engagement intensified. Unfortunately, this
progress shifted mid-period to an increase in rigidity on both sides. The serious efforts
by the two sides to protect the work of the technical committees from political
obstructions that had borne fruit since the beginning of the year, gave way in the
second half of the reporting period to a slowdown and increasing instances of political
blockages. It is especially critical in a time of political tensions that the two sides
provide the committees with the necessary support and leeway in order to preserve
their ability to function, deliver results and address matters with island-wide
implications. The technical committees, where both communities can discuss and
address issues of common concern, should be protected and insulated from larger
political discussions and problems in and adjacent to the buffer zone involving
UNFICYP.
36. The slowdowns and obstructions in certain technical committees were
particularly unhelpful. The suspension by the Turkish Cypriots of their partic ipation
in the peace education project “Imagine” under the auspices of the Technical
Committee on Education is highly regrettable. I also call for engagement regarding
the implementation of the recommendations of the 2017 report of the Technical
Committee on Education. It must remain the highest priority to implement projects
that support the education of teachers and children on both sides of the island in a
culture of peace and to fight stereotyping and xenophobia. The fact that there has been
only one meeting of the Technical Committee on Humanitarian Affairs since October
2021 and no substantive meetings of the Technical Committee on Education since
2 July 2021 is disappointing. The delay in the projects initiated by the Technical
Committee on Culture is also regrettable. Finally, the lack of progress on creating an
agreed process to respond in a coordinated fashion to cross -island crisis situations,
such as wildfires, should be addressed urgently, and the Technical Committee on
Crisis Management should be instructed to move forward without further delay. In
view of the many pressing issues that would benefit from intra-island cooperation,
the technical committees remain underutilized overall.
37. I call on the two leaders to direct the Technical Committee on Gender Equality
as a matter of priority to implement the Action Plan on ways to ensure women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in the settlement process/an eventual settlement
process. In the absence of formal negotiations, it should in particular be explored how
the leaders themselves as well as the Technical Committee on Gender Equality
regularly engage with civil society, women and youth organizations in advance of and
during any possible future Cyprus settlement process, to solicit their views in order
8/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

to prepare the ground for a possible future settlement. To this end, international best
practice and innovative tools and platforms should be explored in order to help
identify and immediately establish a robust standing platform for regular
consultations with “all of civil society”.
38. I once again echo the Security Council’s call for greater engagement with civil
society more broadly and urge the two leaders to encourage contact and cooperation
between the two communities. I call upon the leaders also to aim for more inclusive
cooperation and links between the two communities now, and ultimately in the peace
process, and to involve underrepresented groups, including women, minorities, young
people and persons with disabilities in discussions related to a shared future on the
island and incorporate their views accordingly.
39. The expiration of the funding agreement for the Support Facility to the technical
committees has created a funding gap. In this context, the recent decision by the
European Union to continue to provide funding support is a welcome development.
40. I encourage the two leaders and their representatives to engage in a constructive
dialogue and urge them to agree to and implement mutually acceptable confidencebuilding measures that can contribute to a more conducive environment for
settlement. The proposals put forward by the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot
leaders cover areas of potential benefit to both sides and may in turn contribute to the
improved stability of the broader eastern Mediterranean region. I urge the two leaders
to engage in discussions on the proposals in the spirit of building trust and finding
common ground for the benefit of all. The United Nations stands ready to facilitate
such a dialogue.
41. Both my good offices mission and UNFICYP will continue to be committed to
bringing Cypriots together to work on shared issues of importance on the island, such
as entrepreneurship and environmental peacebuilding. The situation with irregular
migration in particular is worrying, with trends related to climate security globally
and in the region possibly exacerbating migrant flows in the future.
42. I have repeatedly stressed the importance of the parties refraining from taking
unilateral actions both in and adjacent to the buffer zone that could raise tensions and
compromise reaching common ground on peace talks, while also calling upon all
parties to engage in dialogue in order to resolve their differences. I re iterate my
concern over developments in the fenced-off area of Varosha. The position of the
United Nations on Varosha remains unchanged. I recall the decisions of the Security
Council on the matter, notably resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 (1992), and I
underscore the importance of adhering fully to those resolutions.
43. I remain concerned about growing tensions in and around Cyprus and the
broader eastern Mediterranean region. I urge all relevant parties to avoid unilateral
actions that could heighten tensions. I also reiterate that natural resources in and
around the island should benefit both communities and constitute a strong incentive
for the parties to urgently seek mutually acceptable and durable solutions to
disagreements related to natural resources and ongoing or planned energy cooperation
projects in the region, for the benefit of all relevant stakeholders.
44. In the continued absence of substantive dialogue on the Cyprus issue between
the two sides, and given the prevailing socioeconomic and political climate, prospects
for reaching common ground on the Cyprus peace process remain uncertain for the
time being. As the views on the role and mandate of an envoy continue to differ, no
agreement has yet been found regarding the modalities for the appointment of a
United Nations envoy, who could explore ways to reach common ground towards
resuming negotiations for a lasting settlement in Cyprus. Our engagement with the
sides and the guarantor powers continues in this regard. I reiterate that the future of
22-29366

9/29

S/2023/6

the process remains in the hands of the parties, and their demonstration of political
will and flexibility remains of paramount importance as we continue to support them
in seeking common ground. In this respect, a United Nations envoy to lead
engagement with the parties could provide critical support.
45. While underscoring the importance of the work of the technical committees and
the positive impact of confidence-building measures for trust-building between the
two communities, I believe that only genuine progress towards reaching a consensus
starting point for meaningful, results-oriented negotiations leading to a settlement
will reassure Cypriots as well as the international community that a peaceful and
shared future on the island truly remains possible. I have maintained contact and
dialogue with the parties, as have the Deputy Special Adviser and senior officials at
United Nations Headquarters and on the island, as well as with the guarantor powers,
and we will continue to do so in the coming period. In these efforts, I remain guided
by relevant Security Council resolutions that have established United Nations
parameters.
46. Once again, I encourage all Cypriots to engage actively in shaping the future of
the island and to look forward with pragmatism, despite the current prevailing
atmosphere. Continued and serious efforts are needed to find a mutually acceptable
way forward to ultimately bring the Cyprus issue to a settlement and bring peace and
prosperity to all. In the meantime, I urge the guarantor powers to support dialogue
and cooperation between the two communities.
47. I would like to thank the partners once again, including the World Bank and the
European Commission, that have continued to provide support for the work of both
United Nations missions in Cyprus, UNDP and the Committee on Missing Persons in
Cyprus and have contributed to the implementation of confidence-building measures.
48. Finally, I would like to thank my Deputy Special Adviser, Colin Stewart, and
the personnel serving in my good offices mission in Cyprus for the dedication and
commitment they have brought to their work.

10/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

Annex I
Written update by the Greek Cypriot leader to the Good
Offices Mission of the Secretary-General, pursuant to and
in accordance with UNSCR 2646 (2022)
This submission is made in response to the encouragement in UN Securit y
Council Resolution 2646 (2022), to “the leaders of the two communities to provide
written updates to the Good Offices Mission of the Secretary General on the actions
they have taken in support of the relevant parts of this resolution since its adoption,
in particular with regard to paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 and 8, with a view to reaching a
sustainable and comprehensive settlement”.
The present update includes all developments relevant to the effort to r esume
the peace process in the framework of the Good Offices Mission of the UNSG,
irrespective of their inter-state or inter-communal character. References to
communities are without prejudice to the Republic of Cyprus as a Member State of
the United Nations and references to UNFICYP are made without prejudice to the
Republic of Cyprus as the host country of the Force.

I. Efforts to resume the peace process
Efforts for the resumption of the Cyprus peace process are – since the
unsuccessful conclusion of the Conference on Cyprus in Crans Montana in July
2017 – impeded by the policy of Turkey and of the Turkish Cypriot side to question
the agreed basis for a solution of the Cyprus problem as endorsed in the relevant UN
Security Council Resolutions, namely a bizonal, bicommunal federation with political
equality as defined in the said resolutions. During the reporting period we have
unfortunately witnessed no change with regard to this policy, increasingly
accompanied by aggressive rhetoric and actions which aim at undermining the
prospect for the resumption of negotiations but also other efforts, including at the
level of the Technical Committees, which have the potential to contribute towards a
more conducive environment and subsequently towards the strengthening of the
prospect for a solution and reunification.
During these challenging times for the international order, when international
law, multilateralism and the rules-based international system are being questioned, it
is imperative to renew our unequivocal commitment to the principles and values
enshrined in the UN Charter which formed the pillars of international peace and
stability after the devastating wars experienced by humankind during the last century.
We therefore renew our unwavering commitment to the United Nations as our
collective accomplishment, established to save succeeding generations from the
scorch of war.
In the framework of the Cyprus peace process, we have since February 2014
reached an agreement on a Joint Declaration of the leaders of the two communities
which exemplified and reaffirmed the basis for a solution to the Cyprus problem. The
extensive negotiations over the various chapters that followed, culminated into the
Crans Montana Conference in 2017, which came closer than ever to a comprehensive
strategic agreement.
After the unsuccessful conclusion of the Conference in July 2017, we renewed
our efforts for the resumption of the peace process from where it was left -off in Crans
Montana, being conscious of the imperative need to preserve the body of work that

22-29366

11/29

S/2023/6

had been accomplished, in particular the significant convergences on core issues, as
described in the UN Secretary General Report of September 2017.
An agreement in principle was reached by the leaders of the two communities
in August 2019 for the Terms of Reference for the resumption of the negotiations,
which was based on the existing body of work, namely the Joint Declaration of 2014,
prior convergences and the 6-point framework presented by the UN Secretary General
in Crans Montana. This understanding was confirmed during the meeting of the
leaders of the two communities with the UNSG in Berlin in November 2019, paving
the way for an informal 5+UN meeting which took place in Geneva in April 2021.
Despite all efforts, we were not able to achieve a breakthrough due to the fundamental
shift in the position of the Turkish side, also manifested through an unprecedented
policy of interventions, the eventual manipulation of political developments in the
occupied part of Cyprus and the imposition of a new leadership of the Turkish Cypriot
community, which has since been advocating positions that run contrary to the
established UN framework as enshrined in UN resolutions. In the context of the same
policy aiming to undermine every prospect for the resumption of the peace process,
the Turkish side also repeatedly rejected the proposal for the appointment o f a UN
Envoy with a mandate to facilitate the effort for the resumption of negotiations on the
basis of the relevant Security Council Resolutions. The proposal was rejected both
during the meeting in Geneva in April 2021 and again during the informal meeti ng of
the leaders of the two communities with the UN Secretary General in September 2021
in New York and still continuous to be rejected by the Turkish side. At the same time
Turkey continued to embark on a series of illegal and provocative activities in t he
territorial sea, the continental shelf and the EEZ of Cyprus, violations of the military
status quo along the Turkish forces ceasefire line as well as in Strovilia, and in the
fenced area of Varosha, in full defiance of the relevant UN Security Council
Resolutions and decisions. The aforementioned were even more aggravated by
Turkey’s continuous upgrade of its military capabilities and infrastructure in the
occupied part of Cyprus, a policy entailing grave risks for Cyprus but also for peace
and stability in the wider region of the Eastern Mediterranean.
These moves by Turkey towards the further militarization of the occupied part
of Cyprus were also manifested via decisions for the establishment of a drone base in
the illegal military airport of occupied Lefkonoiko, the creation of a naval base in
occupied Trikomo and the further expansion of the Turkish military infrastructure in
the Karpas peninsula which have been further advanced during the reporting period.
Furthermore, Turkey has recently included the Tymbou “airport” to its list of
domestic airports, a move which came only days after its decision to impose a new
financial protocol upon the Turkish Cypriot community in the context of its policy of
suppression and curtailment of the Turkish Cypriots and the integration of the
occupied part of Cyprus to Turkey. Additionally, the policy of suppression against
Turkish Cypriots who stand up against these policies continued to be manifested and
to be intensified.
Despite this negative background and being fully conscious of the need to put
an end to the stalemate and to create conditions conducive to constructive dialogue,
we continued to seek ways and to take initiatives for the reinvigoration of the peace
process and the revival of the prospect for a solution to the Cyprus problem.
In this context and bearing in mind concerns expressed by the Turkish Cypriots
regarding aspects of the issue of political equality and effective participation, we
reaffirmed our commitment to the relevant convergences achieved until the
Conference in Crans Montana and we furthermore submitted a proposal for the
decentralization of the exercise of certain federal competences with a view to

12/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

enhancing the role of the constituent states, whilst at the same time strengthening the
functionality and viability of the Federation.
In the same spirit, we put forward in December 2020 a package of bold
Confidence Building Measures which we have also presented directly to the leader of
the Turkish Cypriot community in May 2022, with the earnest hope that they could
provide a basis for a constructive discussion and progress towards a breakthrough.
The proposed package comprised the following:
(a) Varosha – Tymbou airport: The fenced area of Varosha and the access
thereto, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Security Council
Resolutions 550(1984) and 789(1992), be transferred to the administration of
the United Nations with the view to enabling the early return to the area of its
lawful inhabitants under conditions of safety the soonest possible.
In parallel, the Tymbou airport be also placed under the administration of
the United Nations and operate in full conformity with the relevant rules of
international law, including the 1944 Chicago Convention as well as the 1960
Treaty of Establishment.
In this context it is necessary to reiterate that there is a single and
undivided Flight Information Region in Cyprus (Nicosia FIR).
(b) Famagusta Port – Ankara Protocol: Practical arrangements on trade
through Famagusta port, in conformity with Protocol No. 10 on Cyprus to the
2003 Act of Accession to the EU, would be agreed. Such trade would be
administered by the European Commission.
Turkey would lift its restrictions towards Cyprus and would implement
fully and non-discriminatorily the Additional Protocol to the Association
Agreement towards Cyprus, thus, permitting, inter alia, access of Cypriot flagged vessels in Turkish ports and the opening of its air space.
(c) We reiterated in the strongest possible manner that it is not our
intention to usurp, either a drop of hydrocarbons or a single penny from any
possible revenues, from what our Turkish Cypriot compatriots rightfully are
entitled.
That is why we recalled our proposal that when and if the exploitation of
hydrocarbons commences, even without a solution of the Cyprus problem, to
deposit revenues accrued to an escrow account to the benefit of the Turkish
Cypriot community, in accordance to the population /citizens proportion of the
future constituent states.
Of course such an arrangement could only be in place if an Exclusive
Economic Zone/continental shelf delimitation agreement between Cyprus and
Turkey is reached, taking also into account that the current claims by Turkey
deprive, not only from the Greek Cypriots but the Turkish Cypriots as well, a
large portion of the Exclusive Economic Zone of the island.
Unfortunately, this package was rejected out of hand by the leader of the Turkish
Cypriot community who subsequently counter proposed in July 2022, confidence
building measures that unfortunately reflect the positon of the Turkish side for a “twostate” solution. Despite this, we reiterated our readiness to discuss all proposals, a s
long as this discussion is aligned with the aim of reunification and the established
basis for a solution in accordance with the relevant UNSC Resolutions.
This negative reaction by the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community, in stark
contrast to calls from within the Turkish Cypriot Community for a constructive
response, has also been combined with further provocative actions and continuing
22-29366

13/29

S/2023/6

threats by Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot side. These include the illegal actions and
announcements on further violations in Varosha, in blatant disregard of relevant UN
Security Council Resolutions as well as the repeated calls by the UN Security Council
to cease violations and reverse unilateral actions.
During this period, we have also witnessed renewed efforts in pursuit of the
international upgrading of the secessionist entity, as seen in the recent decision by the
Organisation of Turkic States to amend its statute in order to permit the accession of
entities and to grant the status of observer to the illegal secessionist entity in the
occupied part of Cyprus. This decision is in contrast to international law and relevant
UN Security Council Resolutions in particular 541(1983) and 550 (1984) which
consider the declaration of the so called “trnc” to be legally invalid and call on all
states not to recognize and not facilitate in any way the aforementioned secessionist
entity.
In the same vain and in the context of its policy to create new fait accompli, to
undermine the prospects for a solution and to pursue the upgrading of the secessionist
entity, the Turkish Cypriot side has declared a demand for the the conclusion of a
Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) with the UN in sharp contrast with the legally
binding principles that such agreements are being concluded only between the UN
and the governments of States that host peacekeeping operation in this case the
Republic of Cyprus as enshrined in UN Security Council Resolution 186 (1964) and
subsequent Resolutions
On the ground we continue to be faced with repeated attempts of incursion into
the buffer zone in a number of hotspots along the Turkish Forces ceasefire line, thus
further risking to undermine efforts for a conducive environment but also altering the
basis upon which the process is taking place and bringing about the solidification of
the status-quo.
In spite the above, we remain committed to the effort, under UN auspices, to
reinvigorate the prospects for a resumption of the negotiations and stand ready to do
our part to accomplish this aim. We maintain our firm commitment to continue to
work towards a breakthrough and we reiterate our agreement with the position
expressed by the UN Secretary General in his letter of 26 October 2020, that the
resumption of the talks should build on the existing body of work and that the best
way forward is by returning to negotiations and forging a lasting settlement in
accordance with United Nations parameters, as established in relevant Security
Council Resolutions and from the point they were suspended in Crans Montana.
In this context, the support of the UN and the UN Security Council in particular
is imperative, including by further reinforcing the message towards Ankara regarding
the need to refrain from any threads and actions that could further undermine the
prospects for the resumption of negotiations. Of equal importance is the need to
remain firm and unwavering with regard to the goal of reunification as the only viable
path ahead, as well as on the need to uphold the long established agreed basis of a
bi-zonal, bi-communal federation with political equality, as set out in the relevant
United Nations Security Council Resolutions.
This is the only common ground upon which a breakthrough can be achieved.
Attempts to put forward ideas for new common ground based on a logic of middle
ground between the aforementioned mutually agreed basis and the “two state”
solution declared by the Turkish side would only serve as appeasement and would
encourage an even more arrogant stance.
Notwithstanding our position on the need for the appointment of Special
Advisor/Special Envoy of the Secretary General as per the long standing UN practice,
we welcome the recent decision by the UN Secretary General to assign a high-ranking
14/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

official of the UN Secretariat with the role of liaising with all involved in the context
of the effort to find a breakthrough. The subsequent visits of Assistant Secretary
General Miroslav Jenča to Cyprus in April, July and November 2022, have been
instrumental in highlighting the message about the continued commitment of the
UNSG to provide his good offices and to work for the reinvigoration of negotiations.
We earnestly hope that all involved will engage in a spirit of good will, seeki ng
to address the legitimate sensitivities and concerns of both communities and to
achieve win-win situations and a new era of friendship between Cyprus and Turkey
as well as Greece and Turkey which will in turn have positive repercussions on EU –
Turkey relations and the overall security and stability in the Eastern Mediterranean.

II. Effective mechanism for direct military contacts
Given the need to defuse tension on and around Cyprus, the necessity for the
establishment of a mechanism for direct military contacts, between the opposing
forces in Cyprus, facilitated by UNFICYP, becomes urgent.
Even more so, taking into account the continuous violations of the relevant UN
Security Council Resolutions, in Varosha, the obstructions and interference on behalf
of the Turkish occupation forces to the ability of UNFICYP to perform its duties, and
the continuous upgrading of Turkey’s military infrastructure in the occupied part of
Cyprus.
In this direction, the government of the Republic of Cyprus presented a proposal
already in December 2019, outlining a framework for a mechanism for direct military
contact between the opposing forces, namely the National Guard and the Turkish
occupation forces, at the level of their Commanders, facilitated by UNFICYP at
respective level, in accordance with its mandate, as prescribed by the UN Security
Council Resolution 186 (1964).
With a view to further facilitating the effort for the establishment of the military
mechanism the government of Cyprus has submitted a proposal for the appointment
by the respective Commanders of the opposing forces of focal points that will
comprise the mechanism along with a representative of UNFICYP at the respective
level.

III. Committee on Missing Persons
The work of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus remains a
fundamental aspect of the peace process and therefore, the support of all parties is
indeed considered a conditio sine qua non.
In this regard, we would like to stress once more the importance of access to
information from relevant archives of countries and organizations that had a military
or police presence in Cyprus in 1963, 1964 and 1974, thus rendering the Committee
more effective.
In particular, the Turkish military archives, especially of the period around 1974.
Turkey has the obligation to exercise due diligence and provide information from its
archives in good faith, to help determine the fate of missing persons in Cyprus.
Access to military archives would inter alia provide information regarding
primary locations of burial of missing persons, as well as secondary locations given
that a great number of remains were relocated, rendering the efforts of the Committee
extremely difficult.

22-29366

15/29

S/2023/6

As pointed out numerous times in the past, it is indeed critical to grant access to
archives and obtain pertinent information to the question of the fate of missing
persons, which constitutes one of the grave humanitarian challenges of the conflict.

IV. Technical Committees
The Technical Committees continue their work, aiming to alleviate the daily life
of people from the adverse effects of the status quo, within the framework of their
terms of reference as agreed between the leaders of the two communities since 8 July
2006, under UN auspices. Within this framework, their work constitutes an integral
part of the peace process and are inextricably linked with the overall effort for a
solution to the Cyprus problem on the agreed basis as defined in relevant UN Security
Council Resolutions. Their work also contributes to the efforts to improve the public
atmosphere and to create conditions conducive to the resumption of the negotiations.
During the reporting period, the Technical Committees continued to undertake
a number of positive initiatives further building on the achievements they have
accomplished.
Regrettably, there have been also occasions of their work being increasingly
hampered as a result of decisions taken by the Turkish Cypriot side. This approach
has let to delays, postponements and in some cases setbacks on a number of projects.
One of the most indicative examples of this approach concerns the decision by
the Turkish Cypriot side in October 2022 to suspend its participation in the “Imagine”
programme on anti-racism and peace education, implemented under the auspices of
the Technical Committee on Education. It should be underlined that since its first
launch in October 2017, “Imagine” has reached thousands of students and hundreds
of teachers and is widely recognized as having made a significant contribution to the
aim of increasing bi-communal contact and collaboration. Therefore, the decision by
the Turkish Cypriot side, taken in the midst of the program’s relaunch for the current
academic year and on the basis of unfounded allegations, constitutes a significant
setback. It is expected that this decision will be reconsidered and that the program
will be fully restored.
The discussion on how to address the increasing challenges as a result of
irregular migration has also been at a standstill since our repeated calls for the issue
to be discussed in Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, have been
met by the insistence of the Turkish Cypriot side on establishing other layers of
engagement outside the context of the Technical Committeeswhich points in the
direction of creating a context of cooperation between respective administrations.
This approach is in fact questioning the very logic upon which the Technical
Committees were established, which was to create a context that will bring together
experts form both communities in their personal capacities and on the basis of their
professional qualifications, thus bypassing the sensitive issue of contact between so
called respective “administrations”.
Discussions on the important proposal for the establishment of a photovoltai c
park in buffer zone have also not progressed as expected due to the insistence of the
Turkish Cypriot side for the involvement of an “institution” of the “trnc” in the
preparation of the relevant pre-feasibility study.
In the Technical Committee on Culture, following long discussions and
extensive delays as a result of continuous amendments being requested by the Turkish
Cypriot side, the Technical Committee agreed on a proposal for a networking event
for artists in Cyprus aiming to bring together artists and academics from the two
communities to meet and connect, create a space where they would be able to share
16/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

their work and planning as well as create new ties. However, the implementation of
this proposal as well as the agreed proposal for a video and drawing competition
inspired by the cultural heritage sites of the island, were postponed very late in the
process by the Turkish Cypriot side by invoking a “law” that does not allow for the
organization of such events in a “pre-election” period.
Despite the challenges outlined above, work has continued on other issues,
albeit in some cases with considerable delay. In this context, the Technical
Committees have been encouraged to use available tools and resources to deliver
concrete results, within the framework of their mandate. To this end, the Technical
Committees continued to benefit, up until the expiration of the contract in October,
by the Support Facility funded by the EU in the framework of the Regulation
389/2006. This mechanism and the support framework that it provides is of crucial
importance for the work of the Technical Committees and in this context we look
forward to the rapid conclusion of the relevant process for its continuation.
Following the lifting of all COVID-related restrictions in May, the crossing
points have returned to their pre-pandemic operational status. In line with our aim to
enhance intercommunal contact, discussions within the Technical Committee on
Crossings to further facilitate crossings of people and interaction between the two
communities continue. In this context our efforts concentrate, among others, on
initiatives that will speed – up relevant checks at the crossing points, including
through improvement works and the hiring of additional staff.
Contributing in the contacts, the understanding, the respect and the trust
building between the two communities through joint work on the restoration of
cultural monuments and sites, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage has
maintained a steady output with 13 projects already concluded in 2022, 13 projects
which are still ongoing and 21 more projects which are upcoming in the following
year. Their work has inspired other Technical Committees as well, including the
choice of theme for their projects.
The Technical Committee on Gender Equality is currently continuing its work
for the implementation of the practical recommendations included in the Action Plan
agreed in response to the UN Security Council call to the leaders of the two
communities for a concrete commitment to increase women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in peace talks and to provide direct support and
encouragement to civil society organisations to enhance inter-communal contact and
trust-building. In this context, discussions within the Technical Committee are
currently focusing on the organisation of a seminar during which, women from both
communities who have been involved in previous negotiation rounds will share their
experiences and perspectives. As a next step, we proposed also the organisation of an
event with the participation of women who took part in other peace process.
At the same time, the Technical Committee on Economy continues the
discussion on ways to further advance trade on the basis of the Green Line Regulation.
Following the recent implementation of the decision to expand the list of traded
products to include certain processed foods of non-animal origin, discussions are
underway to further expand the range of traded products, as well as the respective
financial transactions mechanisms. Taking into account the need to advance economic
interaction it should be noted that much work remains to be done to ensure that trade
works in both directions, bearing in mind in particular, existing obstacles in the
“reverse trade”. The Technical Committee on Economy has also worked on ways to
enhance and further highlight economic cooperation between the two communities.,
Moreover, a feasibility study on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment recycling
involving both communities has been concluded with the Technical Committee
unanimously endorsing its content and recommendations. Following this, we have
22-29366

17/29

S/2023/6

expressed our full support to the timely implementation of this proposal, recognizing
its importance, not least from a trade and environmental perspective. We look forward
to a positive reply by the Turkish Cypriot side once it has concluded its own review.
The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters has maintained a well functioning channel for exchange of information regarding criminal activity through
the Joint Contact Room (JCR). The sub-facility of the JCR, launched in Pyla in April
2022, has also contributed to efforts to address the particular challenges in the area.
At the same time, the increasing number of unauthorized “police” operations in the
village, are a source of serious concern. These actions contribute to a worsening
climate, both within the local community as well as more generally, and constitute a
clear attempt to create the false impression that Pyla is an area under the
“co-administration” of two sides. We therefore stress the need to refrain from such
actions, underlining the status of Pyla as an area that lies within the buffer zone and
in which the UN peacekeeping force has specific responsibilities in accordance with
its mandate.
The Technical Committee on Health has sustained its exchange of information
relating to public health issues, such as COVID-19 and the monkeypox outbreak. It
has also concluded the second phase of the programme on the identification and
distribution of mosquito vectors, contributing to the enhancement of capacity building
in identifying mosquitoes of medical significance and increasing public awareness on
protection measures against mosquito bites.
Moreover, the Technical Committee on Education is continuing its work on the
implementation of the Prevalence, Correlates and Prevention of conventional bullying
in schools and cyberbullying project, in synergy with the Technical Committee on
Crime. Of particular importance in the context of the Technical Committee on
Education is the project on Lessons Plans, comprising 30 modules of supplementary
educational material to be made available to students and educators for voluntary use.
This was envisaged as a pilot project in response to the call of the UN Security
Council in its Resolutions to promote peace education in Cyprus. Although the
experts have concluded their work last September, the project continues to remain
under review by the Turkish Cypriot side.
Finally, the Technical Committee on Environment has reached agreement on the
proposal for Protection and preservation of Carob trees with relevant site visits
currently underway in the context of implementing the project. A number of other
projects are also in the pipeline, including the ones relating to the Geological Heritage
of Cyprus, the Environmental Innovation Challenge Competition and the Protection
of Vultures.
The Technical Committees have a considerable role as contributors to a more
positive political environment, in the framework of their mandate and in this context
we renew our commitment in further supporting them in their quest to deliver their
task, which forms integral part of the peace process and of the overall effort to achieve
a solution and the reunification of Cyprus on the agreed basis.

18/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

Annex II
Actions taken by the Turkish Cypriot Side in support of
the relevant parts of the Security Council Resolution
2646 (2022)
General Outlook
I, as the President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), would
like to share the critical developments that unfolded within the past 6 months which
have played a crucial role in respect to the future of my State and the Turkish Cypriot
People whom I represent.
As the TRNC, we continued our efforts for the reaffirmation of our inherent
rights, namely sovereign equality and equal international status, which we have been
deprived of by force in 1963.
The President of the Republic of Türkiye, H.E. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, in his
address in September 2022 at the 77th session of the UN General Assembly in New
York made a historic call to all Member States to officially recognize the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus. At a platform where the representation of my People
continues to be denied, President Erdoğan called on the international community to
put an end to the oppression towards the Turkish Cypriots and to the efforts to isolate
us from the World through inhuman restrictions, contrary to the principles of the
United Nations, and to officially recognize the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
as soon as possible. This landmark call reminds the Member States of their
responsibility to take steps to dispel the illusion that the Greek Cypriot government,
under the guise of the legally defunct Republic of Cyprus, is the sole legitimate
authority of the island of Cyprus.
Concrete results to this end will bridge the unlawful and unfair gap between the
statuses of the two equal Sides and prepare the needed common ground for the start
of meaningful formal negotiations between them under the auspices of the United
Nations Secretary-General.
From the first day that I assumed my duties as the President, upon the mandate
given to me by my People, I have been advocating the reaffirmation of these inherent
rights as the only realistic basis on which the 59-year-old Cyprus problem could be
solved. The ongoing denial of re-affirmation of the inherent rights of the Turkish
Cypriot People has not only been blocking a just and sustainable settlement, but has
also led to the sustenance of an uncertain future for the Island of Cyprus.
As regards the inherent equal rights of the Turkish Cypriot People: the two
Peoples have exercised their inherent equal rights and have co-founded the 1960
partnership Republic of Cyprus. The equal status of Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots, and their equal rights in the effective governance of the Island, including in
determining their future, were enshrined in the 1959-60 international agreements and
the 1960 Constitution by means of which the Republic of Cyprus was established as
a sovereign state and under which the structure of its government was determined.
The governance of the partnership Republic, including the precise manner in which
power would be shared by the two Peoples, was determined in the Basic Articles of
the Constitution which were set out in the Zurich Agreement of 11 February 1959.
The 1960 Constitution preserved and protected fully the Basic Articles and expressly
prohibited their amendment, whether by way of variation, addition, or repeal.
The Republic of Cyprus acquired its international recognition within the strictly
defined framework laid out in the international agreements, which were also
22-29366

19/29

S/2023/6

prescribed in its Constitution, on which the partnership Republic was founded, and
began to exercise its limited sovereignty and international legal personality within the
confines of its internationally protected structure.
Despite the clearly defined power-sharing arrangements, that required the
maintenance of a delicate balance, which were secured by the three Guarantor Powers
and the two Peoples, in 1963, the Greek Cypriot partner started her unilateral
campaign, unconstitutionally amending the “unamendable”, internationallysanctioned Basic Articles of the Constitution, destroying the essentials of partnership
by restricting the inherent rights of the Turkish Cypriot People, thereby turning the
State apparatus into one that they unilaterally governed. Furthermore, the Greek
Cypriot partner maintained this unilaterally created unlawful status through force of
arms and pursued a policy of depriving the Turkish Cypriot partner of its inherent
rights in all walks of life.
The UN acknowledged the unlawfulness, and in 1964, it proposed to deploy its
Peacekeeping Force in the Island (UNFICYP) to undo it, and to halt the
disproportionate armed violence against Turkish Cypriot civilians.
What was lacking at the time was a UN Security Council resolution to recognize
the fact that the partnership Republic was indeed defunct. Disregarding its obligation
to that end, the UN, instead, chose to seek the consent of the Greek Cypriot partner
which created the unlawfulness, thereby serving to its sustenance. All relevant parties
define this unlawfulness as the status quo of which they clearly express to be
unacceptable and unsustainable.
UNFICYP not only failed to prevent the bloodshed against Turkish Cypriots,
but the situation further deteriorated on their watch. By 1974, mainland Greece joined
in the Greek Cypriot campaign through organizing a coup d’état to unite the island
with Greece in July 1974 and the further violation of the 1960 Treaties necessitated
the intervention of Türkiye as part of its obligations therein.
Intervention by Türkiye stopped Greek Cypriot and Greek-instigated genocide
attempts against the Turkish Cypriot People and brought non-violence and stability
to the island by securing the present borders of the two States. After the establishment
of the borders, the two Administrations, under the auspices of the UN, managed to
conclude a Population Exchange Agreement, whereby Turkish C ypriots moved to the
North and Greek Cypriots to the South. This landmark Agreement set the ground for
the democratic legitimacy of the two Sides.
Since then, the two Sides have been conducting their democratic elections,
electing their Presidents, forming their governments, and running their States. Each
Side knows where its sovereignty, authority and jurisdiction start and end.
In 2004, for the first time in the history of Cyprus negotiations, both Leaders
agreed to put the internationally-sanctioned UN comprehensive settlement plan, also
known as the Annan Plan, before the citizens of their States to vote for their approval
in separate and simultaneous referenda according to their respective national
legislation, which entailed the enactment of a separate referendum law by the
Parliaments of both States. The referenda that were held on 24 April 2004 were
conducted by the electoral boards of both States that supervised the implementation
of their own legislation on elections. The Annan Plan was approved by 65% of the
Turkish Cypriot electorate and rejected by 76% of the Greek Cypriot electorate.
Turnout for the referenda was high at 89% on the Greek Cypriot Side and 87% on the
Turkish Cypriot Side, which is indicative of the extent of interest attached to the Plan
and the legitimacy of the procedure on which the separate simultaneous referenda
were held.

20/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

The international community’s persistent denial to recognize these factual
realities on the ground is unacceptable and unsustainable. In violation of international
law, the Greek Cypriot leadership continues to act as if it has the capacity to represent
the Island as a whole, with the support of the international community’s policy of
denial.
This illusion is the creator of the Cyprus issue and the guardian of its existence.
Reality pushed this illusion to start to shatter in 2003 upon the opening of the
first crossing point between the two States. The Greek Cypriot propaganda machine
that has been instrumental in preserving this illusion began to break-up as the Greek
Cypriot People began to cross to the TRNC and experienced the factual reality of the
Island of Cyprus - the existence of two States. The reality is that both Sides are
sovereign equals and are equally entitled to enjoy equal international status.
My vision, which is fully supported by the Republic of Türkiye, not only
registers this reality, but also offers the international community the opportunity to
free themselves from maintaining this illusion and thus protecting the unsustainable
and unacceptable status quo. Consequently, my vision opens the door for the start of
a new, formal settlement process based on a realistic basis.

Our Cooperation Proposals
As the Turkish Cypriot Side, I reiterate my readiness to start a new, formal
process immediately, following the reaffirmation of our inherent rights, and to resolve
the Cyprus issue based on a cooperative relationship between two Sides.
Until then, I proposed six areas for cooperation with the Greek Cypriot
leadership. My proposals were prepared in a constructive, forward-looking manner,
for a win-win outcome. These proposals, if implemented, will be beneficial to the two
Sides, the Island of Cyprus and clearly contribute to the stability and the welfare of
our region.
On 1 July 2022, I have conveyed our first set of cooperation proposals to His
Excellency, the UN Secretary-General Mr António Guterres, which was then kindly
conveyed to the Greek Cypriot leadership.
The first set of cooperation proposals focus on energy -related issues on the
following four areas:
As the first area, I have proposed cooperation on co-owned hydrocarbon
resources on the Island, a fact that is accepted by all relevant parties and stakeholders.
So far, the discovery of hydrocarbon resources off the shores of the Island remains an
area of contention between the two Sides and has a negative impact on the relations
among the coastal States and the involved stakeholders. The reason for this is the
hegemonic vision of the Greek Cypriot Side and its insistence on pursuing a unilateral
course. I prefer cooperation and diplomacy over unilateralism. I repeatedly stated that
the Turkish Cypriot proposal dated 13 July 2019 is still on the table, and even updated
this proposal on 1 July 2022 to address the excuses put forward by the Greek Cypriot
leadership in order to urge them to utilize these resources in a mutually acceptable
manner.
The updated Turkish Cypriot proposal thus envisaged the establishment of a
committee to be composed of an equal number of members appointed by the two
Sides, with the power to jointly decide on offshore hydrocarbon activities, including
revenue-sharing. After the formation of this joint committee, the energy companies
that have been separately licensed by the Turkish Cypriot Side and the Greek Cypriot
Side, could be authorized by the contracting Side, to establish a committee, which
22-29366

21/29

S/2023/6

will be facilitated by the United Nations, with the European Union as observer. The
committee would be entrusted with, inter alia, cooperation on and coordination of
future off-shore activities, future contracts and aspects related to monetizing and
sharing, while making recommendations on the transfer of these resources to
international markets. Decisions taken and the arrangements made in this respect shall
not prejudice the legal and political positions of the Turkish Cypriot Side and the
Greek Cypriot Side on the Cyprus issue.
As the second and third area of cooperation, I proposed transition to green
energy which is of paramount importance. We have been experiencing unprecedented
man-made and natural disasters worldwide. Naturally, the island of Cyprus is not
immune to the adverse impacts of climate change.
I am convinced that the tackling of this global challenge necessitates
cooperation between the two States on the Island. As a first step, I proposed the
establishment of electricity interconnectivity of the Island with Europe through the
geographically closest and economically most feasible Türkiye route, which is
already connected with the former. Following this important step, the Island of Cyprus
will be part of the European interconnectivity system through the utilization of the
already existing inter-connected electricity grid between the two Sides. Both Sides
are predominantly using fossil fuels to produce electricity, which is polluting the
environment. Interconnectivity with Europe will clearly enable expanded use of green
energy on both Sides.
Interconnectivity would also contribute to the stability of our respective
electricity grids, by avoiding grid imbalances and overloading, and ensure the
utilization and trade of renewable energy among interconnected countries.
To complement the transition to green energy, I also proposed to establish a joint
committee, composed of an equal number of authorized officials from both Sides,
with the aim of optimizing the utilization of solar energy, including investments
throughout the island, to the benefit of both the Turkish Cypriot People and Greek
Cypriot People.
As the fourth area of cooperation, I proposed the establishment of a joint
committee, with the participation of equal number of authorized officials from both
Sides, to work towards cooperation on the rational use of freshwater resources of the
Island. This proposal entailed the possibility of sharing the water we have been
receiving through underwater pipelines from Türkiye. Water is the indispensable yet
scarce resource that is of paramount importance, particularly for our island which is
drought prone.
On 8 July 2022, I have conveyed my second set of cooperation proposa ls to the
UN Secretary General, who kindly conveyed it to the Greek Cypriot leadership. The
first area of cooperation aimed at clearing the remaining landmines that constitute
threats to the safety and well-being of the Turkish Cypriot People and the Greek
Cypriot People.
As the President, I considered it as my primary duty to protect my People by
ensuring their physical safety from apparent threats like landmines. The Turkish
Cypriot Side has put forth comprehensive proposals to the Greek Cypriot Side in
2014, in 2015, and in 2018, for the demining of the Island, starting with the areas
adjacent to the buffer zone, one in Derinya under our jurisdiction, and three in the
areas under the jurisdiction of the Greek Cypriot Side, near Akıncılar village. The
ultimate goal of my proposal is the clearance of the 29 remaining suspected hazardous
areas with a view to reaching a mine-free Island. To that end, I proposed the creation
of a mechanism whereby UNFICYP could facilitate the demining activities, in
coordination with the two Sides. I also proposed that the demining operations in each
22/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

Side are conducted proportionally and simultaneously. On my end, I expressed
the readiness of my authorized officials to sit down with their Greek Cypriot
counterparts, to discuss, in detail, the modalities for the implementation of the
demining operations with a view to addressing the matter without further delay. This
is a legacy that we owe to our future generations.
In my final proposal, I addressed the global phenomenon of irregular migration
as neither the Turkish Cypriot Side nor the Greek Cypriot Side is immune from this
challenge. Prepared by our relevant Governmental bodies, this cooperation proposal
took into consideration the sensitivities and concerns of both Sides. The proposal was
prepared so as not to prejudice the rights and procedural guarantees for persons
applying for asylum, in line with the UN Convention of 28 July 1951 on the Status of
Refugees. In this proposal, I suggested the establishment and functioning of a
cooperation mechanism, composed of equal number of officials from the relevant
departments from each Side, including the Departments of Police Immigration,
Immigration Departments of the Ministries of Interior and the Offices of the
Attorneys-General. The cooperation mechanism would be under the auspices and
facilitation of the UN, without prejudice to the respective legal and political positions
of the two Sides and in a way that shall not be construed as altering their respective
stand with regard to the Cyprus issue.
Our Island’s geopolitical and strategic importance is obvious. We live in a
dynamic environment and need to act in accordance with the realities and needs of
the conjecture around us. The aim of my proposals is to increase island-wide
cooperation, in order to prepare the ground, pending the reaffirmation of our
sovereign equality and equal international status, which would be conducive for
political settlement in Cyprus. The realization of this objective would serve the
elevation of the Island of Cyprus in the international arena, due to our contribution to
peace, stability and welfare in the region. We are yet to receive a formal response
from the Greek Cypriot leadership and we believe it is high time for the international
community, including the UN, to urge the Greek Cypriot Side for a positive approach.

The Unhelpful Role of Third Parties
Although all agree that the two Sides in Cyprus are inherent equals, this equality
needs to be demonstrated and seen not just in words, but in practice. The continued
treatment of the unlawful Greek Cypriot government as the legitimate government of
the whole island is only helping the sustenance of the unacceptable status quo and
non-settlement in Cyprus by disallowing the inherent equality of the Turkish Cypriot
Side. This behavior of third parties is encouraging the Greek Cypriot leadership to
continue with their intransigence and is solidifying their comfort zone, thus enabling
them to take steps that further deteriorate relations between the two Sides and escalate
tension at the risk of the future of the Island.
The EU’s unlawful and unilateral admittance of the Greek Cypriot usurped
“Republic of Cyprus” to the EU, despite this being in violation of the Copenhagen
Criteria for membership and the objections of the Turkish Cypriot Side and Turkey,
has further complicated the resolution of the Cyprus issue. The EU, instead of looking
forward and helping prepare the ground for an inherent equality based settlement, is
stuck in 2004 and continues to deal solely with the Greek Cypriot Side at the expense
of the Turkish Cypriot Side. This stance of the EU is helping sustain the status quo,
which everybody says is unacceptable, and is the key obstacle for non-settlement in
Cyprus.
Making matters worse, the Greek Cypriot leadership used the Ukrainian/Russian
war as a pretext to persuade the US to completely lift the arms embargo on them in
22-29366

23/29

S/2023/6

return to its so called cooperation with the West. Earlier, the Defence Cooperation
Agreement between the French Republic and the Greek Cypriot Side, which was
signed on 4 April 2017, came into force on 1 August 2020. These pamper the Greek
Cypriot Side further and encourage them in their hegemonic vision in Cyprus.
Moreover, the Greek Cypriot leadership is reaching out to other countries to enhance
their military capacity. All these further empower the Greek Cypriot Side and further
distance the two Sides from an inherent equality based settlement. No doubt these
will cause an arms race on the island since the TRNC will be forced to take the
necessary steps and measures to defend itself. All these will harm peace and stability
in the Eastern Mediterranean.
We, as the Turkish Cypriot Side, in our contacts with the relevant countries,
continue to state our disappointment and urge them to re-consider their
counterproductive moves. I am committed to protect the safety of my country and
preserve peace and stability that have prevailed on the Island to this day following
the 1974 Peace Operation of Guarantor Power Türkiye, which she has conducted
pursuant to the Treaty of Guarantee.

The Negative Role of the Greek Cypriot Education System
Hostility and hatred form the epicenter of Greek Cypriot policy towards Turkish
Cypriots and Türkiye. The Greek Cypriot Side continues to hold on to this archaic
policy as the bedrock of its existence and outlook. To ensure that the next generation
also pursues this policy, the Greek Cypriot leadership injects enmity to its education
system. The textbooks provided to students are based on this mentality and contain
material that cultivates enmity towards the Turkish Cypriot People and Türkiye.
It is with regret that, despite previous calls by the Security Council on the matter,
concrete steps have still not been taken by the Greek Cypriot Side to make the needed
changes in their education system.
The latest example of the products of this policy was staged at an anti-Turkish
protest on 15 November 2022 attended by Greek Cypriot students during school hours
through the organization of the Greek Cypriot Ministry of Education in which the
students chanted racist slogans of hatred.
Regretfully, the Church is also instrumental in spreading enmity towards
Turkish Cypriots through schools. It is a known fact, also confided by one candidate
who is standing in the upcoming leadership election in the South that the Church
appoints the Minister of Education, and this candidate has pledged that in the event
he wins, he will put an end to this practice. The poisoning of young minds undermines
reconciliation efforts and puts at risk the peaceful future of the island of Cyprus. The
international community should no longer tolerate or ignore these disturbing facts.

UNFICYP’s Status, Presence and Operations in the TRNC
The Cyprus issue continues to be an item on the international agenda for almost
60 years. It is high time the UN and the international community addresses the illusion
that the Greek Cypriot Side represents the whole island and takes decisive and
practical steps to bridge the political gap between the two inherent equal Sides in
Cyprus. In this regard, our consent to UNFICYP’s operations in my country must be
sought and a legal framework must be reached upon as a matter of urgency. My
authorities continue their engagement with the UN to further our proposal that was
presented to the UN in New York last September. The Turkish Cypriot Proposal
reflects the UN Model Status-of-Forces between the UN and host countries (UN Doc.

24/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

A/45/594, 9 October 1990, Annex). Our consent is an indispensable requirement for
UNFICYP to operate in the TRNC, and we continue our engagement with the UN in
a realistic and results-oriented manner. Fulfilling this bedrock principle of
peacekeeping by the UN in the context of the island of Cyprus will be a win-win
outcome for all concerned. This agreement will move us closer to restoring the
shattered equilibrium.

Technical Committees
The exercise of whether common ground exists or not is ongoing under the
auspices of the UN Secretary-General. In the meantime, the work of the technical
committees is also continuing. The trilateral mechanism has proven effective and
continued with its weekly meetings, taking up not only the works of the technical
committees, but also other daily and practical matters important for both Sides. While
the European Union, as an institution, as well as a few of its Member States have
shown interest to contribute to some specific technical committees and/or project s,
their insistence on injecting their political prescription for settlement as a condition
for their support has proven to be counter-productive. Such an approach has not only
adversely affected the works of the technical committees, but also undermined
Turkish Cypriot confidence in the EU, together with confidence between the two
Sides, and further undermined the chances of finding common ground at the political
level.
Recognizing the added value of the Technical Committees, which should
operate on the basis of equality and should act as a tool to build institutional
cooperation and confidence, I am committed to support their efforts to improve the
daily lives of the Turkish Cypriot People and the Greek Cypriot People, and I have
given instructions to that end.
As regards some highlights in the work of the technical committees, the
Technical Committee on Health has completed the first phase of the project on the
identification and distribution of mosquito vectors to address the risk for disease
transmission, and in this context, prepared materials to alert and inform both Sides.
The activities of the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage towards the
protection of cultural heritage and towards ensuring their preservation for future
generations are continuing.
The Technical Committee on Environment has completed the website which is
intended to be a platform for experts from both Sides to access and communicate their
projects and exchange views and best practices. The Committee has continued its
discussions on possible projects which range from the protection of carob trees,
feasibility study on geo-heritage and other activities on the protection of the
environment.
Regarding the Technical Committee on Crisis Management, our Co-Chair has
made a proposal to the committee that entails direct communication with Civil
Aviation Authorities in Ercan Airport to ensure air safety for civilian flights. We are
expecting a response from the Greek Cypriot on this important issue. The Committee
also started to work towards the establishment of a mechanism that would enable
effective communication and cooperation between the two Sides whenever necessary,
particularly in the cases of natural disasters and emergencies.
Following the agreement of the Technical Committee on Broadcasting to
remove TV broadcasting systems from the 700 MHz frequency band in order to make
way for the introduction and use of 5G across the island, the tender process to ensure
transition from analogue to digital broadcasting has been initiated.
22-29366

25/29

S/2023/6

The Technical Committee on Economy and Commercial Matters is working on
issues like the enhancing of the trade of processed food from the TRNC, enabling
bank transactions between the two Sides and the crossing of commercial vehicles
from the TRNC to the South. We are hopeful that the resolution of the issue of
exchanging worn out Euros, an issue that has been on agenda of this committee for
years, is in its final stage.
The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters has continued with
the exchange of information between the police forces of the two Sides, via the Joint
Contact Room (JCR) in the buffer zone, on crime and criminal matters, including the
handing over of suspects between the two Sides. The Committee also set up another
JCR in the village of Pile and started to exchange information on crimes.
The Technical Committee on Humanitarian Affairs has agreed to work on
raising awareness regarding challenges faced by the elderly and the necessity to ease
their daily lives.
The Technical Committee on Gender Equality has agreed on an Action Plan, as
called upon by the UN Security Council, on the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in an eventual settlement process. The Committee will
continue its technical work towards the implementation of this Action Plan.
The Technical Committee on Culture has agreed to organize a video and drawing
competition on antiquities which would be open to the participation of youth and
children from both Sides on a voluntary basis. The Committee is also continuing its
discussions on the organization of an event for artists and those who engage in arts
from both Sides.
The Technical Committee on Crossing Points is working on ways to ease the
crossing of peoples at crossing points, yet we are disappointed by the speed with
which the Greek Cypriot side is taking up these matters. The Committee is
particularly pursuing the Turkish Cypriot proposal to ease crossings especially at the
Metehan and Beyarmudu crossing points, in line with the applicable legislation and
the decision of our Government to that end.
The Technical Committee on Education is continuing its work on the
implementation of the joint project it has prepared with the Technical Committee on
Crime and Criminal Matters titled “Prevention of Bullying and Cyberbullying in
Schools”. The Imagine project has been suspended following the identification that
the implementing partner of this project is being partly sponsored, as stated in its web
page, by the Greek Cypriot Side, putting their impartiality into question.
In brief, in order to enhance the work of these committees, the participation of
authorized personnel from the relevant departments of the two Sides is indispensable
so as to effectively tackle the outstanding issues that relate to the lives of both Peoples
as quickly as possible, pending a political solution. I wish to underline that
institutional cooperation between the relevant departments of the two Sides is
essential for the meaningful and effective functioning of the bilateral Technical
Committees.

The Committee on Missing Persons
The Committee on Missing Persons (CMP) has continued its effective work to
find the remains, exhume and identify the missing persons on both Sides of the Island,
with a view to easing years-long anguish and pain of the relatives of missing persons.
The support of the TRNC to the work of the CMP is multi-faceted.

26/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

Sharing information at our disposal to enable CMP to find the remains is one
aspect of our contribution. Since the initial exchange of information on possible burial
sites in 1998, TRNC has continued to share any new information that came about on
additional burial sites.
Information sharing was maintained through granting CMP access to a number
of State archives, and enhanced through the establishment of the Archive Committee,
in 2016, which was tasked to respond to the specific requests of the CMP on possible
burial sites.
Access was also granted to the Turkish Cypriot Member ’s Office of the CMP to
the aerial photos dating from 1974, which proved to be a helpful tool to find burial
sites through examining photographic images of the disturbances in the soil. In the
reporting period, CMP resorted to the aerial photos in 8 different coordinates in 6
different regions.
After corroborating information on possible burial sites, CMP prepares its own
exhumation schedule on the places it will excavate. Accommodating access of CMP
to suspected sites is another aspect of our contribution to the work of the CMP.
In order to assist CMP, TRNC authorities continue to make the necessary
arrangements so that CMP can have access to any suspected burial site throughout the
TRNC. In this context, CMP has completed its work in 58 sites. In May 2022, a new
list has been prepared and access has been granted for 10 military areas; including 4
sites with the updated GPS coordinates from June 2019 and 6 new sites, where
excavations will be conducted according to the excavation planning of the CMP.
In 2022, CMP excavated 49 areas in the TRNC. 4 excavations in the TRNC are
concluded in the military areas with the granted permission in June 2019. Moreover,
2 excavations have been completed and 1 excavation is currently ongoing out of the
10 military areas where access has been granted in May 2022.
Monetary contribution to assist CMP in financing its activities is another aspect
of assistance we provide. Annul contributions to the budget of the Office of the
Turkish Cypriot Member of the CMP is in the amount of approximately EUR
1,000,000 per year. This is supplemented by annual payments, with EUR 75,000 in
the reporting period, bringing the total to EUR 508,000. The funds that are transferred
by the EU, reaching EUR 33,300,000, are from the funds the European Union has
earmarked for the economic development of Turkish Cypriots.
During this reporting period, CMP identified 3 additional missing persons, 1 of
whom was a Turkish Cypriot missing person and 1 Greek Cypriot missing person, as
well as 1 Greek Cypriot who was not on CMP’s official missing persons list. The
Turkish Cypriot Side expects the CMP to proceed with exhumations of Turkish
Cypriot reported missing persons in the known mass burial site in Atlılar village
without further delay.

Hellim/Halloumi
Turkish Cypriot producers continue to be deprived of the opportunities already
available to their Greek Cypriot counterparts in the South and cannot export their
traditional product, Hellim/Halloumi, to the EU, with the added benefits provided by
its registration as a Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) in the EU.
To this day, the modalities set out in the EU legislation have not been
implemented for the Turkish Cypriot producers in the TRNC. While the appointed
control body, Bureau Veritas, started its operations in the South, as early as 1 October
2021, it has not yet done so in the TRNC. Moreover, for a year and a half, since
22-29366

27/29

S/2023/6

12 April 2021, no appointment has been made for the required body to verify the food
and safety standards to enable the export of Hellim/Halloumi to EU markets.
In addition to the above, the Greek Cypriot Side is now trying to obstruct the
export of Hellim/Halloumi cheese from North Cyprus to third countries. Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/591 clearly states in paragraph 45 that
intellectual property rights are governed by the principle of territoriality. As a
consequence, the PDO registration is valid within the EU and has no relation to the
manufacture or marketing of the product in third countries. Furthermore paragraph
46 clearly states that compliance with the sanitary provisions applied in the EU is
only necessary for marketing in EU member states. Despite these provisions the
Greek Cypriot Side has sent a note verbale to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Immigration of the Republic of Lebanon on November 30, 2022 through its Embassy
in Lebanon asking for the prohibition of Hellim/Halloumi imports from North Cyprus.
This is clearly an attempt to cripple our economy and Hellim/Halloumi exports from
our country. All these are happening despite the call of the UN Secretary General that
the acute economic difficulties faced in North Cyprus do not benefit any of the parties
to the conflict, but instead make prospects for a settlement more difficult and that the
widening of the economic gap will feed resentment and distrust between the two
Sides, while exacerbating estrangement between them (5 July 2022, S/2022/533,
para. 52).
Hellim is a shared traditional cheese product that belongs to both Turkish
Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. In the reporting period, the Working Group established
by the European Commission has met twice. We have been doing our best to complete
the PDO registration and SPS standards necessary for compliance with the
Implementing Regulation and Decision, nevertheless, the Group has failed to change
the eventuality whereby Turkish Cypriot producers continue to be excluded from
benefitting from the registration, due to unnecessary formalities/obstacle s and/or the
lack of the necessary inspection schemes. The European Commission has the
responsibility to proceed with the cancellation of the PDO registration for the whole
Island, should it not function effectively as foreseen in the relevant EU legislati on.

Isolation and Restrictions
During the reporting period, there has not been any change in the Greek
Cypriot’s obstructionist policy of imposing inhuman socio-economic restrictions and
isolation on the Turkish Cypriot People, the latest example being the Hellim/Halloumi
case above. Turkish Cypriots have been suffering from these socio-economic
restrictions since 1963.
The inhuman and unacceptable restrictions and isolation imposed on the Turkish
Cypriot People must come to an end, and it falls on the UN and the international
community to terminate this oppression. This human rights violation is more than a
concern and is a reality that needs to be terminated.
During this reporting period, this Greek Cypriot hostile policy was felt in all
walks of life, including in cultural, academic and sports events, in the right to travel
abroad, communication with the outside world, as well as trade relations with other
countries.
This policy also manifested itself as threats, at all levels, including the
organization of health and education related events in our country, and our
representation abroad.

28/29

22-29366

S/2023/6

Hydrocarbons
I am firmly committed to turn the contested hydrocarbon issue, which are
co-owned by Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, to an area of cooperation.
In this reporting period, my commitment was reflected in a written proposal on
1 July 2022 to pave the way for utilizing these natural resources for the benefit of
both Peoples of the Island, and also to contribute to peace, stability and welfare of the
region as a whole. I would like to call once again upon the Greek Cypriot leadership,
the relevant coastal states and stakeholders to seize this opportunity which, I am
confident, will lead to a win-for-all outcome.

Maraş
In this reporting period, the Greek Cypriot applications to the European Court
of Human Rights-sanctioned Immovable Property Commission (IPC) concerning the
closed part of Maraş has increased to 470. The increasing number of applications by
the former Greek Cypriot inhabitants is a clear demonstration that our Maraş opening
policy is well-received by the Greek Cypriot People. IPC will evaluate these
applications in a timely manner, in according with our applicable legislation, as well
as our international obligations.
I am determined, together with my Government, to carry out this policy in a way
that would address the claims of property owners.

22-29366

29/29
