S/2004/1040

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2004
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
The President of the Security Council hereby transmits a letter dated
27 December 2004 from the Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, forwarding his personal report on the activities of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations during 2004.

05-22131 (E) 090205

*0522131*

S/2004/1040

Letter dated 27 December 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
to the President of the Security Council
[Original: English and Spanish]
In my capacity as Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, I have the honour to submit a personal report on the
activities of this Group during 2004. The report is thus submitted under my sole
responsibility.
It would be appreciated if the present letter and its annex could be circulated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Cristián Maquieira
Chairman
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations

2

S/2004/1040

Annex
Report on the activities of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations during 2004
I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council during 2004 considered the issue of peacekeeping
operations and the strengthening of cooperation between the Council, troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat.
2.
The Security Council stressed during that period the importance of full
compliance with the provisions of its resolution 1327 (2000) of 13 November 2000,
as well as with the contents of previous statements of the President
(S/PRST/1996/13 and S/PRST/1994/22).
3.
In the light of the opinions expressed by the members of the Security Council
during the debate that took place at its 4257th meeting, on 16 January 2001, on the
issue of the strengthening of cooperation with troop-contributing countries, it was
recognized that relations with troop-contributing countries could be improved and
that to do so it was necessary to work together with a common purpose to achieve
the shared objectives and to promote a new spirit of partnership, cooperation and
confidence between the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries.
4.
The Security Council thus decided to establish a Working Group of the whole
on United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Working Group would not replace
private meetings with troop-contributing countries and would address both generic
peacekeeping issues relevant to the responsibilities of the Council and technical
aspects of individual peacekeeping operations.
5.
Accordingly, the Working Group was charged with seeking the opinions of
troop-contributing countries, including through meetings between the Working
Group and troop-contributing countries, with a view to making their opinions known
to the Security Council.
6.
In fulfilment of this mandate, the Working Group met on four occasions in
2004. The principal statements and discussions at these meetings are detailed below
in the present report.

II. Meetings
A.

First meeting, on 2 April 2004
7.
The first meeting of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations had as its
main objective to discuss the peacekeeping operation in Burundi and was attended
by the 15 members of the Security Council. Troop contributors, such as India, South
Africa and others, as well as financial contributors, such as Japan and some of the
neighbouring countries of Burundi, were also invited to the meeting.
8.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations was represented by the Assistant
Secretary-General, Hédi Annabi, who was accompanied by Colonel Nicholas

3

S/2004/1040

Seymour and by the Civilian Police Adviser, Kiran Bedi, both of the Military
Division of the Department.
9.
The meeting began with a presentation by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations delivered by Mr. Annabi, who said that significant political progress had
been made towards a cessation of hostilities in Burundi and that the parties seemed
genuinely prepared to build a future of peace.
10. He added and emphasized that the African Union, with the support of troops
from Ethiopia, Mozambique and South Africa, had played an important role in the
peace process in Burundi. However, the African Union had requested the United
Nations to take charge of the peace process in Burundi and to expand the size of the
peacekeeping force in that country. That had led the Secretary-General to request
that the Security Council consider the deployment of a multidimensional United
Nations peacekeeping operation comprised of a military component based on the
reassignment of the military component of the African Union Mission and
consisting of a total of 5,650 troops, including 200 military observers, and a civilian
component drawn from the current capacity of the United Nations Office in
Burundi.
11. The Assistant Secretary-General also reported that some progress had been
made thus far towards the planning of disarmament, demobilization, reinsertion and
repatriation operations. With the assistance of the World Bank, the United Nations
Office in Burundi and the African Union Mission, the appropriate structures had
been created and the armed groups were assembling their forces at the designated
sites to prepare for disarmament.
12. He continued by stating that the support for elections and the transition
process must be accompanied by development options that could definitively
transform the lives of the population. The ideal was to be able to deploy a strong
force in Burundi in support of the transition process.
13. In order to determine how best to contribute to the fulfilment of the provisions
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, an evaluation
mission was sent which concluded that it was possible to expand the role of the
United Nations and thus provide support for the peace process.
14. The most immediate priority proposed for the military component was for it to
assume and to strengthen the role played thus far by the African Union Mission,
undertaking as its principal task to supervise the pre-disarmament assembly sites,
guaranteeing their security, collecting weapons and destroying unstable arms and
munitions. In turn, as additional tasks, protection had to be provided for United
Nations personnel and equipment; the freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel and the personnel of humanitarian organizations had to be facilitated; the
civilian population had to be protected and, to the extent possible, support had to be
provided to the local authorities for creating the conditions of internal security and
providing support during the electoral process.
15. The peacekeeping operation would need a civilian police component to
support the elaboration of a comprehensive plan for the establishment and
strengthening of the National Police of Burundi, as well as to provide support for
the planning and implementation of a training programme for the National Police, to
develop the training curricula, and to assist in the selection of candidates and
training instructors.

4

S/2004/1040

16. He concluded by stating that the force in Burundi could not remain in place for
an indefinite period and that a review would be conducted six months after the
elections to determine when it should leave the country. He then expressed
appreciation for the excellent work done thus far by the African Union Mission and,
in accordance with the request that had been made, the Mission would be
strengthened with the creation of the United Nations Peace Mission, in which the
regional organization would provide more than half of the United Nations force.
Comments of the delegations of the Security Council and invited persons
17.

The comments focused on the following issues:
• The biggest challenge for the peacekeeping mission is to achieve a total
ceasefire, which has not been achieved thus far.
• The problem in Burundi is political but with ethnic characteristics that
complicate its solution.
• An exit strategy must be developed for the mission once the objectives and
established time frames have been met.
• It would be appropriate to review the mandate and presence of the mission
after six months from the date of the elections.
• Care must be taken to prevent a precipitate withdrawal in order to avoid a
repetition of regrettable situations with peacekeeping operations that had to be
restarted because of the failure to achieve the complete stability and progress
needed to guarantee their sustainability over time.
• The conditions for deployment of a peacekeeping operation are the best that
they have ever been because of the work already done by the African Union
Mission.
• The peacekeeping operation must work towards improving the situation in
order to enable the elections to be held.
• It is a very positive development that the peacekeeping operation planned for
Burundi is multifunctional and interdisciplinary.
• Delegations that are not members of the Security Council expressed
satisfaction at the format of the meeting and their desire that it should be
maintained and that meetings should be held with greater frequency.

B.

Second meeting, on 11 June 2004
18. The second meeting was held with the participation of only the members of the
Security Council.
19.

The topics dealt with were the following:
• Role of the Security Council in the light of the increase in the number of
peacekeeping operations.
• Format and contents of a periodic review of peacekeeping operations.
• Format of meetings of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
potential invitees to the meetings.

5

S/2004/1040

Role that the Security Council can play in the light of the increase in the number
of peacekeeping operations in terms of adequate time to put together the
personnel, funding and logistical arrangements
20.

The principal ideas expressed on this topic were the following:
• Rapid reaction of the United Nations to crises is critical and, to that end, it is
important to overcome the difficulties in recruitment of personnel, logistics,
funding and meeting civilian police needs, among other things.
• The need to prevent crises from developing.
• Planning for the rapid deployment of the United Nations.
• Availability of a list of possible candidates who can cover the civilian police
needs of peacekeeping operations.
• Identify and have waiting lists of French-speaking police officers who can be
included in peacekeeping missions.
• Have exit strategies for peacekeeping forces and provide for them to be
relieved by the forces of regional organizations.
• Evaluate implementation of the mandate of peacekeeping operations.
• Assist the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in keeping the Security
Council informed of key problems facing peacekeeping missions.
• Determine what the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations can achieve
without duplicating the efforts of other United Nations organs.
• Identify peacekeeping missions that must be renewed with a view to meeting
beforehand to consider how to improve the peacekeeping mission without
duplicating the work of the Group of 34.
• Have a United Nations rapid deployment force.
• Troop-contributing countries should have a reserve force which should be
available for rapid deployment.
• Examine the possibility of a pre-mandate in order to have forces available.
• There is a major change in the peacekeeping situation as a result of which old
methods can no longer be used to deal with logistic and personnel problems.
• The Working Group must meet more frequently, interact with countries and
monitor the work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
• Study the recruitment practices of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
with a view to improving these operations.
• Also address the new element of the security of peacekeeping forces, attacks
against them and the lack of respect which this implies for United Nations
mandates.
• Measures that the Security Council should adopt to prevent the loss of lives
and materials of peacekeeping missions. What are the rules for preventing such
losses?

6

S/2004/1040

• Consider in the Working Group the issue of the excessive use of Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter in peacekeeping mandates.
• Examine the need to consider military aspects in peacebuilding operations.
• Undertake reforms that would permit the United Nations to develop a strategy
to identify and study potential threats.
• Examine with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations how to reform
mandates when the political conditions in which a current operation is taking
place change.
• Examine how the Working Group relates to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with a view to reporting thereon to the Security Council.
• Obtain more information from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
about difficulties on the ground.
• Strengthen the work of the Military Staff Committee, which would improve
the work of the Security Council.
Format and content of the periodic review referred to in the statement by the
President of the Security Council of 17 May 2004 (S/PRST/2004/16)
21.

The main ideas on this subject were the following:
• Once again mention was made of not duplicating the work of other organs.
• Examine how discussions can be had with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the planning capacity to deal with this increase in the number of
peacekeeping operations, and review what authority exists for a mission prior
to its deployment.
• Consider how to undertake periodic reviews, which should be done in a
manner similar to the reviews used by the military, and in a very simple way
should describe the status of each mission, the areas where problems are being
encountered and ways to improve the situation or resolve the problems.
• Have an independent snapshot of each peacekeeping mission, in the
preparation of which, in addition to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, other United Nations organizations and agencies involved in
peacekeeping operations, such as the United Nations Development
Programme, should also participate.
• The evaluations must be practical in nature to provide value-added.

Follow-up
Invitation to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Frequency of meetings
Invitation to the biggest financial and troop contributors to peacekeeping
operations
22.

The main ideas on this topic were the following:
• Invite the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations to attend a
meeting of the Working Group, for which a paper will be prepared with the

7

S/2004/1040

issues to be discussed with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and
request that he put forward in detail his views on those issues.
• Proposal that the five largest troop and financial contributors should
participate in the meetings of the Working Group.
• Need for flexibility to invite other countries, depending on the subject being
dealt with or the peacekeeping mission being considered.
• Differentiate between the five largest financial contributors, which is an issue
that is clear, but differentiate between the five largest contributors in
accordance with the importance of each country to specific missions.
• Let those countries that intend to contribute with resources participate, instead
of those which, despite having a legitimate interest in peacekeeping
operations, only wish to talk.
• A determination must be made of which States are useful in this wave of
peacekeeping operations to be able to contribute and they should be invited to
participate in meetings.

C.

Third meeting, on 2 July 2004
23. The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations met for the third time on
2 July, with the participation of the Assistant Secretary-General, Jane Lute, of the
Office of Mission Support of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to
consider an agenda that included the following two items:
(a) Issues related to the increase in peacekeeping missions and the challenge
that that poses for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
(b) Future activities of the Working Group in these areas, including the
question of convening the largest contributors to peacekeeping operations.
Issues related to the increase in peacekeeping missions and the challenge that that
poses for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
24. The Assistant Secretary-General, Jane Lute, in her presentation to the members
of the Working Group, said that there was currently an unprecedented increase in
peacekeeping operations, which posed great difficulties because of the environment
in which the demands were being made and because of the simultaneous nature of
the demand for such a large number of peacekeeping missions, which made it
difficult to determine the timeliness of such missions.
25. In strategic terms, she said that it was an interesting period, since Member
States could approach problems of the world through regional and local
organizations or through the United Nations. That meant that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations was practically in a market together with the Security
Council.
26. On the other hand, it was established that not all problems being experienced
by States had easy solutions and that the United Nations was the only organization
that really had a budget to confront such problems.

8

S/2004/1040

27. In addition, those peacekeeping operations were currently being carried out
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, and more frequently than at any
earlier stage when Chapter VII was used to send a signal to the parties, while
currently it was so that they could begin to use weapons in the discharge of their
mission and under strict rules of engagement.
28. In her opinion, the work of the Security Council had contributed a great deal to
the solution of specific internal problems of States, and it could be said that those
were intrusive operations under Chapter VII. It also meant that peacekeeping
operations no longer needed only the use of force to establish peace, but that
different tasks were also being carried out related to the processes of economic and
political development of States.
29. That meant that there was a change in the expectations for peacekeeping
operations, so that no State assumed the burden of what it was believed had to be
assumed by the United Nations, which then posed a problem for the organization of
missions and represented a collective commitment when the Security Council acted
through its resolutions.
30. The questions that we must pose based on the above are the following: When
can one say that an established peacekeeping mission has succeeded? In what cases
are Blue Helmets the solution to the problems of States? Under what conditions
should the United Nations intervene?
31. There are no common replies to each situation, but what must be understood is
that integrated peacekeeping operations will not resolve by themselves the internal
problems of States but rather will create the conditions for nationals of that State to
take responsibility for their own destiny.
32. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations was currently reviewing when
peacekeeping operations should be adapted, when to expand them and also when to
close them. Here there emerged an issue of considerable relevance, which was the
availability of resources to launch a peacekeeping operation.
33. As the Brahimi report (A/55/305-S/2000/809) states, these operations must be
organized and become operational within a maximum period of 90 days. However, it
has been seen that no State is capable of launching a peacekeeping operation within
this period when there is no prior planning and no resources are available.
34. The future of peacekeeping operations is at a strategic turning point where the
emphasis must be placed on their regional dimension and on the capacity of regional
organizations to assume responsibility for mounting or contributing the most
resources to peacekeeping operations to act in their region.
35. For the success of a peacekeeping mission, a vital component is the
commitment of local people to take ownership of the process and assume
responsibility for the conduct of their affairs, taking advantage of the conditions
which peacekeeping forces have been able to establish.
36.

The delegations stated their views as follows:
• With regard to the greater use of Chapter VII of the Charter, some delegations
of non-permanent members expressed the view that that should not become
routine and that not all peacekeeping operations should be undertaken under
that Chapter, but only those that were necessary. Others expressed the view

9

S/2004/1040

that the use of Chapter VII created greater expectations, but also gave more
flexibility for the use of the tools of combat.
• There was emphatic agreement that all necessary resources should be provided
to organize peacekeeping operations and that the idea could be considered of
having pre-established forces available which could be deployed rapidly to
deal with emergency situations.
• The United Nations continues to be the main organization with the capacity to
organize peacekeeping operations. However, regional groups can make a
bigger contribution, thereby making resources from outside the region
unnecessary.
• The prevention of situations is an issue that needs to be more effectively
addressed, thereby strengthening the principle of the provision of resources to
do so. That brings up the question of how to improve the intelligence available
to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to anticipate events and to
prepare the resources that will be needed for future operations.
• With regard to the organization of peacekeeping operations, some delegations
pointed to the need for the biggest contributors to be involved in the operation
during its planning stages in order to ensure greater participation and to
receive their support in the early stages of the process.
• Another important aspect that was discussed was that the effectiveness of a
peacekeeping operation had nothing to do with its size and volume but rather
depended on the mandate that it received and its efficient and timely
organization to enable it to fulfil its mandate.
Future activities of the Working Group in these areas, including on the question
of inviting the largest contributors to peacekeeping operations
37.

The following views were expressed:
• On this question, there was no consensus since some delegations wanted all
financial and troop contributors to participate in the meetings on a permanent
basis. Other delegations were of the view that the Working Group should
proceed in the matter on a case-by-case and meeting-by-meeting basis.
• There was also a discussion on the participation of neighbouring countries
when the situation of a State in conflict or a given peacekeeping operation was
being reviewed. As with the contributors to peacekeeping operations, most
delegations preferred the matter to be considered on a case-by-case basis.

D.

Fourth meeting, on 27 August 2004
38. On 27 August, the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations held its fourth
meeting, which was attended by the Under-Secretary-General, Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Head of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to consider an
agenda that included the following items:
• Challenges facing the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the design,
planning and deployment of new peacekeeping missions, while it continued to
support ongoing missions.

10

S/2004/1040

• Support for missions under pre-mandate commitments.
• Recruitment of troops and civil police for the command posts and field units.
• The situation of Brindisi and the problems of accumulating stockpiles to meet
deployment needs on a timely basis.
• Integrated planning of peacekeeping operations.
• Establishment of a method and format of evaluation to achieve this objective,
which should be short, practical and easy to use.
Presentation of the Under-Secretary-General, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Head of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
39. In his presentation, he stated that the meetings of the Working Group were a
positive initiative that permitted the establishment of closer links between the
Secretariat and members of the Security Council on those issues. He gave an
overview of the current situation in peacekeeping operations and added that over the
next few months 27,000 more troops would be needed, in addition to 2,500 civilian
police, 1,300 observers, 4,000 local staff and 2,000 international personnel. All of
that represented a cost of approximately $2 billion.
40. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had had an extremely heavy
workload in recent times, since it had to launch a series of new missions and to
expand ongoing missions, such as, for example, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). That presented no
great difficulties in budgetary terms, since funding was available for them.
However, it represented a heavy burden in terms of the workload for personnel in
the Department.
41. With regard to what was stated in the Brahimi report, namely, that it should be
possible to deploy a peacekeeping operation within a period of 90 days, he said that
it was a goal that they were striving to achieve under the difficult conditions of the
moment, since several missions had to be serviced at the same time while a number
of others had to be deployed simultaneously and resources committed to ensure the
maintenance of ongoing missions. He added that military personnel with the greatest
experience in such deployments were aware of the difficulty of that activity.
42. He continued by saying that new peacekeeping operations were rather
complex, mainly because the parties to the conflict did not respect the peace
agreements made. In order to enforce compliance, there must be peacekeeping
troops which, while acting in a cordial and friendly manner with the population, at
the same time had the capacity to use weapons when necessary.
43. The main difficulties faced by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
were to persuade countries to provide more technical and specific resources such as
helicopter units and communications and engineering units. He also said that there
was a need for adequate hospital units in the field, since that gave more peace of
mind to the forces for the fulfilment of their missions and they were forcemultiplying elements.
44. Among the difficulties faced in securing and deploying troops was the fact that
when a mission was to be deployed in regions where adequate facilities and
accommodations such as airports did not exist, countries would definitely not go,

11

S/2004/1040

and that was why the Department could not comply with the deadline of 90 days for
the deployment of an operation.
45. On the other hand, there must be fully simultaneous efforts to effect
deployments and when a piece of the puzzle of launching a peacekeeping operation
was missing, it had consequences for the rest of the puzzle and disrupted planning.
The logistical aspect was vital in that sense and if it failed or was delayed, then the
Department obviously could not deploy troops in the field until a solution was
found.
46. With regard to the deployment of civilian police, it was necessary to reconcile
quantity and quality, which was the best way to be effective. What was needed was
not only a group of trainers but also policemen to deploy in the field and to see how
police departments functioned and give them advice. There must be cultural
sensitivity in that regard.
47. If obtaining troops was difficult, securing policemen was even more so, since
normally they were occupied in the activities of their respective countries.
Moreover, obtaining good policemen was even more difficult. Obtaining policemen
who spoke local languages was also a challenge. Establishing a police force in the
country that had the trust of the population was a vital aspect for the success of a
peacekeeping operation.
48. On the question of strategic deployment, he said that they were pleased that
stockpiling would be authorized based on the situation in Brindisi. He also added
that a mechanism was needed to facilitate the purchase of equipment.
49. With regard to ways of improving the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
he said that when a mission was evaluated, an integrated team was sent. That team
later became a coordinating oversight group. He added that when a mission
changed, an evaluation team was also sent out. The next step was to have a plan and
to that end they were working on a manual so that the different components
involved in the deployment of a peacekeeping operation would understand each
other and be coordinated in order to serve the main component. The objective being
pursued was to operationalize integrated planning for which the manual would be
used.
50. It was more work for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to have
three operations of 5,000 troops than one of 15,000. To deal with several
simultaneously meant that there was a shortage of personnel to service them.
51. He concluded by stating that at the end of July 2004 there were 60,000 persons
in 17 peacekeeping operations and that it was a challenge “to have to repair a boat
while it was sailing”. For the success of peacekeeping operations, there must be
commitment by all the parties involved in the conflict and, in particular, by the
international community beginning with the Security Council. The key elements of
each operation depended in turn on political, economic and military factors.
Statements by delegations
52.

The statements focused on the following issues:
• Better coordination was needed between countries and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, not with a view to supervising what the Department

12

S/2004/1040

was doing but to more effectively address the challenges that were common
and which must be faced together.
• The sudden increase in peacekeeping missions had required the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to take measures that were effective but we must ask
ourselves how that surge in demand could be more effectively met.
• Peacekeeping operations must create the spaces and conditions for the
development of political processes that would restore normalcy to the country.
• The resources that were needed for each peacekeeping operation should be
determined so that better use could be made of existing capacities.
• It was necessary to establish a method to evaluate the most urgent needs.
• The real need for continuing with peacekeeping operations on the same scale
as when they began should be determined and ways of reducing them should
be sought when they had achieved objectives, thus permitting priorities to be
established.
• Greater emphasis should be placed on continuing dialogue with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and more countries should be
included in the meetings of the Working Group. On that question, there were
differences of opinion and the criterion that should be used was to view each
meeting on a case-by-case basis.
• Interest was expressed in focusing the meetings of the Working Group on more
practical issues.
• It should be determined how countries that provided more troops could receive
requests on a more timely basis.

III. Final observations
53. At the meetings held by the Working Group over the course of 2004, it was
pointed out that the great value of the Group was to create a spirit of partnership,
cooperation and confidence between the Security Council, the Secretariat and troopcontributing countries, which are the main reasons for which it was established and
in some cases it has gone beyond that. Indeed, as the present report shows, the
Working Group dealt with various issues concerning the relationship between troop
contributors and peacekeeping operations but also focused attention on the
relationship between the Council and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
both in their mutual relations and in terms of how to deal jointly with the demands
of peacekeeping, both from the perspective of new and increasingly complex
operations and from the point of view of the management of ongoing operations.
54. In this process, the Working Group has clearly demonstrated its value as the
appropriate instrument for discharging the functions of the Security Council in the
area of peacekeeping.
55. It is my opinion that, after a tentative beginning, the Working Group has gone
beyond the functions initially foreseen for it. The Group can perfectly well assume
operational functions — and not simply functions of diagnosis and analysis as has
been the case thus far — in the relationship between Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Security Council.

13

S/2004/1040

56. To this end, it is vital for the Working Group to cease being “informal” and to
become a full-fledged subsidiary organ of the Security Council. As provided for in
the initial agreement that gave rise to the establishment of the Working Group
(S/PRST/2001/3), the meetings of the Working Group are required to take into
account the working calendar of the Council, a limitation that is not imposed on any
other subsidiary organ and which means, in practice, that the Working Group is not
free to convene its meetings as other subsidiary organs are. Because of this, it has
been necessary to suspend many meetings, such as those that were held this year,
because of the lack of services or because the services had to be provided to another
subsidiary organ. From the substantive point of view, the Working Group is also in a
position to be a forum of the Council and to have a more effective role in terms of
peacekeeping mandates. Nothing prevents the Working Group, for example, from
being the forum for discussion of the terms of the future mandate of a peacekeeping
operation or of the renewal of an existing mandate with a view to reaching broad
agreement which experts, acting as a drafting committee, could later convert into a
specific draft.
57. With these modifications, the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
could better discharge its functions and be of greater use to the Security Council.

14
