General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

136

7. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system for their assistance to Namibians and
requests them, in consultation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to give priority to the allocation
of funds for material assistance to the Namibian people;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the United Nations Council
for Namibia in implementing its programme of work;
9. Calls upon all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system-in particular the International Labour Organisation, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research-to assist the
United Nations Institute for Namibia in all possible
ways, including the provision of specialists, lecturers
and researchers;
10. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Namibian refugees;
11. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be
eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
12. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/152.

Observer status for the South West
Afrfra People's Organization

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Recognizing the crucial phase reached in the struggle
of the Namibian people and the added demands and
critical tasks imposed upon their liberation movement,
the South West Africa People's Organization,
Taking into consideration the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia99 and the recommendations contained therein,1° 0
Reaffirming the resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council concerning
the question of Namibia,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3111 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973, by which it recognized the South
West Africa People's Organization as the authentic
representative of the Namibian people,
Noting that the Organization of African Unity and
the non-aligned countries have recognized and invited
the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in their meetings in an observer capacity,
99 /bid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
100 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24),

and 273.

1. Invites the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Invites the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
3. Considers that the South West Africa People's
Organization is entitled to participate as an observer
in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under the auspices of other organs
of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps for the implementation of the present resolution and to accord all the facilities as may be required.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/153.

Nationhood Programme for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided to assume direct responsibility
for Namibia, as well as resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, by which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia to administer the Territory until its independence,
Aware of the decisive stage achieved in the struggle
of the Namibians for self-determination, freedom and
independence under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization,
Recognizing that, by assuming direct responsibility
for Namibia, the United Nations and its Member States
have also assumed the responsibility of assisting the
people of Namibia morally and materially,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as subsequent resolutions relating to the Fund,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Narnibia, 101
Welcoming the inauguration of the United Nations
Institute for Namibia at Lusaka,
Commending the steps taken by various specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within the
United Nations system to provide assistance to Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to fulfil its responsibility
towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
1. Decides to launch, in suppon of the nationhood
of Namibia, a comprehensive assistance programme
within the United Nations system, covering both the
present period of struggle for independence and the
initial years of independence of Namibia and including:
(a) The review and planning of measures for assistance to Namibians by the specialized agencies and
other organizations and bodies within the United
Nations system;
( b) The consolidation of all measures in a comprehensive and sustained plan of action;
( c) The implementation of the plan of action;
2. Calls upon the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the Administering Authority of the Territory,

vol. I, paras. 272
101 /bid., Supplement No. 24

(A/31/24).

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

to

eiaborate in consultation with the South West Africa
People's O;ganization, the guidelines and poli_cies for
such a programme, to be known as the Nat10n~ood
Programme for Namibia, and to direct and co-ordmate
the implementation of the Programme;
3. Invites all States to participate in the Nationhood Programme for Namibia by suppor!ing. measures
for assistance to Namibians and by contnbutmg to _the
United Nations Fund for Namibia and the Umted
Nations Institute for Namibia;
4. Calls upon the specialized age~cies a~d other
organizations and bodies within th_e Umt_ed Nations ~ystem to participate, in c?-?Pe~at10n with .the Um_ted
Nations Council for Namibia, m the planmng and implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
5. Requests the Secretary-General_ to provid~ the
necessary assistance to the United N1:!-t10ns Council_ for
Namibia for the effective implementat10n of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/154.

Question of Southern Rhodesia
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant c~apte!s of !he report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,102
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 103
Taking into account the report of the Ad Hoe Group
established by the Special Committee at its 1029th
meeting on 1 April 1976,104
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 Dece_mber 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full implem~ntation ?f the
Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relatmg to
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, has the primary responsibility for
putting an end to the critical situation in Southern
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) which, as repeatedly affirmed by
the Security Council, constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempt to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal regime on the basis of independence before majority rule would be in contraven102 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, II
and IV-VIII.
103 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 41st meeting, paras. 9-37.
104 /bid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev .1 ) , chap. VII, annex I.

137

tion of the inalienable rights of the people of the Territory and contrary to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Taking note of the declared position of the administering Power that there shall be no independence before
majority rule in Zimbabwe, 105
Reaffirming also its endorsement of the relevant provisions of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on Southern
Africa, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its ninth extraordinary
session, held from 7 to 10 April 1975, 106
Endorsing the relevant provisions of the Political
Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to
southern Africa, 10 7
Taking note of the convening of the conference on
Zimbabwe at Geneva,
Condemning the illegal racist minority regime for its
intensified oppression of the people of Zimbabwe, the
arbitrary imprisonment and detention of political leaders
and others, the illegal execution of freedom fighters and
the continued denial of fundamental human rights, including in particular the wanton beating, torture and
murder of innocent villagers, arbitrary criminal measures of collective punishment and measures designed to
create an apartheid State in Zimbabwe,

Commending the firm determination of the people
of Zimbabwe, under the leadership of their national
liberation movement, to achieve freedom and independence,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by all the means at their disposal the enjoyment of that
right as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in conformity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe and
that any settlement relating to the future of the Territory must be worked out with the full participation of
the people of Zimbabwe and in accordance with their
true aspirations;
3. Strongly condemns the illegal racist minority
regime for its continued brutal and repressive measures
perpetrated against the people of Zimbabwe and in
particular the wanton killings of Africans carried out by
the regime within and outside Zimbabwe;
4. Further strongly condemns the illegal racist
minority regime for its systematic acts of aggression
against neighbouring African States;
5. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in the discharge of its primary responsibility as the administering
Power, to take all effective measures to enable Zimbabwe to accede to independence in accordance with
the aspirations of the majority of the population and not
under any circumstances to accord to the illegal regime
any of the powers or attributes of sovereignty;
chap. VIII, annex, para. 44.
Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.1), chap. IX, annex, para. 99.
101 See A/31/197, annex I.
105 Ibid.,
106 Ibid.,
