United Nations

S/PV.6085

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6085th meeting
Thursday, 19 February 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2009/72)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-24239 (E)

*0924239*

S/PV.6085

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2009/72)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Cuba, the Czech
Republic, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, South
Africa, Thailand and Timor-Leste, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of TimorLeste, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste,
was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend the warmest welcome to Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
President of Timor-Leste.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Atul Khare,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste and head of Mission of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members have before them document S/2009/72,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
I wish to welcome the presence this morning of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We are very pleased
that he has made time available for this meeting. I now
have the honour of giving him the floor.
The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to attend this Council meeting and to present
my report (S/2009/72) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I am
particularly pleased that President Ramos-Horta is with
us this morning. At this time last year, we were all
anxiously following the news of his medical condition
in the wake of the tragic attacks of 11 February. His
presence today, clearly in fine health and spirits,
symbolizes the resilience of his young nation, which
responded so maturely to that terrible event.
My report on UNMIT comes at a watershed
moment for Timor-Leste. In 2007, order was
re-established; the security situation was stabilized,
peaceful elections were held and a smooth transfer of
power took place. In 2008, the country took in its stride
a small but serious challenge to its stability. It stuck to
its immediate priorities. By the end of the year,
remarkable progress had been made in addressing the
residual problems of the 2006 crisis. The petitioners
reached a settlement with the Government. The vast
majority of internally displaced persons have returned
to their communities without incident. I have the rare
pleasure of being able to say to the Council that more
progress has been achieved than had been anticipated
in my last report (S/2008/501).
We begin 2009 with a clear horizon. The country
can finally devote its undivided attention to the
essential task of building the strong and durable
foundations that are crucial for long-term stability and
prosperity. That work will require the concerted efforts
of all Timorese. I commend President Ramos-Horta for
engaging all political actors and working to forge a
unified effort on issues of important national interest.
One of the main priorities in the year ahead must
be the development of the security sector. A major step

09-24239

S/PV.6085

will be the gradual resumption of executive policing
authority by the national police. UNMIT is working
closely with the Government to plan a series of
handovers based on agreed criteria. As the Timorese
police begin that new phase of its development, United
Nations police will remain fully in place to support,
advise and intervene as necessary as a guarantor of
security.
My report to the Council includes a set of
benchmarks for measuring UNMIT’s progress in
achieving its mandate. I am keenly aware that a
number of fundamental issues will require sustained,
long-term attention well beyond the Mission’s lifespan.
In his last appearance before the Council, in 2007 as
Prime Minister, President Ramos-Horta argued that a
United Nations peacekeeping presence would be
required until at least 2012, a date that now seems less
distant than it did. Whatever the ultimate length of
UNMIT’s mandate proves to be, it is clear that bilateral
partners, with the ongoing cooperation of the United
Nations family, will have to ensure that long-term
support. I urge them to do so, not least because, in
areas such as police training and the development of
military doctrine, bilateral expertise may be more
effective than traditional United Nations means.
I am heartened to know that the mood of the
country has become very positive. Government
transfers to individuals have injected much-needed
cash into the economy. Parliament has passed the
budget, which projects considerable investment in
infrastructure for the coming year. Indeed, the
Government has designated 2009 as the year of
infrastructure, to lay the foundations for Timor-Leste’s
future. Investing in infrastructure is crucial but, as we
all know, infrastructure is not just a matter of roads,
schools and power grids. It is equally a question of
strengthening democratic governance and the rule of
law. Without accountability, not only of the
Government to its people but of the people to each
other, there is no hope for a viable democratic State.
In that regard, I am pleased to note the productive
tone and content of recent debates in Parliament,
including the active and constructive role of the
opposition, and of women in general. Prime Minister
Gusmão, for his part, has shown laudable respect for
the democratic process by personally presenting and
defending his budget in front of Parliament every day
for three full weeks.

09-24239

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Organization’s full-time presence in Timor-Leste. Our
partnership has become strong and close. President
Ramos-Horta’s presence here today exemplifies the ties
that inseparably bind the United Nations and TimorLeste. Just over a year ago, the members of the Council
and I had the pleasure of visiting that brave new
country and seeing Timor-Leste’s progress for
ourselves. With what we saw very much in mind, I
have no doubt that the Council will take this
opportunity to renew its collective commitment to
Timor-Leste. For my part, I pledge the full support of
the United Nations system in helping the Timorese
people realize their hopes for security, stability and
well-being.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General
very much for his very important statement.
I now have the honour to give the floor to
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste.
President
Ramos-Horta:
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor today; it is
always a privilege to speak before this body, and in
doing so I wish to reiterate my sincere gratitude, and
that of the people of Timor-Leste, for the steady
engagement of the United Nations in assisting us to
overcome the inevitable and predictable setbacks and
all of the natural challenges encountered in the process
of nation-building and peace-consolidation.
I am honoured and touched by the presence of the
Secretary-General, as it illustrates his strong
commitment to the well-being of the people of TimorLeste and his determined leadership in ensuring that
we succeed.
I am pleased to be here in the company of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Atul Khare, who has earned the gratitude
and respect of all of us — leaders and common people
alike — because of his intimate knowledge of TimorLeste, his integrity and his dedication. I wish also to
commend the international and national staff of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), in particular the United Nations police
(UNPOL), for their selfless dedication to our country
and to the cause of peace.
Almost exactly one year ago, on 11 February
2008, I was on that dark frontier between life and
death. At that time, doctors and nurses of the Aspen

3

S/PV.6085

Medical Centre in Dili were operating on me. Then I
was flown to the Royal Darwin Hospital, where I was
very well looked after. Almighty God decided to defer
my departure from this Earth and guided the hands of
the doctors and nurses who operated on me. Once
again, to the devoted doctors and nurses in Dili and
Darwin, my family and friends and the anonymous
thousands around the world, leaders and common
people, of all walks of life and of all ages — to all
those who devoted countless hours to praying for me,
in my own beloved country and elsewhere — I reiterate
my eternal gratitude.
I wish also to reiterate my heartfelt gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his personal interest and
concern about my well-being, as well to the members
of the Security Council for holding an emergency
meeting following the 11 February attacks on me and
the Prime Minister (see S/PV.5833).
I recall my appearance before this body on 5 May
2006 (see S/PV.5432) as my country began the descent
towards renewed social unrest. I said then that Dili was
a city on the edge and that fear was palpable. I
appealed to the Council then to take decisive action to
prevent the worst. Upon my return to Timor-Leste, I
began intense efforts to bring about dialogue and an
end to the tensions and to prevent the worst from
happening. I met with all — and I emphasize all —
East Timorese actors in my attempts to bridge the
divide, and I regularly briefed the diplomatic
community. A meeting involving all civilian and
military leaders was to be held in the last week of May
2006. However, on 23 and 25 May 2006, separate but
related violent incidents occurred, compromising my
efforts.
As the security situation deteriorated at the end of
May 2006, the East Timorese political and military
leadership decided to put aside our pride and appeal to
friends to assist us immediately. Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Portugal responded positively.
Their prompt response and the expeditious deployment
of troops with credible force and equipment can be
classified today as a remarkable success and as having
set a new precedent in peace-enforcement history.
In August 2006, the Security Council established
UNMIT, equipped with a robust police component but
without a peacekeeping force with airborne and
extraction capabilities. As Malaysian and Portuguese
formed police units integrated with the new UNPOL,

4

we negotiated with Australia, New Zealand and the
United Nations a unique trilateral arrangement that
remains in force today and has proved to be extremely
effective.
I wish to register my appreciation for the
forthcoming decision of the Council to extend
UNMIT’s mandate until February 2010, as contained in
the draft resolution that the Council will be
considering. In my view, the International Stabilization
Force that comprises contingents from Australia and
New Zealand should continue its mandate in tandem
with that of UNMIT.
I am here today amid a very different, more
positive and promising scenario. In mid-2006, our
country was sucked into the most serious challenge and
the greatest danger seen since 2002. As a result, our
vulnerable economy, which had shown signs of
recovery in 2005, contracted into negative growth. But
as the crisis eased by the end of 2006, 2007 saw some
robust recovery, with non-oil gross domestic product
estimated to have grown 8 per cent in real terms.
Today, Timor-Leste is at peace. The most recent
report on the situation in Timor-Leste by International
Crisis Group concluded that “security in Timor-Leste is
strikingly improved. Armed groups are no longer at
large. The atmosphere in the streets of Dili is far less
tense”. Incidents ranging from assault to homicide
have significantly declined since 2007; they are less
frequent than in previous years and even less frequent
than in some more established democracies. For
instance, a United Nations compilation of data
comparing incidents of assault reveals that in 2008
there were 169.1 assaults per 100,000 people in TimorLeste, while there were 796 cases recorded in two
major industrialized countries. During the same period,
there were 3.2 homicides per 100,000 people in TimorLeste and 5.6 in a major industrialized country.
Our economy is doing very well, exhibiting real
growth of more than 10 per cent at the end of 2008.
With a 2009 budget of $680 million and $200 million in
donor programmes, I believe we will be able to maintain
double-digit growth in spite of the international
financial crisis. Why and how do I make such an
optimistic prognosis for our economy in 2009? We are
an importing nation, importing cement, steel and basic
foodstuffs like rice. While our petroleum revenues will
be significantly reduced, so will our import bill as
commodity prices fall. We have strong liquidity — more

09-24239

S/PV.6085

than $4 billion — in our Petroleum Fund, which can be
drawn upon to support continued investment in strategic
sectors of the economy and thus to fuel economic
growth and relative wealth. Apart from our continued
firm commitment to investing in education and health,
the 2009 budget shows that the total amounts allocated
to agriculture and infrastructure — $34 million and
$130 million, respectively — have increased
substantially compared to previous years.
The food crisis of 2007 and 2008 was a wake-up
call for all of us. In a number of comments then, I said
that we must not always react to crises with fear and
despair but that we must rather seize them as
opportunities. In Timor-Leste, the food crisis prompted
the Government to refocus attention on the agricultural
sector, increasing investment in the provision of highyield seeds, tractors and hand tractors, enabling farmers
to learn new farming techniques and expanding food
production. As a further incentive, the Government
purchases locally produced, non-perishable produce,
such as rice, corn and beans, above international market
prices. The purchased items are redistributed to
hospitals, schools and vulnerable groups. As a result of
timely and proactive Government intervention, TimorLeste was able to avoid social unrest and instability and
the further deterioration of the livelihood of the poor.
In the 2009 budget, $205 million was allocated
for major capital development projects, including the
building of a new national electricity project to provide
reliable and cheap electricity to the whole country
within two or three years. This is a heavy-fuel-based
power plant with new transmission lines that can be
switched to gas and wind power. However, we believe
that, even if we are able to operate with gas and wind
energy, Timor-Leste will continue to need
supplemental support in the form of heavy-fuel-based
energy. There will be strict monitoring to ensure that
the project will be in full compliance with World Bank
environmental standards and the Kyoto Protocol. An
international tender will be announced shortly for an
independent consultant to oversee the implementation
of the project in all its technical aspects as well as in
terms of environmental impact.
Over the next 10 years, the Government will have
to mobilize approximately $5 billion, inter alia to build
a new international airport, estimated to cost $700
million; a new port, estimated to cost $300 million; and
a modern, first-class network of national and rural

09-24239

roads, estimated to cost between $1 billion and
$2 billion.
There are no short cuts to development and
modernization, and there are no miracles. I have told
my good friend Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão: Be
audacious, courageous, decisive and take risks, and
you will be remembered as a Lee Kwan Yew of
Singapore or a Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia —
leaders of vision and courage who have transformed
the conditions in their countries from conflict and
poverty into peace and prosperity in one generation. I
added: Or you will be remembered as a small
shopkeeper-owner if you are not courageous enough to
invest aggressively in the next few years.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2009/72), the events of 11 February 2008 have
resulted in a kind of watershed; we have turned the
corner. Let me share some facts with the Council.
With regard to internally displaced persons, the
visible calm and feeling of security in the country have
permitted the Government’s ongoing success with the
national recovery strategy. Fifty-eight of the 60 camps
that were open in 2006-2007 have now closed. There
are few camps remaining in Dili, which the Ministry of
Social Solidarity is working to have closed within the
first few months of 2009. The Ministry, with the
assistance of the United Nations, is continuing to
address the needs of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the receiving communities, as well as
monitoring the situation in receiving communities to
ensure that any problems that may arise as a result of
the relocation will be addressed in an appropriate
manner.
The Government, led by Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmão, has, in one year, managed to resolve many of
the outstanding problems inherited from the 2006
crisis. Within approximately a year and a half, the
situations related to IDPs, petitioners, pensions for the
elderly, vulnerable persons and former combatants of
the national liberation movement were resolved.
Security sector reform and the further
development of our national police and defence forces
have been my main concerns, and I have made them
priorities of my presidency. That commitment had
already been demonstrated when I took office as Prime
Minister in the midst of the 2006 crisis. Speaking then
before our national parliament, I defined my role as
that of an army chaplain and pledged to heal the

5

S/PV.6085

wounds of the country’s heart and soul and not to buy
more weapons. I made it a priority to heal the wounds
within our police and defence forces, between the two
institutions and between them and the people. I was
aware then — and remain aware — that only a healthy
relationship of trust between the two security
institutions can ensure that the 2006 crisis will not
recur. I have continued that effort as President, in
partnership with the Speaker of our national parliament
and with our Prime Minister, and I believe we have
achieved much since.
Today, we can say with a degree of confidence
that many of the divisions within the two institutions
have been resolved. That does not imply that all the
weaknesses and failings have been overcome. We still
have a long way to go in professionalizing and
modernizing the two security forces, but I believe we
can achieve our most ambitious goals by 2012.
In line with the Government’s view that “the
rebuilding of the national police is a long undertaking,
requiring
national
ownership
and
continued
international assistance”, key developments in the area
of security sector reform have focused on greater
consultation and participation. With the assistance of
UNMIT, and following the signing of the Security
Sector Review project between the United Nations and
the Government of Timor-Leste, the Government will
undertake a comprehensive review of the security
sector.
A number of activities were undertaken last year
to support the strengthening of national institutions. In
September 2008, representatives of a broad spectrum
of Timorese society, police and military personnel,
parliamentarians and Government officials met, in a
Government-initiated process to develop the national
security policy, at the Asia-Pacific Center for Security
Studies in Honolulu.
In an effort to canvass a broader range of
opinions and views, a nationwide survey is being
conducted on perceptions of security threats and of the
security sector in general. In December 2008, the
Prime Minister and I, with full support from UNMIT,
co-hosted a security sector reform and development
seminar. The seminar brought together a range of
diverse national and international actors to discuss
topics such as national security legislation and policy
and was an important step in developing a consensus
vision on what Timor-Leste would like to achieve in

6

the security sector. Key legislation, such as the national
security law, the national defence law and the internal
security law, has been drafted.
The resumption of policing responsibilities by the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) from UNMIT
has sparked a call from PNTL officers — ever
conscious of their need to be prepared for the eventual
full assumption of policing responsibilities from the
United Nations police — for greater training and
logistical support. The establishment of assessment
teams, the handover of districts and the terms of
reference for a joint technical team that will monitor
the transition process are currently being finalized.
With regard to handover in the districts, decisions
will be based on the meeting of four criteria: the ability
of the PNTL to respond appropriately to the security
environment in a given district; final certification of at
least 80 per cent of eligible PNTL officers in a given
district or unit to be handed over; the availability of
initial operational logistical requirements; and
institutional stability.
The PNTL and the Secretary of State for Security,
together with UNMIT, are finalizing the indicators that
will be used to assess the overall criteria. We are also
discussing the work of joint assessment teams that will
determine whether a district or unit has met the
criteria. The handover itself will be of vital importance
as a confidence-building exercise for officers of the
PNTL, but the Government also realizes that the
handover is only one stage in the development of a
mature, professional, disciplined and neutral police
force with due regard for human rights and the rule of
law.
I now turn to the justice sector. In 2008, a number
of key challenges faced that sector, including
insufficient capacity, issues regarding the composition
of the Court of Appeal and insufficiently robust
institutions. However, despite those challenges, there
were some significant accomplishments. The drafting
and review of important legislation for the
development of the legal framework in Timor-Leste
was completed. Draft laws regarding witness
protection, juveniles, the establishment of an anticorruption commission, domestic violence and the
criminal code are now before the Council of Ministers
for review and adoption.
Efforts have been made to enhance cooperation
between the prosecution and the police. That

09-24239

S/PV.6085

cooperation has concerned the serving of notifications,
the long-awaited transfer of prosecution files to their
respective jurisdictions in two districts — Baucau and
Oecussi — and the consideration of an overall case
management system that will, it is hoped, result in a
significant increase in the number of criminal cases
processed. A strategy has also been formulated for
further reform of the corrections service.
As regards the fight against poverty, the recent
Timor-Leste survey of living standards conducted by
the National Statistics Directorate and analysed by the
World Bank has revealed that the incidence of poverty
increased significantly between 2001 and 2006, from
36.3 per cent to 49.9 per cent. As a result of the decline
in the non-oil economy in per capita terms, real non-oil
gross domestic product (GDP) fell by 12 per cent in
that period, despite the increase in Timor-Leste’s oil
revenues.
The next survey will reveal the impact of the
Government policies currently being implemented.
However, with increased Government expenditures
since the last quarter of 2007, non-oil GDP has
increased dramatically, which will reverse the decline
in per capita terms as shown in the Timor-Leste survey
of living standards and hence should begin to reduce
poverty levels.
While poverty levels seem to have increased in
the years 2001 to 2006, I believe that Timor-Leste will
remain on target to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 if the Government and our
development partners continue to work hand in hand to
enhance support for rural development, job creation,
public health and education. Other highlights from the
2009 budget include vital social programmes to reduce
poverty via $96 million in transfers for pensions to
support veterans, the elderly and the disabled.
In conclusion, what Council members have heard
from me are the natural and inevitable challenges
facing most developing countries, and in particular
post-conflict communities. Nation-building and peaceconsolidation are lengthy processes that require the
patience and steady commitment of all. In August this
year, we will mark the tenth anniversary of the Popular
Consultation that not only brought about our freedom
but that also saw the complete devastation of our
country and the resulting staggering human toll.
In the past 10 years, with assistance from the
United Nations and our friends, we began the painful

09-24239

process of healing hearts and souls, building bridges of
reconciliation among the fractured East Timorese
communities, building infrastructure and institutions,
creating an economy and building bridges with our
neighbours. Nation-building and peacebuilding require
vision and long-term, steady commitment. That is true
for my country and is equally true for Haiti, Palestine,
Somalia, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries.
The list is a very long one. The challenges are always
overwhelming and could discourage the weak and the
impatient. Only the few who dare to dream and act on
their dreams of an ideal abode for all human beings
will see the fruit of their dreams.
On my part, I will do my best to relieve the
burden of the international community and not to
betray its trust, as it has been too patient and generous.
I will do my best not to fail our people and not to
betray their trust.
For those who are quick to make simplistic and
sweeping judgements about the perceived failures of
the United Nations, I am here to testify that we East
Timorese owe the United Nations our very existence. A
recent nationwide survey of people’s perceptions
conducted by the International Republican Institute
found the following: UNMIT has an approval rate in
Timor-Leste of 75 per cent; the Government has an
approval rate of 66 per cent. It seems that UNMIT has
performed better than our Government. The Prime
Minister did better than the rest of the Government —
without offence to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
sitting behind me — receiving a 79 per cent approval
rating. The National Police Force of Timor-Leste
received an 80 per cent approval rating. That is most
surprising in view of the fact that, in 2006-2007, the
popularity of our police force was probably zero.
This shows the achievements we all have made
and the results of the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral and of the Security Council. Our defence
force, which also had a low rating for respect following
the 2006 crisis, today has an approval rating of 78 per
cent. I will not share with the Council my disapproval
rating, because it was embarrassingly low. And for
those in the media and pseudo-academics with a
penchant for inserting clichés like “failing State” into
their sanctimonious lectures on my country and several
others, I can only say, admittedly with poorly disguised
disdain, that we are doing very well, thank you. May
God the almighty and the merciful bless us all.

7

S/PV.6085

The President: I thank President Ramos-Horta
for an inspiring statement. The Council thanks him for
his notice that the United Nations has upheld such a
high standing and is very grateful for that.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statement to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations that will take the floor with
a lengthy statement are kindly requested to circulate
the text in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me at the
outset express our gratitude for the presence of
President Ramos-Horta. We are pleased to see him in
the Council today and thank him for his impressive
and, at the same time, candid statement. We are also
particularly grateful for the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and for his comprehensive and informative
briefing on an issue on which the United Nations has
truly been able to make a difference.
Let me also say that Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered later in the
day by the representative of the Czech Republic on
behalf of the European Union.
My country is proud that we were able to make a
contribution along Timor-Leste’s way to independence.
Burg Schlaining and Krumbach Castle were the venues
of the Intra-East Timorese dialogue under the
patronage of Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 1995
and 1998, which resulted in the Burg Schlaining
Declaration. President Ramos-Horta and Bishop Belo
were amongst our esteemed guests at the time.
Looking at present developments, we welcome
the significant progress made in addressing the
consequences of the 2006 crisis, in particular the
reintegration of the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de TimorLeste petitioners into civilian life and the accelerated
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs), which
allowed for the majority of IDP camps to be closed. We
therefore also support the recommendations of Walter
Kälin, Representative of the Secretary-General on the
Human Rights for Internally Displaced Persons, on the
sustainability of returns and durable solutions, and
acknowledge the Government’s five-pillar National
Recovery Strategy as an important step in that
direction.

8

We would like to congratulate the Government of
Timor-Leste on those encouraging developments,
which have unfolded in a remarkably smooth manner
and without major violent incidents, and we thank the
United Nations and the international security forces for
their important contributions. In particular, we wish to
acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police,
working together with the national police force, in
stabilizing the security situation.
Austria welcomes progress made in preparing for
the resumption of policing responsibilities by national
structures. On that point, we are in full agreement with
the Secretary-General that a phased approach should be
pursued, based in particular on the agreed criteria set
out in his report. We are pleased to note that adherence
to human rights standards will be one of the factors in
measuring the readiness of districts and units to resume
policing functions. Sustainable success in that field
requires a broad approach that also entails the effective
strengthening of the rule of law.
Let me say that the Permanent Mission of TimorLeste has been one of the most active participants in
the work of the friends of the rule of law, here at
Headquarters in New York, and we are therefore not
surprised that, for the Government of Timor-Leste, the
rule of law is also a key priority. It is clear that we
support the Government of Timor-Leste in its reform
efforts and the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
accomplish an independent needs assessment of the
judicial sector to allow for a coordinated approach in
justice sector reform. We share the concern of UNMIT
over the high levels of sexual and gender-based
violence, which is one of the major public security
problems. We hope that the National Parliament will
soon enact the legislation necessary to ensure the
protection of and support for victims, as well as
accountability for perpetrators.
We are also encouraged to hear that allegations of
ill treatment and human rights violations during arrests
have substantially decreased following the disbanding
of the Joint Command. It is important that members of
the security forces be brought to justice for human
rights violations documented by UNMIT during states
of exception and that those responsible for criminal
acts and human rights violations during the 2006 crisis
be held accountable, as recommended by the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry. We
support the authorities in Timor-Leste in their efforts to

09-24239

S/PV.6085

build strong institutions to fight impunity for grave
human rights violations.
Finally, in order to achieve long-term stability,
review and reform of the security sector remain of
utmost importance. In this context, let me place
particular emphasis on the need for a clear definition of
the army’s role in peacetime, the clarification of the
relationship between the army and the police, as well
as internal accountability mechanisms and civil
oversight.
We welcome the fact that UNMIT is already
integrating peacebuilding aspects and thus helping to
bridge a potential gap between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding as the country moves forward. In order
to gradually strengthen a peacebuilding approach to
resolving the remaining issues, we would encourage
Timor-Leste to consider starting cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Fund in the near future.
In closing, Austria wishes to acknowledge the
important role that UNMIT continues to play and to
express support for the extension of its mandate for
another 12 months. We thank UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste for the elaboration of the
medium-term strategy. In our view, the achievements
that have been made during these last years of close
cooperation between UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste represent a success story, and lessons
should drawn from them and applied in other
comparable places.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): We deeply appreciate His
Excellency President José Ramos-Horta’s personal
participation in and contribution to today’s debate. I
thank him for his update on the situation in TimorLeste. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his views on the situation in Timor-Leste as well.
Croatia aligns itself with the European Union
statement to be delivered later in this open debate by
the Czech presidency of the Union.
The United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) is playing a vital role in restoring and
maintaining stability, as well as in the crucial areas of
democratic governance, socio-economic development,
rule of law and security sector reform in Timor-Leste.
We also recognize the significant contribution the
international security forces made in 2008 towards
maintaining stability in the area.

09-24239

We are encouraged by the Secretariat’s
assessment of the political and security situation in
Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis and the return to
normalcy following the events of 11 February 2008.
While this progress confirms that a positive momentum
has been established, its fragility should not be
underestimated. Although Croatia was relieved to see
that there were no further significant security incidents
in 2008, the assassination attempts last year still serve
as a stark reminder of the importance of addressing the
unresolved root causes of the 2006 crisis and the
multifaceted challenges still facing Timor-Leste. These
challenges include strengthening political dialogue and
reconciliation, consolidating peace, democracy and the
rule of law, and achieving durable social and economic
development.
On the issue of political dialogue, UNMIT has
proved to be a valuable conduit for fostering a more
inclusive and participatory consultative process at all
levels of society in order to address critical political
and security-related issues facing the country. We
welcome the ongoing good office efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Khare to
promote an enhanced dialogue between the main
stakeholders, including through the expanded Highlevel Coordination Committee and the Trilateral
Coordination Forum. We also commend President
Ramos-Horta for his role in creating opportunities to
reinforce these and other consultative approaches with
the opposition on questions of national interest. These
practices can only help to build much-needed trust
among the political leaders and allow the opposition a
constructive role as set out in the political party accord
signed on 25 May 2007.
The upcoming local elections in 2009 will serve
as another important benchmark in the country’s
progress towards a culture of political dialogue and
democratic governance. We hope that the Timorese will
continue to take full advantage of the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNMIT’s expertise in order to further build on the
positive momentum achieved to date.
The ongoing review and reform of the security
sector is of paramount concern. Fully cognizant of the
long-term commitment that this comprehensive process
entails, we appreciate the central role that UNMIT is
playing to further strengthen institutional capacities,
policies and processes. To ensure that the security
sector will act in a professional, impartial manner and

9

S/PV.6085

with due respect for human rights, a clear distinction of
roles between the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de TimorLeste (F-FDTL) security force and the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is needed, coupled with
a strong legal framework and shored up by civil
oversight, the rule of law, transparency and
accountability mechanisms for both security institutions.
Fully developed and effective national capacities
are essential for the consolidation of future
peacebuilding efforts in Timor-Leste. The long-term
consolidation of peace in Timor-Leste cannot take
place in the absence of a viable environment for a
credible and functioning judiciary and penal system in
which the rule of law prevails, impunity is fully
overcome and perpetrators of the serious criminal
offences committed in 1999 and 2006 are brought to
justice. Timorese recognition of the need for justice
and commitment to implementing the recommendations
of the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry is a
very encouraging sign.
We warmly welcome the resolve of the
Government to address two major residual consequences
of the 2006 crisis, namely, the issues of the F-FDTL
petitioners and of the internally displaced persons. The
onus now lies with the Government to ensure the
sustainability of returns by providing a secure and
stable environment and by establishing legal, social
and economic frameworks that will allow for their
reconciliation and reintegration into society.
Perhaps more focus could now be given to
peacebuilding efforts aimed at social inclusion and
cohesion for all Timorese people through their
employment and empowerment in an inclusive and
sustainable economy. These efforts could produce vital
opportunities for the Timorese people to support
themselves and develop more productive livelihoods
given the serious social and economic challenges the
country faces in trying to alleviate poverty and meet
the Millennium Development Goals.
Finally, Croatia supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the UNMIT mandate for a
further 12 months at the current level. We believe that
the Mission’s presence is necessary to enable the
Timorese leadership to effectively address the outstanding
challenges to the peace consolidation process, ensuring
a solid foundation upon which a Timorese-led
peacebuilding process can be built in the future.

10

Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like first to welcome the presence here of
President Ramos-Horta, Nobel Peace Prize laureate. It
is an honour for us to welcome him here this morning
and to express our admiration for him. Together with
Prime Minister Gusmão, he has for decades been the
incarnation of the hopes and aspirations of an entire
people to independence, and for several years now, the
capacity of that same people to rally to build a peaceful
and democratic future.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste. His
presence attests to the particular importance that the
United Nations attaches to that country, which it has
closely and most successfully accompanied in its
emergence on the international scene for some 10
years. Here, we must also hail the particularly effective
work conducted in the field by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team.
The Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic make a statement on behalf of the European
Union with which France fully associates itself. For my
part, I would like to make a few very brief observations.
A year ago, we met here in the tragic context of
the attacks on the Head of State and the Prime
Minister, designed to destabilize the country. In
contrast to what happened in the spring of 2006, these
events did not endanger the recovery efforts. Progress
that we could barely have hoped for a year ago has in
fact been accomplished, in particular on the economic
level and in security sector reform, as broadly outlined
in President Ramos-Horta’s statement. The unity of the
people of Timor-Leste, attested to by the remarkable
figures cited, their solidarity with the Government and
its high regard for the international cooperation are
particularly remarkable because Timor-Leste owes its
success above to the Timorese people and officials
themselves.
However, they would not have been possible
without the commitment of the international
community. Once again, I pay tribute to the vigorous
activities of Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and welcome
the very positive role played by the neighbouring
countries, in particular Indonesia, Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Portugal, among others that the
President referred to, whose support to the Timorese
authorities helped to preserve stability in the country.

09-24239

S/PV.6085

France, for its part, will continue to support the
efforts of Timor-Leste and the international community
for the development and stability of the country. In
particular, we are participating, in coordination with
the United Nations, in the training of the Timorese civil
guard, which, as President Ramos-Horta said, is a high
priority for the Government.
I recall once again the importance of judicial
reform and the fight against impunity for past crimes,
which are prerequisites of lasting reconciliation. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the activities of
UNMIT in supporting Timor-Leste’s ProsecutorGeneral, which are fully within the mandate entrusted
to it by the Security Council.
Consolidating the progress achieved over the past
few months will take time. The reassuring presence of
UNMIT and of international security forces will be
crucial to stability during that period of reconciliation.
Therefore, France supports renewing the Mission’s
mandate for a period of 12 months. But that should be
part of a medium-term peacebuilding strategy with the
assistance of the United Nations, to ensure the gradual
assumption of ownership by the Timorese people of the
tasks undertaken today by the United Nations
operation.
Thus, we can realize the wish of the Security
Council to develop better-targeted, and thus more
effective, operations. Once again, Timor-Leste can be a
laboratory of ideas and, as President Ramos-Horta
himself underscored, can prove that the United Nations
also knows how to excel.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
President Ramos-Horta at this debate of the Security
Council. We thank him for his important speech and
also the Secretary-General for his very comprehensive
report on the situation in Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to note that, following the attacks
of February 2008, under the leadership of President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmão calm
quickly returned to the country. The settlement of the
issues of the petitioners and the internally displaced
persons resulted in political dialogue among the
different factions of the country further intensified.
The history of the past two years in Timor-Leste
has shown that only full cooperation among the various
political forces, and in particular between the

09-24239

Government and Frente Revolucionária do East Timor
Independente, has made it possible to effectively
resolve the security issue. We hail the efforts of
President Ramos-Horta for national reconciliation. We
call on all the parties in Timor-Leste to take into
consideration the stability of the country and the
interests of the people, take advantage of the present
situation, which is conducive to peace and
development, avoid futile controversy and focus on the
process of peace and the reconstruction of the country.
Achieving peace and lasting stability in TimorLeste requires significant efforts to further develop the
economy and improve living conditions in the country.
In the existing circumstances, we support the
Government’s action in giving priority to developing
infrastructure, rural development and human resource
capacity-development, in particular for young people,
with a view to eliminating factors for instability from
the outset.
The international community should also
continue to do its utmost to step up the peace process
in Timor-Leste. We hope that the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, signed last year
between the Government and the United Nations, will
be effectively put into practice. As part of its
peacekeeping tasks, UNMIT should also assist the
Government of Timor-Leste in strengthening its
capacity for independent governance.
From the very beginning, the history of
independence and development in Timor-Leste has
been closed linked to the United Nations so as to
ensure that Timor-Leste is on the path to success. The
United Nations therefore bears a clear responsibility.
We support the extension of UNMIT’s mandate. In
continuing its peacekeeping operations, the police
component of UNMIT must guarantee public security
and redouble efforts to help the Timor-Leste police in
strengthening its law enforcement capacity. In the
future, United Nations police should give priority to
training and transferring experience to the Timor-Leste
police. After a comprehensive review of the division of
resources and work of the United Nations, the staffing
of UNMIT needs restructuring.
China and Timor-Leste are both members of the
great family of nations of a peaceful Asia. We attach
great importance to the development of the situation in
Timor-Leste. We hope that Timor-Leste will achieve
development beneficial to the people and their

11

S/PV.6085

happiness as quickly as possible. In so far as possible,
China will continue to provide assistance to TimorLeste.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate of the Council on TimorLeste. I welcome President José Ramos Horta of
Timor-Leste to the Council and thank him for his very
important statement. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and for his report
(S/2009/72), which covers all key aspects of the
situation in Timor-Leste over the past six months.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
My delegation concurs with the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that the reporting period marked
an important stage in Timor-Leste’s return to normalcy
following the events of 11 February 2008, and
congratulates the people and Government of TimorLeste on their success in maintaining national security
and stability and in keeping the peace process on track
amid numerous difficulties. While taking note of the
increased poverty as a long-term challenge, demanding
even stronger determination and more effective
combined synergy, we highly appreciate the efforts
made by the Government of Timor-Leste to address
post-conflict issues, particularly those related to the
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the
closure of 54 out of 63 IDP camps in Dili and Bacau;
to strengthen national reconciliation by creating
opportunities for all stakeholders to contribute to
solving issues of national interest; and to work in close
consultation with the United Nations, local partners
and the public to enhance its capacities and implement
socio-economic development programmes.
We commend the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the activities
conducted within its mandate in helping to preserve
peace, sustain stability and promote development in the
country, especially those activities aimed at enhancing
Timor-Leste’s institutional capacities by training staff,
increasing citizen participation, and strengthening
parliamentary oversight functions and security sector
reform, as requested by the Government of TimorLeste.
We are encouraged by the broad agreement that
the Government and UNMIT have reached on the
assumption, from this year, by the National Police of

12

Timor-Leste (PNTL) of policing responsibilities in line
with the Policing Arrangement. We share the
expectation that, with support from UNMIT, the PNTL
will be able, step by step, to take over its security
responsibilities.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
medium-term strategy and benchmarks, which
incorporate national priorities and other planning
exercises such as the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, to help measure and track
progress in key areas, particularly improvement in
quality of life and employment opportunities for youth
in rural areas, thereby addressing the country’s
underlying challenges.
In view of the need for the long-term stability of
Timor-Leste, we support the Secretary-General’s
request to extend UNMIT’s mandate for another 12
months at its current composition and strength. We
encourage UNMIT to make full use of its mandate to
continue working closely with the Government of
Timor-Leste and with other United Nations entities,
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
UNESCO, UNICEF, the World Food Programme and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to effectively implement security and
development programmes in Timor-Leste.
Now that the peace and development process is in
the hands of the people of Timor-Leste, the country’s
long-term security and stability depend on the
determination and the efforts of the Government and
all sectors of the population to move the current
process forward. We call upon all parties concerned in
Timor-Leste to actively participate in the ongoing
dialogue and to contribute to meeting the country’s
challenges, first and foremost those relating to ensuring
the success of the local elections to be held this year.
Viet Nam has been and will remain by the side of
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste on their
path towards lasting peace and sustainable
development. We are prepared to share post-conflict
development experiences with Timor-Leste and to
enhance bilateral cooperation in fields where Viet Nam
has comparative advantages.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene
this open Security Council debate to consider the work
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT). There is no doubt that the progress

09-24239

S/PV.6085

made in Timor-Leste constitutes a positive example
that serves to encourage the Security Council and the
entire Organization in their efforts.
My delegation is pleased to welcome President
José Ramos-Horta and to congratulate him on the
important strides made in his country towards building
a democratic system, and on having ensured security
and institutional capacity following the February 2008
attacks against him and Prime Minister Gusmão.
We also welcome the support provided by
neighbouring States and the international community
as a whole.
Further, we welcome the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, and we
thank them for the report before the Council in
document S/2009/72, which offers a clear overview of
the work of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and of the challenges and priorities that
still lie ahead.
While the Government of Timor-Leste has made
progress in strengthening post-conflict stability,
UNMIT is playing a crucial role in maintaining
security, fostering development and strengthening
institutions, and it must continue to provide support to
the country in its endeavours in those areas. Here, we
note with interest the Secretary-General’s comments in
his report with respect to the country’s urgent needs,
such as security sector reform, strengthening the justice
system, respect for human rights and improved
machinery for transparency and accountability in the
government sector.
That is why we support UNMIT’s efforts to
address outstanding tasks such as security sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law, ensuring
economic and social development, promoting a culture
of democratic governance and bringing about the
successful return and resettlement of internally
displaced persons.
Pending issues requiring renewed efforts include
the training of police officers, lawyers and judges, and
the establishment of legal mechanisms to resolve civil
disputes, including those related to property rights,
with a view to strengthening the rule of law and
making the system more efficient. That is why Mexico
welcomes the current process of transferring command
to enable the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste to
assume responsibility for police work that until now

09-24239

has been undertaken by UNMIT. We also welcome the
signing of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework
for
2009-2013
by
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste and the Prime Minister, in order to promote
democratization and social cohesion, poverty reduction
and basic social services. We hope that the programme
will make it possible to tackle the major challenge
posed by unemployment and to fight poverty in TimorLeste.
My delegation is concerned about the trafficking
in persons for purposes of sexual exploitation, forced
labour and agricultural work. While we acknowledge
the progress the Government has made in establishing
offices for the protection of minors, we call upon it to
ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children,
supplementing
the
United
Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
We also urge the Government to cooperate closely with
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry in
order to address the continuing impunity for crimes
committed during the 2006 crisis, in conformity with
resolution 1802 (2008).
We also welcome efforts made to facilitate the
return of the country’s remaining internally displaced
persons, and we express our hope that the Government
will put in place the mechanisms necessary to ensure
that those persons are socially and economically
integrated into their communities in an atmosphere of
calm and reconciliation.
Mexico hails the level of coordination achieved
between the Government of Timor-Leste and the
various United Nations bodies and agencies, in
particular the joint activities of the United Nations
Development Programme and UNMIT and the
establishment of a support team to strengthen the
institutional capacity of the National Electoral
Commission with a view to the municipal and mayoral
elections to be held this year.
Mexico’s Federal Electoral Institute will work
with the Timor-Leste authorities in that electoral
process through a capacity-building programme in the
areas of training for municipal officers, electoral
training, electoral information campaigns for civil
society and the media, and the voter registry.
Finally, I reaffirm my country’s commitment to
maintaining security, strengthening institutions and

13

S/PV.6085

protecting human rights in Timor-Leste, as has been
the case from the outset of the process of selfdetermination and independence.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I join previous speakers in welcoming President
José Ramos-Horta and in thanking him for his personal
participation in our debate today with a detailed and
candid presentation on the situation in his country. I
wish also to thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2008/72) and
his valuable remarks.
My country welcomes the fact that the situation
in Timor-Leste — in particular the security situation —
has stabilized since the incidents of February 2008. We
commend the progress made in addressing the two
residual consequences of the 2006 crisis — the
petitioners and the internally displaced persons. We
hope that these efforts will continue with a view to
achieving lasting peace.
We also welcome the agreement between the
Government of Timor-Leste and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) on the
resumption of policing responsibilities by the National
Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) in mid-2009, in
accordance with the criteria agreed by the two parties
in 2008. This development will lay the foundation for
the long-term development of the PNTL. In that
connection, we share the views expressed by the
Secretary-General on the need to agree on a detailed
and binding document defining the specific roles of
UNMIT police and the depth of the UNMIT-national
police engagement in this next phase, which must be
agreed and in place prior to the start of the handover
process. UNMIT should also continue its monitoring
and advisory role. In that regard, we welcome the
Government’s agreement to a medium-term strategy
and terms of reference and support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to maintain the current size of the
police mission.
Despite the achievements, we share the
Secretary-General’s opinion that “inflammatory
rhetoric between some leaders has a negative impact on
all of society, hardening positions and increasing
tensions between followers” (S/2009/72, para. 8). We
therefore call on all parties to pursue constructive
political dialogue in the interests of their country. In
that connection, we welcome the memorandum of
understanding signed by the Office of the President on

14

19 November to achieve consensus on issues of
national importance and priority. We also commend the
efforts of President Ramos-Horta and his perseverance
in maintaining good relations with all local actors.
It is important to continue supporting and
improving the institutions of Timor-Leste, building
their capacities to assume their full responsibilities for
socio-economic and security conditions, respect for the
rule of law, human rights and the fight against
impunity, and to pursue a comprehensive approach to
identifying the external and internal responsibilities
and roles of the national police and the armed forces.
That will help to strengthen legal frameworks and
civilian oversight through constructive political
dialogue and respect for State institutions.
In conclusion, we support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report, particularly
those in response to the request of the Timorese
Government for logistical support and assistance for
the local elections to be held this year, which we hope
will be crowned by success. We also support the efforts
of Special Representative Atul Khare and the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of UNMIT be extended to February 2010.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join other speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his statement to the
Council this morning. I also wish to welcome to the
Council the President of Timor-Leste and thank him for
his comprehensive address.
The comments of the Secretary-General as well
as those of President Ramos-Horta point to two
important facts: the fact that steady progress is being
made in Timor-Leste but that a lot more remains to be
done, and the fact that the unwavering support of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, is still necessary. While we have to do more,
we have to consolidate the success achieved so far.
We are pleased to note that progress has been
made in the most critical aspects that will speed up
self-governance and administration in Timor-Leste,
especially the continued stabilization of the security
situation. There is no doubt that the completion of
security sector reform will be an important springboard
for the long-term stability and socio-economic
development of Timor-Leste.
We particularly welcome the success achieved in
the area of national dialogue and reconciliation. It is

09-24239

S/PV.6085

encouraging to note that the issue of internal
displacement has been addressed with the priority it
deserves, leading to the accelerated return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) to their homes, and without
incidents affecting their reintegration. We are happy to
note that the remaining IDP camps will be closed soon.
Uganda, as a country in the process of resettling IDPs
and reconstructing the northern part of the country
after the brutal insurgency of the Lord’s Resistance
Army, attaches great importance to the issue of
resettling IDPs so that they can lead normal and
productive lives.
Uganda appreciates the personal interest in and
commitment of President Ramos-Horta to establishing
a framework for dialogue. The signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the Office of
the President and the Centre for Humanitarian
Dialogue, with a view to establishing a formal dialogue
process for achieving consensus on important national
matters, is an important cornerstone of the future
stability of the country.
We believe that real stability in the country will
not be realized until there is meaningful progress in the
law and order sector, with the Government and people
of Timor-Leste assuming full law enforcement
responsibilities. In this regard, every effort should be
made to speed up the capacity development and
empowerment of the Timorese police, as well as its
institutional capacity to undertake this responsibility.
We note that benchmarks have been agreed upon for
the gradual transfer of policing activities to the
Timorese National Police. We hope that, with
continued support from the international community,
these benchmarks will be achieved in timely manner.
The completion of the development of the
medium-term strategy and its benchmarks is a very
welcome development. The execution of the strategy
will require the commitment of all parties involved,
including the international community. We welcome
the active participation of Timorese authorities in its
development, and trust that it will receive the support
of all the parties and people of Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, Uganda is convinced that the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend
UNMIT’s mandate for a further 12 months, at the
current composition and strength, is a reasonable one.
Uganda is ready to support it.

09-24239

Ms. Rice (United States of America): I am
particularly pleased that we are joined today by
President José Ramos-Horta. We very much welcome
his very thoughtful and comprehensive statement to the
Council. We also appreciate the Secretary-General’s
presence and his comprehensive statement.
We are very heartened to see the progress that has
been made over the past year, in particular in the wake
of the bloodshed of 2006 and last year’s attempts on
the lives of both President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmão. The people of Timor-Leste and their
leaders have shown great courage as they strive to
bring peace and stability to their country. We also
commend
the
Secretary-General,
his
Special
Representative Mr. Atul Khare and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the
key role they have played in assisting Timor-Leste in
that process. We concur wholeheartedly with the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation
to
extend
UNMIT’s mandate for one year at its current
composition and strength. We will look to UNMIT to
continue to play a central role in Timor-Leste, in
particular as the national police prepares to resume
policing responsibility and as the justice sector builds
its capacity.
The United States believes that development and
security go hand-in-hand and that one cannot move
forward without the other. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/72) notes a rise in poverty in the
country. Our concern for the most vulnerable in TimorLeste — the poor and the displaced — is also indeed
growing. We commend the Government of Timor-Leste
for returning nearly all displaced persons to their
homes and for resolving the petitioner issue. For
lasting stability, however, Timor-Leste will need to
continue its development efforts, in particular in rural
areas, and work to lower unemployment rates.
Timor-Leste cannot stand on its own without a
fully functioning security sector. We very much
appreciate UNMIT’s careful planning process to enable
the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) to
gradually resume policing responsibility. Throughout
that process, Timorese officers will require continued
training in order to meet the security challenges in their
country. UNMIT must be diligent about delineating
responsibility between the PNTL and UNMIT police.
The leadership in Timor-Leste, in concert with the
international community, should work to clarify the
roles and responsibilities of the nation’s military in

15

S/PV.6085

relation to the police. Civilian oversight of both the
police and the military should be strengthened.
Future progress in Timor-Leste will require a
responsive and independent justice sector. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to promote a coordinated approach to
justice sector reform, and stress the critical need to
reduce the backlog of cases and to establish a
comprehensive legal system to hold criminals
responsible.
Finally, we encourage the international
community to help the Government of Timor-Leste to
hold the local elections that are planned for this year.
We hope that UNMIT, acting under the terms of its
mandate to enhance democratic rule and advance
political dialogue, will also work to ensure that the
vote goes smoothly.
The achievements made in Timor-Leste give its
people a great deal to be proud of. We salute the
determination shown by President Ramos-Horta, Prime
Minister Gusmão and their Government. We also again
extend our thanks to Special Representative Khare, the
dedicated UNMIT staff who work alongside him and
the United Nations country team. We deeply appreciate
the labours and sacrifices of the bilateral and
multilateral partners in Timor-Leste and the diligent
efforts of the international security forces working
there to help maintain law and stability. The people of
Timor-Leste still have much to do, but they must know
that they do not stand alone.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): My delegation would like to join others in
welcoming the presence at this debate of President José
Ramos-Horta. I would like in particular to thank him
for his important and encouraging statement. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his decision to
personally introduce his report (S/2009/72) on the
situation in Timor-Leste.
My delegation would first like to welcome the
calm that prevails today in Timor-Leste, especially
following the tragic events of February 2008. Although
the situation can still be considered fragile, it is
reassuring to note that it is the result of both a
courageous policy and the resolute commitment of the
country’s officials to ensuring full respect for the
Constitution and the rule of law. The prevailing
situation is also the outcome of an inclusive and
participatory approach to the management of public

16

affairs that emphasizes consensus in the search for
lasting solutions to national problems such as security
sector reform, strengthening governance and the rule of
law, and economic development. We hope that the
environment of relative stability will be utilized to
strengthen mechanisms for consultation and to further
promote national dialogue and reconciliation, in line
with the efforts already made to that end by President
Ramos-Horta and the Government with the help of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and United Nations agencies.
That will require the full support of the entire
population, and in particular that of all of TimorLeste’s political actors. The latter in particular have
today a historic responsibility to exercise, and it is for
that reason that we urge them to demonstrate
moderation and the highest level of restraint in order to
avoid endangering the still precarious stability. That
will be especially important in this year of local
elections.
Unfortunately, the young country of Timor-Leste
still has to face all sorts of challenges, including those
associated with security. In that regard, we should
welcome and encourage every effort aimed at
strengthening security. My delegation therefore
welcomes the efforts made to reform and strengthen
security sector institutions. In that regard, we hope
that, among other things, the Government will take
advantage of UNMIT’s expressed readiness to provide
advice and operational support, as the obstacles to be
overcome in that regard are still numerous and real.
Throughout the country’s history, the law and the
administration of justice have been of crucial
importance in ensuring social justice, the public’s trust
and the further entrenchment of democracy and the rule
of law. We welcome the significant progress made on
social matters, especially as regards the issue of the
petitioners and displaced persons. That progress is a
reflection of the desire of both the Timorese people as
a whole and their officials to quickly turn the page on a
painful chapter in their history. It is therefore important
that, above and beyond the difficulties and incidents
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General, we
support the genuine efforts being made to combat
impunity as well as every initiative aimed at
strengthening the capacities of the relevant national
institutions.

09-24239

S/PV.6085

On the socio-economic front, it is heartening to
note that, with the support of its partners, the
Government of Timor-Leste has understood the full
scope of the challenges and difficulties it faces and that
it has already put in place the necessary clear policies
to overcome, or at least lessen, them. In that regard, its
decision to declare 2009 as the year of infrastructure,
rural development and human resource capacitydevelopment is an important one.
Unfortunately, the impact on the levels of poverty
is still insufficient. We nevertheless hope that efforts
under way will help to reverse that trend. In the
knowledge that poverty and the problems associated
with it are among the underlying causes of conflict, we
hope that the international community will be able to
provide the necessary assistance to the country, in
particular by financing the 2009-2013 United Nations
Development Assistance Framework and the five-pillar
National Recovery Strategy aimed at assisting
internally displaced persons.
In this regard, we welcome the medium-term
strategy drawn up by the United Nations, with the full
support of the Government. The strategy will be an
important tool not only for consolidating the
achievements made in a number of specific areas, but
also and above all for revitalizing and devising
improved development policies, in the ultimate aim of
laying the foundations of a stable, democratic and
prosperous Timor-Leste, as clearly noted by the
Secretary-General.
In conclusion, I pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul
Khare, and to UNMIT for their efforts in Timor-Leste.
Despite the progress that has been achieved in a
number of areas, their work is far from over. That is
why, in accordance with the wishes of the Timorese
authorities, the United Nations and the international
community in general must maintain an effective
presence in and significant support for the country. In
this regard, Burkina Faso supports the recommended
extension of the UNMIT mandate by 12 months.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his report contained in document
S/2009/72 and for his informative briefing on
developments in the situation in Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to welcome to the Security
Council the President of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Ramos-

09-24239

Horta. The tragic events of 11 February 2008 were a
source of profound concern for us, and we express our
admiration for the steadfast courage shown by the
President. We listened carefully to his remarks
concerning the success that has been achieved in his
country and the complex problems being resolved by
the Government and people of Timor-Leste.
It is indeed gratifying that Timor-Leste has
achieved significant progress in settling the
consequences of the 2006 crisis. The petitioners are
returning to peace-time life and internally displaced
persons to their homes. The time has come for this
young, independent country to focus on other highpriority objectives, including strengthening State
institutions and security structures, establishing
legality and the rule of law, developing the judicial
system, making provisions for social and economic
development, eliminating poverty and generating
employment for the population. These goals can be
achieved only through the concerted efforts and
cooperation of all the political forces of the country
and civil society. In that context, the holding of local
elections, planned for this year, is of great importance.
The strengthening of the national security forces
is of the highest priority for the restoration of stability
in the country and an important indicator of the selfsufficiency of the State. An important function being
carried out by UNMIT is the provision of assistance to
Timor-Leste in training a strong and professional
national police force that will be able gradually to take
over exclusive responsibility for maintaining the rule
of law.
In view of Dili’s continuing need for the
assistance of the international community, we support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the
United Nations Integrated Mission mandate for 12
months. Russia expresses its solidarity with the people
and Government of Timor-Leste in their efforts to build
a stable, democratic and flourishing State.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): We very
much welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), contained in document
S/2009/72, and the presence of the Secretary-General
himself this morning.
It is a particular honour to have President RamosHorta here with us today. It is a great credit to the
Government of Timor-Leste, to UNMIT and to the

17

S/PV.6085

international security forces that Timor-Leste has
enjoyed a stable security situation since the terrible
attacks of February 2008.
Significant progress has been made over the past
year, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General
and the statement of President Ramos-Horta, but, as
the Secretary-General also notes, many challenges
remain. It is clear that the long-term security and
stability of Timor-Leste will depend in particular on
building national police and security forces that can
take over responsibility from the international force.
The challenge over the next few months will be to
define a timescale and benchmarks for the resumption
of policing responsibilities by the national police and
then to move forward with the transfer of those
responsibilities.
We welcome the medium-term strategy set out in
the Secretary-General’s report, which focuses on the
four priority areas of the UNMIT mandate. We also
welcome the acceptance of these benchmarks by the
Government of Timor-Leste. They are consistent with
one of the key principles underpinning the international
effort in Timor-Leste: that the international community
should help the people of the country stand on their
own feet. We look forward to reviewing progress
against the benchmarks, which will allow UNMIT to
begin to scale down its presence in stages as its tasks
are completed.
We look to the people and Government of TimorLeste, supported by the international community, to do
everything in their power to continue the positive
trends in terms of politics, security and sustainable
economic and social development. In particular, the
Timorese Government and opposition must develop
and implement a shared vision of what kind of country
Timor-Leste should be and the way its democratic
institutions should function. Secondly, a determined
effort must be made by Timorese State institutions,
with international support, to build capacity and deliver
reform, in particular in the security and justice sectors.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for the
Government of Timor-Leste to commission a
comprehensive needs assessment for the judicial sector.
We would welcome a firm commitment from the
Government of Timor-Leste to taking this forward with
the aim of helping to ensure accountability and justice
for all. Thirdly, we look forward with great interest to
the local elections in Timor-Leste, which will mark

18

another important
country.

democratic

milestone

for

the

The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
support for the Government and people of Timor-Leste.
We have heard a consistent message from the
representatives of Timor-Leste in this Chamber over
the past year, and again today from President RamosHorta. They want UNMIT to stay and to support their
progress towards self-sustaining independence and
economic development. We are sympathetic to that
message.
The United Kingdom supports the extension of
the UNMIT mandate by a further 12 months, in
recognition of the challenges that East Timor continues
to face. We are confident that this will continue to be a
partnership, in which UNMIT plays a supporting role
to the efforts of the Government.
We thank Special Representative Khare and his
team for the excellent work they continue to carry out.
We must also look forward to the day when their work
will be done.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I should first like to welcome
the President of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
and to thank him for his extensive and enlightening
briefing on his young nation. We are deeply honoured
by his presence today. We are also delighted to see him
fully recovered after the cowardly attack of 2008 on
democracy and stability in Timor-Leste. The Timorese
people’s reaction to this attack by further embracing
the agenda of reform and development was most
remarkable.
Today, we are pleased to see that the security
situation in Timor-Leste has substantially improved
since last February, as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2009/72.
These improvements have provided the opportunity to
focus on key issues such as security reform, the rule of
law, democratic governance and socio-economic
development. At this point, I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report and his remarks
today, and Special Representative Atul Khare for his
continuous to efforts in assisting Timor-Leste in these
endeavours.
That said, much remains to be done in order to
ensure that the achievements realized so far can be
sustained and carried forward. In this regard, the main
challenges, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s

09-24239

S/PV.6085

report, are poverty, unemployment, uncontrolled
migration, the lack of effective land and property
regimes, a weak judicial system and security
institutions still in need of development. The local
elections to be conducted this year will also be an
important test.

In conclusion, we are confident that Timor-Leste,
under the able leadership of President Ramos-Horta
and with the help of the United Nations, will continue
to make impressive strides towards peace, security and
prosperity. Turkey will continue to support the young
but vibrant Timorese nation on its promising journey.

Given the progress made so far, we are confident
that Timor-Leste will overcome those challenges and
achieve self-sufficiency. However, that will require
continued national dialogue and unity, as well as the
articulation of clear strategies and plans. Transparency
and accountability in the policy and decision-making
processes are also keys to success.

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by welcoming the presence of His
Excellency President José Ramos-Horta. My
Government recognizes his unceasing efforts to
develop and strengthen democracy in his country, as
well as his desire to promote an inclusive vision of
national life. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his message and to take advantage of the presence
of his Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, to thank
him and the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for their efforts to facilitate
dialogue among political actors, to lay the groundwork
for development and to consolidate the foundations of
democratic governance in Timor-Leste. My thanks go
also to the United Nations agencies present in TimorLeste.

In that context, we believe that the United
Nations still has a valuable role to play. There is no
doubt that the joint efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
United Nations country team are instrumental in
providing coordinated policy, political, technical and
financial support to help the people of Timor-Leste
accomplish their goals.
The two priority areas in which UNMIT is and
should continue to be most active are facilitating a
constructive political dialogue within the country and
ensuring the success of security sector reform. In that
regard, we are pleased to see a general consensus that
the gradual handover of policing responsibilities from
UNMIT to the Timorese national police should not be
bound by restrictive timetables and that the emphasis
must be placed on meeting the necessary criteria.
Indeed, that is of the utmost importance if public
security is to be maintained at this critical stage.
Likewise, we also concur with the SecretaryGeneral in his call for the definition of a meaningful
role for the Timorese army in a peacetime setting. In
that regard, we think that, if the 1,300-strong army
could be oriented and trained towards contributing to
peacekeeping operations, it might at some point be put
to good use in a number of peacekeeping missions
throughout the world.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General about
the need for a continued robust UNMIT police
presence across the country and therefore endorse his
recommendation that UNMIT’s mandate be extended
for a further period of 12 months, maintaining the
Mission’s current composition and strength.

09-24239

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/72)
presents a view of the process being experienced by the
citizens of Timor-Leste and of their efforts to achieve
their common goals and develop the institutions that
will help them to do so. But the report also describes a
number of obstacles hindering that process. Above all,
it expresses concern about the behaviour of some
political actors who have yet to fully accept the basic
principles of democracy.
The international community is waiting for all
political actors to display a mature attitude. Such
conduct is a necessary ingredient for other actions
urgently needed by Timorese society. Progress must be
made in improving understanding of democratic
governance and in preparing and adopting legal
frameworks aimed at consolidating it. In that context,
we believe that the work being done by the electoral
agencies, the political parties and the media is of
capital importance.
Also important is the progress that has been made
in improving security and strengthening the institutions
that guarantee it. The advances made with regard to the
exercise and guarantee of human rights are especially
satisfying. We are particularly encouraged by the
actions taken to reduce incidents of sexual and genderbased violence, and we call on UNMIT to continue its

19

S/PV.6085

support for the formulation of a national gender policy
and strategy. In addition, we recognize all the efforts
being made and actions being taken to build a judicial
system that supports the progress made in maintaining
security and promoting human rights.
With regard to socio-economic development in
Timor-Leste, the encouraging news about economic
progress and growth and the improvement in healthrelated aspects is somewhat overshadowed in the social
arena by the growth of poverty and unemployment. We
hope that the Government’s activities to promote
employment — which President José Ramos-Horta told
us about today — and other actions to improve access
to food staples will reverse the increase in the poverty
rate.
In addition, we are confident that the mediumterm strategy that has been adopted will guide the
country’s socio-economic, political, institutional and
cultural development. We recognize the importance of
the benchmarks that have been adopted, which will
enable the country to gauge future progress and will
enable the Council to assess the quality and the
modalities of the support that the United Nations
system will have to provide to Timor-Leste in the
future.
Finally, I welcome the optimism about this
country reflected in the Secretary-General’s report. We
hope that, with the support of UNMIT and the work of
its people under its leadership, Timor-Leste will
consolidate the foundations of peace and stability,
which will enable it to achieve sustainable
development for its inhabitants.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and Special Representative
Atul Khare for their presence in the Council today. We
very much appreciate the strong commitment of all
those people working within the United Nations to
support the nation-building effort of Timor-Leste. I
would also like to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency President José Ramos-Horta, Foreign
Minister Da Costa and the other members of the highlevel Timorese delegation.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
historic popular consultations in which the people of
Timor-Leste demonstrated their strong desire for

20

independence. Despite the lamentable turmoil that
followed, Timor-Leste has risen, first by gaining
independence and then by following the path of
consolidating peace and stability.
Japan is pleased that it has been able to associate
itself with that transformation as one of the strongest
supporters from the very outset. It hosted the first
donor conference 10 years ago and, as one of top
donors, has provided substantial assistance since then.
Contingents of the Japan Self-Defence Forces assisted
in the reconstruction of the country. We have also sent
police to help train local police officers.
I would like to reaffirm Japan’s continued
commitment to supporting efforts in Timor-Leste. So it
is a double pleasure and honour for me, during Japan’s
Council presidency, to have the opportunity to discuss
the progress and the prospects of Timor-Leste.
Since 1999, the United Nations has been the focal
point of international assistance for this young country.
The current mission, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), was established to
help the country regain stability after the crisis in 2006.
We applaud the strides that the Timorese Government
and people have made towards stability and
democracy. The country demonstrated the resilience of
its institutions by weathering the attempted
assassination of the President and the Prime Minister.
Much related to the two major concerns about
security have also been resolved: the first group of
petitioners was disbanded peacefully and a significant
number of internally displaced persons returned home.
We are grateful to those Member States participating in
the international security forces for their contributions.
We also commend the leaders of Timor-Leste for
continuing their efforts to bridge differences through
an inclusive political dialogue. Parliament plays an
important role in promoting a culture of democratic
governance. We should extend support to Timor-Leste
to ensure the success of the forthcoming local
elections, since local governance is also fundamental.
Yet we must face the situation there, which is
calm but fragile. The country is at a critical stage in its
efforts to consolidate its achievements and pave the
path to self-sufficiency and sustainable development.
The orderly resumption of police responsibilities
by the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is the
key task for UNMIT this year. A strong security

09-24239

S/PV.6085

institution is a cornerstone for the country. To build
such an institution, the transfer of responsibilities
should be based on a realistic assessment of the
operational capacity of the PNTL. We endorse the
approach of ensuring that the transfer process is bound
by strict criteria and that the authorized UNMIT police
force stays at the current level, at least for the next 12
months, so that it will be equipped for contingencies.
The Secretary-General should be given flexibility on
the level of police strength to deal with the situation on
the ground.
For the success of the peacekeeping effort, early
planning for consolidating peace over the medium term
is indispensable. We therefore welcome the helpful
strategy and benchmarks. We believe that the
Government of Timor-Leste must take ownership of
the strategy for its implementation, with the assistance
of the international community. We know that the
consolidation of peace requires painstaking, long-term
sustained efforts, as President Ramos-Horta said this
morning, and that it must proceed in an integrated
manner. Together with enhancement of the security
sector and judicial institutions, poverty reduction and
the creation of employment and economic opportunity
must be pursued most vigorously.
It is not too early, while the peacekeeping mission
carries out its mandate, to start focusing a
peacebuilding perspective on how to achieve economic
growth and how to sustain growth and development. In
particular, effective measures for rural development
and agriculture, and creating employment opportunities
for young people, are urgently needed. The population
of Timor-Leste is among the youngest in the world and
its potential is therefore great to develop human
resources. We welcome the fact that the Government
attaches high priority to education and vocational
training, as well as to infrastructure.
We congratulate the new graduates of the national
university of Timor-Leste, who graduated last month. It
is my belief that the future of any country rests with
such young and motivated students, to whom the task
of building the nation is entrusted. Japan will spare no
effort to help the young people of Timor-Leste develop
their full potential and contribute to the development of
their country.
In conclusion, Japan believes that the presence of
UNMIT is an essential stabilizing factor for TimorLeste. We therefore support the extension of the

09-24239

UNMIT mandate for another 12 months, as
recommended by the Secretary-General and as
endorsed by the leaders of the country. As the lead
country, Japan will submit a draft resolution to extend
the mandate of UNMIT. I would like to ask for
members’ continued cooperation in expressing the
Security Council’s unanimous support for the work of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste, and for the efforts
of its Government and people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your work as President of the Security Council
this month, and express our appreciation for your
decision to hold an open debate on Timor-Leste.
I am pleased to welcome His Excellency
President José Ramos-Horta, who honours us with his
presence today. It is a great joy to see him fully
recovered from the tragic attacks that he and Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão suffered last year. We also
appreciated the presence of the Secretary-General this
morning, and we sincerely thank him and his Special
Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, for the outstanding
work being carried out in Timor-Leste.
The bonds between Brazil and Timor-Leste are
strong and reflect a deep sense of friendship and
solidarity, as well as a shared heritage, as stressed by
President Lula during his latest visit to Dili, in July
2008. The fact that this visit was the first by a foreign
head of State after 11 February 2008 should not be
overlooked, as it shows our firm confidence in the
Timorese people and in their exceptional capacity to
overcome challenges. The intensity of our relations is
also attested to by the fact that earlier in the same year
President Lula had welcomed President Ramos-Horta
in Brasilia.
The close link between Brazil and Timor-Leste is
evident in our bilateral cooperation, which encompasses
several areas, such as judiciary training and legal
development, education, agriculture, health, capacitybuilding, military cooperation, the fight against hunger
and poverty, the training of diplomats and sports. The
possibility of extending such cooperation to projects in
the fields of renewable sources of energy, the
environment, culture, and budget planning is now
being considered.

21

S/PV.6085

My delegation is encouraged by the progress
made by Timor-Leste in normalizing the political and
security situation. We celebrate the lifting of the state
of exception introduced after the events of February
last year. The fact that the constitution has been upheld
since the adoption of those exceptional measures is no
small deed, especially in a young democracy. Such a
display of political and institutional maturity deserves
our full recognition and active support. The efforts
made by the President and the Prime Minister to foster
dialogue among the political parties and forces are also
key to building a culture of cooperation for the
common good.
We commend the Timorese Government for the
significant improvement made in ensuring the return of
internally displaced persons. We hope that the
remaining camps will be closed soon. We agree with
the Secretary-General that long-term success depends
on further socio-economic and security-related
measures. We also praise the Timorese Government for
successfully addressing the situation of the petitioners;
continued efforts will be needed to ensure their full
social integration. In both cases, the international
community must support Timor-Leste, as requested by
the Timorese authorities.
At the same time, we are concerned that
substantial challenges still remain. Deep poverty is not
only disturbing from a human point of view but also
far-reaching in its potential impact. The persistence of
deprivation calls for renewed efforts by the
international community to support the Timorese
Government and people. The United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2009-2013
and the Government’s decision to designate 2009 as the
year of infrastructure, rural development and capacity
development provide the necessary guidance and basis
for our common endeavours.
Regarding the key issue of security sector reform,
it is encouraging that continued efforts have led to
further progress in the registration, screening and
certification programme for the national police and that
the Government and UNMIT have reached broad
agreement on the resumption of policing responsibilities
by the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). We
understand and support the willingness of the Timorese
Government to assume such responsibilities and view
the phased approach to the transfer of functions as an
adequate means to achieve the shared goal of full

22

institutional normalization in the security area in a safe
and orderly manner.
The resumption of responsibilities by the PNTL is
a gradual process that will take time to materialize.
When it does, the Council will be able to assess its
effectiveness. While, as a rule, developments on the
ground should be reflected in the composition and
functions of any given mission, we cannot afford early
downsizing that might later prove to be unsustainable. I
am convinced that the Council is fully aware of the
need to avoid such an undesired scenario anywhere,
including in Timor-Leste.
Another important aspect to be considered with
regard to security in Timor-Leste is the function of the
military. We support efforts to address relevant matters
such as the separation of internal and external security
roles and responsibilities between the national police
and the military, the strengthening of legal frameworks
and the enhancement of civilian oversight and
accountability mechanisms.
Brazil was touched by the decision of the
Timorese parliament to establish the Sergio Vieira de
Mello Human Rights Awards for Timor-Leste. It is a
fitting tribute to Sergio Vieira de Mello and a welcome
initiative to make his legacy a continued source of
inspiration.
In concluding, I believe that we all agree on the
overall assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste. The
country is on the right track thanks to its dedicated
efforts and the cooperation of the international
community. Such partnership needs to be strengthened
in the years to come in order to consolidate gains
already made and successfully overcome the remaining
challenges. Brazil is fully committed to continued
cooperation with the Timorese Government and other
international actors to build a stable and prosperous
Timor-Leste.
The President: I call on the representative of
Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Mr. President, let
me begin by commending you for convening this
important debate on the situation in Timor-Leste and at
the same time congratulating you on your very able
stewardship of the Council during the month of
February. I wish also to join previous speakers in
welcoming President José Ramos-Horta of Timor-Leste

09-24239

S/PV.6085

to this body and thanking him for his important
statement today.
We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2009/72) and for his
important statement. Of course, we wish to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for his important
work.
We wish to associate ourselves with the statement
to be made by the representative of Thailand on behalf
of the member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
As its closest neighbour, we are following closely
the developments in Timor-Leste and are heartened to
note a number of positive developments in the country
during the Secretary-General’s reporting period. As
stated in the Secretary-General’s report, the security
situation in the country remains calm. The people and
leaders of Timor-Leste have made remarkable progress
in overcoming the most visible reminders of the 2006
crisis, including the issues of the internally displaced
persons and the so-called petitioners. The Government’s
five-pillar National Recovery Strategy for dealing with
the consequences of the crisis has proved to be
effective and fruitful.
As the resilience of Timor-Leste State institutions
has proved, in particular as exemplified in dealing with
the consequences of the incidents of 11 February 2008,
and due to the progress made in addressing the issues
related to the 2006 crisis, public confidence in these
institutions is growing and welcome.
There has been important progress in
reconciliation and democracy as well. All the political
parties continue to work constructively in Parliament.
Dialogue among the stakeholders continues to be
pursued to promote broad consensus in dealing with
the important challenges confronting the country. It is
worth noting that, as mentioned in the report, President
Ramos-Horta has made laudable efforts to create
opportunities for the opposition to make contributions
to issues of national interest. Indeed, those positive
developments reflect the progress in the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
We encourage UNMIT to help maintain this
conducive environment and to support, to the best of
its ability, the Government of Timor-Leste in making

09-24239

further progress in tackling the challenges it currently
faces. In particular, we encourage UNMIT to devote
more attention to mobilizing support among
development partners to address poverty and
unemployment in Timor-Leste. In the past, these two
issues manifestly contributed to the 2006 crisis, and
addressing them will also contribute to the long-term
stability of the country in the future.
We appreciate UNMIT’s continued efforts to
assist the Government in the promotion of security
sector reform. We are of the view that long-term
security and stability in the country will depend on the
capacity of Timor-Leste security institutions to
function in an accountable, impartial, responsible and
effective manner.
With regard to UNMIT’s mandate to assist in the
promotion of democratic governance, it is crucial that
the Mission continue to assist Timor-Leste in its
institution-building efforts and in further ensuring that
State institutions function properly. We encourage
UNMIT to support Government endeavours to increase
opportunities for the people of Timor-Leste to take on
judicial line functions. We support the Government’s
efforts to achieve early and effective Timorization of
the justice system, as described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
We note with interest the proposed medium-term
strategy developed by the Secretary-General as an
annex to his report. We believe that the strategy should
be developed on the basis of the national priorities of
Timor-Leste and place emphasis on the ownership and
leadership of the Government of Timor-Leste in their
implementation. We believe that the implementation of
the medium-term strategy should lead to the gradual
ownership by Timor-Leste of tasks currently being
performed by UNMIT.
We continue to support UNMIT in implementing
its mandate with a view to assisting the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste in achieving selfsufficiency. We recognize the need to ensure the
sustainability of the international community’s support
to Timor-Leste’s efforts on its path to security and
prosperity. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
Council renew UNMIT’s mandate for another 12
months.
As a final note, we are pleased to inform the
Council that Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to

23

S/PV.6085

enjoy an excellent level of bilateral relations. We
continue to move forward in deepening and expanding
our bilateral cooperation in various areas. We
recognize that Timor-Leste has become a much-valued
partner in the region. It is the firm commitment of
Indonesia to continue to support Timor-Leste in its
efforts to achieve a stable, prosperous and democratic
country.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Philippines.
Mr. Gatan (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines wishes to thank Japan, which holds the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February 2009, for convening this open debate on
Timor-Leste, and commends it for taking the lead on
Timor-Leste in the Council. We welcome the presence
here today of President José Ramos-Horta and thank
him for his important statement this morning. We also
thank the Secretary-General for presenting the report
on the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) (S/2009/72).
The Philippines also associates itself with the
statement that will be delivered by the representative of
Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The Philippines is encouraged by the positive
developments that have continued to take place in
Timor-Leste since the last Security Council meeting on
the subject in August 2008. The leaders and the people
of Timor-Leste should be commended for overcoming
the past crises and for persevering in their efforts to
achieve long-term peace, stability and development.
The United Nations and the international community,
particularly the donors and regional partners, must
continue to fully support Timor-Leste in staying on
course on its painful path of nation-building.
The Philippines submits that the international
community must give its priority attention to three key
areas: security, socio-economic development and
judicial reform.
The Philippines recognizes the important role that
UNMIT plays in promoting peace and stability in
Timor-Leste. The international community should
support UNMIT’s ongoing efforts to facilitate the
gradual resumption of policing responsibilities by the
National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL), as well
as other functions, such as the further training,

24

mentoring and institutional development of the PNTL,
interim law enforcement and public security, until the
PNTL is fully reconstituted. In this regard, the
Philippines supports the extension of the mandate of
UNMIT for a period of 12 months at its current
composition and strength.
The Philippines continues to stress the
importance of sustained international community
support for the socio-economic development of TimorLeste. For its part, the Philippines is pleased to inform
the Council that 99 Timorese students arrived in the
Philippines on 13 January 2009 to take up various
courses at Philippine colleges and universities. These
students represent the initial batch of Timorese
Government scholars, and more are expected to arrive
in 2009 and succeeding years. The Philippines also
wishes to inform the Council that the Philippine
Secretary of Agriculture will lead an investment
mission to Timor-Leste on 22 February 2009 to explore
areas related to food security in which the Philippines
could provide assistance.
The Philippines supports efforts on judicial
reform, especially in building capacity and
strengthening the judicial system, thereby ensuring in
the long run an independent judiciary manned by
competent judges and personnel. No one can argue that
an independent judiciary is the last bulwark of
democracy and the guardian of the rule of law. We are
pleased to note that the third post-graduate training
course for judges, prosecutors and public defenders,
organized by the Legal Training Centre supported by
the United Nations Development Programme, began on
29 July 2009. We hope that the international
community will continue to support such work to
increase Timorese ownership and to strengthen national
capacity judicial line functions.
In conclusion, we must be unceasing in our
support for Timor-Leste so that it continues to be one
of the best examples of a successful international
enterprise engineered through the combined cooperative
efforts of the United Nations, regional players and
partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Hill (Australia): We once again appreciate
the opportunity to participate in the Security Council’s
deliberations on Timor-Leste. Like others, we are
particularly pleased to see President Ramos-Horta here

09-24239

S/PV.6085

today and take the opportunity to acknowledge his
significant personal efforts to promote peace and
national reconciliation in Timor-Leste.
Australia is heartened by the Government of
Timor-Leste’s progress in addressing long-standing
security and development challenges, including
resettling internally displaced persons and negotiating
a resolution with the petitioners. The Government’s
quick and effective response to the attacks on the
Timorese leadership on 11 February 2008 has
contributed to the current stable security environment
in Timor-Leste. Improved stability has allowed the
Government of Timor-Leste to focus on much needed
socio-economic development.
Australia would also like to take the opportunity
to praise the efforts of Timor-Leste’s partners, in
particular the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), under the very able leadership
of Mr. Atul Khare. It is UNMIT’s ongoing support to
the Timor-Leste Government that provides the enabling
environment and stability to allow the Government to
move forward.
While Timor-Leste has made good progress, the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/72) makes clear
that there is no room for complacency. We agree. Much
needs to be done before its longer-term stability and
economic development can be assured. Meanwhile,
Timor-Leste will require continued strong support from
the United Nations and bilateral partners.
In Australia’s view, nowhere is that more
apparent than in the security sector. Australia
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recommendations
for a 12-month mandate extension, with no reduction
to the authorized United Nations police levels. We note
that the United Nations is working with the
Government of Timor-Leste to ensure a phased
resumption of policing responsibilities, and we
welcome the negotiation of clearly defined criteria
between Timor-Leste and UNMIT to gauge the
readiness of the national police (PNTL) to assume
responsibility. The challenges facing PNTL should not
be underestimated and will be ongoing. Until the police
force has been significantly strengthened, it will be
vital to retain an ongoing strong United Nations police
presence to underpin security. Without that, other gains
will be jeopardized.
Australia sees itself as a steadfast friend and
neighbour of Timor-Leste and will continue to be at the

09-24239

forefront of international efforts to assist it towards
long-term stability and greater prosperity. Through our
leadership of the International Stabilisation Force and
with the strong support of New Zealand, we are
pleased to have helped the Timor-Leste Government
and
UNMIT stabilize Timor-Leste’s
security
environment. Also, Australia, as a leading development
partner, will continue to take a long-term approach to
addressing the many development challenges facing
Timor-Leste, including in relation to youth
unemployment and delivery of basic Government
services.
Given the importance of security sector
strengthening, assistance to Timor-Leste’s police and
military forces will continue to be a particular focus for
Australia’s enhanced engagement. We also welcome
the work to strengthen Timor-Leste’s justice sector,
which remains fundamental to consolidating the rule of
law and preventing the re-emergence of political
violence. Australia will continue to offer assistance in
that regard.
As Timor-Leste turns its mind increasingly to
longer-term security and development challenges, the
international community will need to remain fully
engaged. Effective cooperation and coordination
between donors are crucial in ensuring that TimorLeste is well placed to address the challenges ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
First and foremost, let me extend our warm
welcome to President José Ramos-Horta of TimorLeste. The European Union highly appreciates his
courage and his dedication to securing a better future
for the people of Timor-Leste. It is a pleasure to hold
today’s debate with President Ramos-Horta present,
especially when recalling the terrible events of
11 February 2008.

25

S/PV.6085

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2009/72), the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for the tireless
work of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) on the ground, which is highly
appreciated by the international community.

that process on 27 March 2009, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General. In addition, the
European Union looks forward to receiving a document
defining the specific roles of UNMIT police and the
UNMIT-PNTL engagement, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report, which is to be submitted
before gradually handing over responsibilities to the
PNTL.

The European Union has been following the
recent developments in Timor-Leste with great interest.
We commend the Government and people of TimorLeste for their efforts to achieve long-term stability and
ensure sustainable development in all spheres of public
life in the country. Since 1999, the European Union has
provided about €327 million in development and
humanitarian assistance. We are committed to
continuing our support in crucial public sector areas.
For the period from 2008 to 2013, the European Union
is providing support of about €81 million in areas such
as institutional capacity-building, rural development,
assistance to the health sector and food security.

The European Union expresses its full support for
the role performed by UNMIT, especially the United
Nations police contingent, as well as for other relevant
actors implementing the security sector reform plan.
The European Union underlines the need to intensify
training activities for the PNTL, including in the area
of human rights, and supports the development of a
comprehensive and coherent concept for the whole
security sector, which should be elaborated in a
coordinated, inclusive and transparent manner and with
the direct involvement of all relevant governmental and
non-governmental actors. The recent establishment of
the security sector reform team in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, and the attention that the team
and the United Nations task force on security sector
reform have been paying to addressing the needs of
Timor-Leste in the area of security sector reform are
very welcome and encouraging developments. It
cannot be overemphasized that all this would not make
sense without the direct and active involvement of
Timor-Leste and without true national ownership of
security sector reform processes.

Furthermore, under the Instrument for Stability,
the European Commission is providing support to
Timor-Leste in security sector reform, the social
reintegration of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
employment generation. In those areas, the European
Union works closely with the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Organization
for Migration and the International Labour Organization.
The European Union commends recent positive
developments in the security situation in Timor-Leste
and acknowledges the significant progress achieved in
addressing the challenges of the Falintil-Forças de
Defesa de Timor-Leste petitioners and the return of
internally displaced persons. In that respect, the closure
of a large number of IDP camps in Dili and Bacau and
the process of reintegration are encouraging signs. The
European Union has taken note of them with
appreciation. At the same time, the European Union
encourages the Government of Timor-Leste to continue
its efforts and to focus on long-term solutions to those
challenges.
The active engagement of the National Police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) and of UNMIT, which have
contributed considerably to internal security, calls our
attention to the question of resumption of
responsibilities by the PNTL. In that regard, the
European Union welcomes the possibility of starting

26

Along the lines of the Secretary-General’s report,
the European Union remains concerned about the
situation of the judiciary. Further support with regard
to the backlog of judicial cases is necessary in order to
help mitigate the difficult situation. On its part, the
European Union will continue to assist Timor-Leste in
developing its justice sector and reinforcing the rule of
law. An identification mission has already been sent to
the country, with a mandate to identify specific support
to the National Parliament as a way to support political
and democratic dialogue in the country.
The European Union is also concerned about the
socio-economic situation in Timor-Leste despite
positive results as far as overall economic growth is
concerned. The Union is especially concerned about
World Bank data regarding the increase in the poverty
rate, which has reached about 50 per cent, and the high
rate of unemployment, which could potentially lead to

09-24239

S/PV.6085

renewed instability. It is therefore the European
Union’s aim to support labour-intensive work
programmes, mainly through the implementation of the
rural development programme. The European Union
also encourages Timor-Leste to make use of the
Petroleum Fund for future investment projects and to
stimulate the non-oil part of the economy by creating
new job opportunities and through basic infrastructure
development.
The European Union appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s presentation in his report the medium-term
strategy for UNMIT, with illustrative benchmarks for
the four mandated priority areas — the review and
reform of the security sector, the strengthening of the
rule of law, economic and social development and the
promotion of a culture of democratic governance
dialogue — as requested by resolution 1802 (2008).
The international community is eagerly awaiting
the Government’s revised national development plan,
which is to focus on poverty reduction as called for
under the 2008 national priorities, thereby signalling
Government ownership of the process and giving
donors a longer-term orientation, including the
possibility of alignment according to the Accra Agenda
for Action.
Bearing in mind the persisting political, security
and economic challenges at hand, the European Union
fully supports the extension of UNMIT’s mandate for
another 12 months, at the current composition and
strength, as recommended in the Secretary-General’s
report. The European Union is convinced that such an
extension will help to ensure continuity in further
stabilizing the country.
Last, but not least, the European Union will
follow with great interest the 2009 local elections in
Timor-Leste as another important milestone in the
country’s democratic processes and as a significant
indicator of the progress achieved so far in the area of
institutional
capacity-building
and
democratic
governance, which are both so crucial to ensuring
stability and good governance in the country.
In conclusion, I would like to reassure President
Ramos-Horta and the Timorese people of the European
Union’s unwavering commitment to assisting their
country in achieving further positive results in their
country’s stabilization and reconstruction and in
addressing remaining challenges.

09-24239

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Ireland.
Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): Ireland welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council during its
open debate on the situation in Timor-Leste. I am
delighted to join others in saluting the presence here of
President Ramos-Horta and welcoming the statement
he delivered earlier.
Let me immediately associate Ireland with the
statement that has just been delivered by the
Ambassador of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union (EU).
We
endorse
the
Secretary-General’s
acknowledgment in his comprehensive report
(S/2009/72) of the remarkable progress made by the
leaders and people of Timor-Leste since 2006. As a
country that has also struggled with the challenges that
face a small, newly independent nation, Ireland
recognizes
the
magnitude
of
Timor-Leste’s
accomplishments. We commend it for its many
achievements.
President Ramos-Horta’s recovery from the
attack of February 2008 and his continued leadership
have played no small part in the maintenance of peace
and stability in Timor-Leste. On behalf of my
Government, I would also like to acknowledge the role
of Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão and
opposition leader Mari Alkatiri, who have displayed
true leadership and patriotism during many challenging
times.
Ireland has actively supported the people of
Timor-Leste during their struggle and throughout the
process of transition to independence. We continue to
be actively engaged there. Following the vote for
independence in 1999, the focus of our support was on
the deployment of Irish troops, who served as members
of three successive missions: the International Force,
East Timor, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor. In addition, Ireland
participated in United Nations and EU observation
missions for the referendum in 1999 and the elections
in 2001 and 2002.
Our multi-year priority development programme
in Timor-Leste, which is managed through our mission
in Dili, has focused on efforts to promote post-conflict
reconstruction through good governance, the

27

S/PV.6085

strengthening of democracy and the justice sector,
public sector development, the promotion of human
rights and gender equality, and support for the
development of a strong civil society.
Under Ireland’s new conflict resolution initiative,
we have added a further dimension to our support with,
I am happy to say, the full agreement and
encouragement of the Government of Timor-Leste. The
purpose of that new engagement on our part is to assist
Timor-Leste in its transition from conflict to peace,
with particular focus on peacemaking, peacebuilding
and lesson-sharing. The initiative is being led by our
first roving ambassador for conflict resolution and
special envoy to Timor-Leste, Dame Nuala O’Loan. I
am delighted to acknowledge her presence among our
delegation today for this important discussion.
Ireland’s conflict resolution engagement in
Timor-Leste, in close cooperation with Irish Aid’s
development programme there, is designed to address
key issues directly related to the sources of fragility.
Initiatives taken so far include support for structured
high-level dialogue among Timor-Leste’s leaders, a
programme on peace, remembrance and reconciliation,
and advice on security sector reform.
The need to address security sector reform and
the respective roles and responsibilities of the FalintilForças de Defesa de Timor-Leste and the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) have rightly been
acknowledged, in the current report of the SecretaryGeneral and in earlier ones, as being absolutely crucial
to peace and stability. Ireland also plans to launch an
early-warning and response system in Timor-Leste,
based in civil society there.
I am pleased to report that our Special Envoy has
had many very constructive discussions with the
leaders of Timor-Leste. These discussions have
demonstrated the shared desire to avoid further
upheaval and to build on the progress made. I would
also like to note our appreciation for the advice offered
by Special Representative Atul Khare and the UNMIT
team and for their support for Dame Nuala O’Loan’s
engagement; they continue to do an outstanding job in
Timor-Leste.
My Government’s Conflict Resolution Initiative
has a specific focus on lesson-sharing, which draws
from the experiences we garnered from the Northern
Ireland peace process. The experiences and insights
brought to bear by our Special Envoy, drawn from her

28

former role as Northern Ireland’s first Police
Ombudsman during a critical transition period, are, in
our view, a particularly valuable asset with regard to
the current issues to be addressed in Timor-Leste’s own
transition to the full resumption of policing powers by
the PNTL and the eventual withdrawal of UNPOL.
We fully endorse the view of the SecretaryGeneral that this process of transition must be
undertaken with great care and great prudence,
carefully assessing the fulfilment of all the critical
benchmarks. The role of the security sector reform
experts within UNMIT — which enjoys Ireland’s direct
support — and the input of the security sector reform
unit in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will be vitally important in this process. We, of course,
welcome the Secretary-General’s latest report to the
Council (S/2009/72) and look forward to early action
by the Council in response to it.
Ireland has also launched a lesson-sharing
process between organizations working on gender
issues in Northern Ireland, Ireland as a whole, Liberia
and Timor-Leste. The cross-learning process on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, is designed to facilitate the
sharing of national experiences with a view to
encouraging best practices and is intended to act as a
catalyst for discussions on effective implementation. In
addition to a meeting of representatives from those
areas that was held in Dublin last November, an Irish
project team recently carried out missions to Monrovia
and Dili. The outcome of this process will also feed
into the development of Ireland’s own national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
In drawing to a conclusion, I should like to state
that Ireland is encouraged by the progress made by
Timor-Leste towards overcoming the obstacles and
issues that that country has faced in recent years. We
are committed to continuing our engagement in TimorLeste — with the Government, with civil society, with
the United Nations and with the European Union — in
support of the positive efforts being made by the
Timorese people to build this young State in a way that
will enable it to realize its full and manifest potential.
In this context, I join others in commending the
Security Council’s continuing attention to this urgent
and vital issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.

09-24239

S/PV.6085

Ms. Juul (Norway): The situation in Timor-Leste
has continued to improve in spite of the regrettable
attacks on the Government in 2006 and most recently
in February 2008. The United Nations plays a vital role
in supporting stability and economic development in
Timor-Leste.
Norway commends the Government of TimorLeste for its handling of the attacks in 2008. The
Government moved decisively to assert its authority
and rapidly re-established law and order. In the
aftermath of the attacks, the Government took steps to
resolve the problems of internally displaced persons
and to reintegrate the petitioners into civilian life.
Yet stability in Timor-Leste remains fragile. The
underlying challenges that contributed to the recent
crises, such as growing poverty, unstable security
institutions and a weak judicial system, remain to be
addressed. Norway supports the Secretary-General’s
assessment that, until these challenges are tackled,
there is a danger that any progress could be derailed.
Economic development in Timor-Leste will
contribute to national stability. Norway will continue to
support the Government and the United Nations in
building a democratic State and fighting poverty. We
recognize the progress made in including women and
youth in the nation-building process and urge the
Government to pay continued attention to these groups.
Attaining durable peace and stability in TimorLeste requires reform of the security forces. There is a
need for clear separation of internal and external
security responsibilities between the national police
and the military. While the process must be led by the
Timorese Government, Norway supports the continued
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to strengthen discipline and
enhance civilian control. The Government must also
ensure cooperation between the defence forces and
their Indonesian counterparts in securing their common
border.
Norway believes further efforts are needed to
solve the problem of the internally displaced persons.
The judicial sector, which continues to be weak and
overburdened, needs to be strengthened. Any political
interference in the justice system must be avoided, as it
may undermine public trust in the judiciary and
jeopardize the separation of powers, as guaranteed by
the constitution.

09-24239

Norway is concerned that parliament again has
postponed
the
long-awaited
debate
on
the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation on the Indonesian occupation.
It is our hope that parliament will set a new date for the
debate as soon as possible. Solutions to the
recommendations of both this Commission and the
Commission of Truth and Friendship must be found
within the framework of applicable law and
international human rights. A criminal justice approach
needs to be complemented with a non-formal system of
truth and reconciliation, as we have seen in other
countries. Impunity runs the risk of undermining public
trust in the rule of law.
Norway supports an extension of UNMIT’s
mandate for a period of 12 months, at the Mission’s
current composition and strength. Other peacebuilding
mechanisms, such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and Peacebuilding Fund, should be assessed for a later
stage. We pay tribute to the nations participating in the
UNMIT operation, as well as to those contributing to
the International Stabilization Force.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the situation in Timor-Leste
(S/2009/72). I also thank you, Mr. President, having
convened this open debate. We value very highly
Japan’s leadership in the Security Council and in the
Timor-Leste Core Group.
It is an honour and a pleasure to welcome
President Ramos-Horta one year after the serious
attack on his life. The President’s recovery and
resumption of responsibilities is a tribute to his
strength and determination. We also thank him for his
recent visit to New Zealand.
We congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste
and President Ramos-Horta on the significant progress
made over the past year. The United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), under the leadership
of Mr. Khare, has a critical and ongoing role to play in
Timor-Leste, helped by the International Stabilization
Force, to which New Zealand continues to contribute,
working with Australia.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, there
have indeed been many encouraging developments
over the past years: the closure of most internally

29

S/PV.6085

displaced persons camps; the resolution of the
petitioners issue; the more stable, though still fragile,
security situation; and the efforts being made to
strengthen institutions and to stimulate economic
development.
Continuing effort to strengthen democratic
governance is also a vital ingredient for going forward.
We strongly encourage the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste to continue to consolidate their
democratic institutions and to make full use of
parliament to resolve all political differences. Local
elections in 2009 are an important part of this process
and should be supported by UNMIT and other partners.
A great deal of work lies ahead for the
Government and for UNMIT. An immediate challenge
is transferring policing responsibilities to the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste. New Zealand welcomes
the planned commencement of that process and the
joint assessment currently being carried out by the
Government and UNMIT. We believe that, if
implemented properly, the mutually agreed criteria for
assessing the state of readiness of each district will
help to ensure that each area is in fact ready and able to
take over full policing responsibilities. We strongly
support the phased implementation of that process.
UNMIT will need to monitor it closely and be ready to
step in and provide additional support if necessary.
We believe that a single policing model needs to
be agreed in the coming months and that this will
enable international policing assistance to be
channelled more effectively. New Zealand is pleased
that its pilot community policing project in Becora and
Suai has received a positive response.
We acknowledge the broader efforts undertaken
in the security sector, including the recent seminar in
Dili, and we encourage the Government and UNMIT to
continue that work. We believe that clearly defining the
respective roles of the military and the police and
strengthening the civilian oversight mechanisms are
necessary for long-term stability.
Accountability issues and, especially, countering
perceptions of impunity are relevant to the
development of the justice sector. They affect its
credibility and strength. We acknowledge the serious
constraints in the justice sector and the need for
international support to accelerate the development of
national capacity. Dialogue and reconciliation efforts

30

are also relevant, and we value the essential role that
President Ramos-Horta is playing in that respect.
In conclusion, New Zealand strongly supports the
extension of UNMIT for 12 months at its current
authorized level, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral. As a regional partner and friend, we remain
committed to assisting Timor-Leste. We continue to
offer our support and encouragement to President
Ramos-Horta, to all the leaders and people of TimorLeste and to Mr. Khare and the UNMIT team.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to President
Ramos-Horta, who honours us with his presence today.
His wisdom and vision have guided his young country
through its first years of existence, and they are still
needed to stay the course. I also thank the Japanese
presidency of the Council for convening today’s open
debate, the Secretary-General for his detailed briefing
on the situation in Timor-Leste and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
leadership that he has shown in this Mission in a
challenging environment.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. I would like to add
just a few remarks drawing on the Italian national
experience.
Together with its European Union partners, Italy
has supported the national reconciliation process and
the consolidation of Timorese democracy at every
stage of its development. We have done so through
bilateral initiatives and contributions to multilateral
institutions. I should like to mention our participation
in the multinational force and, in the years following
independence, our initiatives to support the local
population and consolidate Timorese democracy. We
have focused on key sectors, such as training civil
servants, justice and support for the Parliament in Dili.
Italy remains committed to supporting TimorLeste in its quest to consolidate peace, democracy and
development. Let me therefore express our satisfaction
at the country’s progress, particularly in the area of
security and in dealing with the closure of camps for
internally displaced persons and the reintegration of
the petitioners into civilian life.

09-24239

S/PV.6085

Both the performance and the organization of the
Timor-Leste police have improved. Nevertheless, we
believe that the process of strengthening security will
take several years and that UNMIT still has an
essential role to play in that context. We therefore fully
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
UNMIT’s mandate be extended for another 12 months
and that the Mission’s current composition and strength
be maintained. Nevertheless, appropriate adjustments
to the mandate could be required in the future to
gradually reflect the increasing ownership of the
Timorese authorities and to strengthen the country’s
institutions.
We also believe that the local elections,
scheduled to take place in the second half of this year,
represent a crucial moment in the consolidation of the
country’s democratic institutions and in evaluating the
success of the international strategy. We therefore
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
UNMIT meet the Government’s request for assistance.
The
Timorese
representative
institutions,
including the Parliament, are functioning well.
Nevertheless, the performance of public administration
continues to be hampered by a lack of human and
financial resources. Through the years, the
international community has provided important
support for the empowerment and development of
those democratic institutions. For its part, my country
has contributed to the United Nations Development
Programme
(UNDP)
project
Strengthening
Parliamentary Democracy in Timor-Leste and has
renewed its support for the development of further
UNDP programmes in 2009. My country is also
including Timorese officers in specialized public
management courses and programmes.
We appreciate the efforts of the Government in
Dili to strengthen the judiciary sector through the
allocation of greater financial resources and the
creation of an anti-corruption commission, a court of
auditors and a public services commission to oversee
the management and recruitment of personnel.
Concerns persist, however, over the country’s
economic situation and its tackling of the plague of
youth unemployment, which undermines social
stability. It is also true that the weak economic
performance is compounded by a limited capacity to
attract foreign investment in areas other than the
energy sector. To that end, we believe that greater

09-24239

resources from the international community should be
directed towards infrastructure, which is needed to
launch future development strategies in areas such as
industry and agriculture.
Regional cooperation and the full inclusion of
Timor-Leste in the ongoing integration of South-East
Asia could help consolidate the country’s institutions.
Timor-Leste would benefit from regional mechanisms
that would raise the Government’s external and internal
profiles. We look forward with interest to the
possibility of Timor-Leste’s joining the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, and we hope that that goal
can be achieved by 2012.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, we
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. Portugal welcomes the opportunity to
participate once again in the Council’s deliberations. I
extend to President José Ramos-Horta a very cordial
and warm greeting. I thank him for his presence here
today and for his laudable efforts for the cause of
peace, reconciliation, democracy and development in
Timor-Leste. We are very happy to see him fully
recovered.
Portugal, naturally, concurs with the statement
delivered by the presidency of the European Union.
However, as a representative of a country that has had
a shared history with Timor-Leste for nearly 500 years,
I should like to raise some points in my national
capacity.
Portugal praises the encouraging advances
achieved over the past year in Timor-Leste. The leaders
and the people of Timor-Leste have made remarkable
progress in overcoming the most visible reminders of
the 2006 crisis. The majority of the internally displaced
persons have returned to their homes, the petitioners of
the Falintil-Forças Armadas de Defesa Timor-Leste
have been reintegrated into civilian life and the
continuing stable security environment is a credit to
Timor-Leste’s determination to create conditions
conducive to long-term peace, stability and
development.
I wish to take this opportunity to commend
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and all the staff of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste

31

S/PV.6085

(UNMIT) for their tireless work. UNMIT continues to
play a critical role in assisting Timor-Leste, and we
fully support a decision by the Council to extend its
mandate for an additional period of 12 months at the
Mission’s current composition and strength.
Portugal recognizes the underlying challenges
still to be met: poverty and unemployment, urban
centres struggling with migration and the lack of an
effective land and property regime, along with a
judicial system that needs to be strengthened and
security institutions requiring further capacity and
training.
Dialogue is central to addressing those issues, as
it is to ensuring unity of effort, if not broad consensus,
in matters of national concern. Portugal is encouraged
by the efforts of President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmão in that regard and urges all major
Timorese political groupings to pursue a constructive
political dialogue, thus helping to meet the country’s
challenges.
Along with others, Portugal considers that longterm security and stability will depend on the capacity
of the Timorese security institutions to function in an
effective, responsible and accountable way, with due
respect for the rule of law and benefiting from public
confidence and support. Further efforts are needed to
ensure a clear articulation of strategies and plans
within and across State institutions. A clear vision of
the relationship between the Falintil-Forças de Defesa
de Timor-Leste and the national police is crucial. Also,
we share the view that additional steps should be taken
to facilitate the coordination of the international
community’s support, including that of bilateral
partners.
Portugal encourages the Government of TimorLeste to continue working with UNMIT on the process
of the resumption of police executive responsibilities.
Portugal fully agrees with the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/72)
on the need for a continued robust UNMIT police
presence across the country, both to support the
handover of responsibilities and to help guarantee
public security while that process is under way. We
note that the challenges facing the police in TimorLeste should not be underestimated and will take
several years to address. The resumption of
responsibilities by the national institution is only one
step, albeit an important one, but also one that marks

32

the beginning of a new phase for which the
commitment of the Government and the support of the
international community will prove essential.
Portugal also welcomes the Government’s
commitment to obtain an independent assessment of
the needs of the judicial sector. We are ready to
support, with other partners, all efforts to achieve
national ownership of the entire rule of law system.
I would like to assure the Council that Portugal
remains deeply engaged in supporting Timor-Leste in
its efforts to consolidate democracy and development,
both as a sister-country within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and as a major
development partner of my country in a number of
significant areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Moreno Fernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to begin by welcoming the presence at
this meeting of His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
President of Timor-Leste, whom we thank for the
important statement he made this morning. We
remember the successful visit to Cuba by President
Ramos-Horta last year and in particular his statement
during the General Assembly debate on 25 September
2008 (see A/63/PV.10), when he courageously and
firmly requested the lifting of the inhumane and
criminal economic, commercial and financial blockade
which has been imposed on Cuba for over 50 years.
Although much remains to be done, Cuba
welcomes the significant progress made in the security
situation of Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis.
Likewise, the country showed its great ability to
recover after the shock caused by the attacks of
11 February 2008. I also wish to welcome the fact that
despite the seriousness of his injuries, today President
Ramos-Horta is present among us and is well, active
and optimistic.
The people and leaders of Timor-Leste have
shown their strong will to continue the struggle to
create favourable conditions for long-term peace,
stability and development. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) has also
played an important role in assisting Timor-Leste in
various sectors.
Timor-Leste has stressed the need for UNMIT to
continue to maintain a strong presence in the country.

09-24239

S/PV.6085

Cuba believes that the wishes and interests expressed
in that regard by the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste should be duly taken into account by the
Security Council.
In one opinion, in considering the situation in
Timor-Leste not enough emphasis has yet been placed
on the urgent attention required by the structural,
economic and social problems affecting that sister
nation, and on the need for greater support and
assistance on the part of the international community.
The eradication of poverty and underdevelopment is
essential in order to guarantee the achievement of
sustainable and durable peace and stability in TimorLeste. There will be no stability without development,
or development without stability.
The Government of Timor-Leste has adopted
important measures to tackle poverty, unemployment
and other pressing problems. The work carried out by
President Ramos-Horta in that respect is commendable.
Nonetheless, Timor-Leste will continue to require
considerable support from the international community,
in particular from the United Nations.
The current international financial and food crisis
raises other important challenges. As a country which
depends on the importation of basic food staples,
Timor-Leste is affected by the sharp increase in the
global price of foodstuffs such as rice. The challenges
to be overcome by the Timorese people and
Government in the coming years require considerable
resources which greatly exceed the capacity of a State
with limited resources. Furthermore, the international
community has the moral obligation to help TimorLeste train its human resources and create the
infrastructure that is so greatly needed by that country,
while continuing, of course, to fully respect its
sovereignty.
Cuba, a small besieged country with limited
resources, also continues its humble cooperation with
Timor-Leste through various vital social development
programmes which also play an important role in
strengthening the country’s internal stability. Cuba
extends its cooperation in various sectors, principally
in the area of health. Since 2003, 546 Cuban physicians
and other health specialists have rendered service in
that country and provided 3,477,000 Timorese citizens
with health care. Cuban medical doctors have
performed 25,564 surgeries, of which 6,396 were
considered major surgery, and over 22,000 deliveries.

09-24239

They have administered more than 52,000 doses of
vaccine. The lives of 12,418 people have been saved
throughout the rugged terrain of Timor.
The Cuban medical brigade in Timor-Leste
currently includes 233 physicians and other specialist
personnel and is an example of selfless cooperation.
Apart from providing basic and specialized health
services in difficult conditions, the Cuban doctors also
teach. Currently, 168 medical students from all districts
of Timor are being trained in the medical school of the
national university, and the medical professors are
Cuban. Complementing those efforts, around 700
Timorese young people are studying in Cuba, free of
charge, and most of them are studying medicine. This
year, the first 19 medical students will return to Timor
for their final year of internship; they will be directly
involved in addressing the health problems of their
respective communities. A total of 36 Cuban teachers
advised the national literacy campaign in Timor-Leste,
applying the Cuban literacy method called “Yes I Can”,
through which 17,400 citizens of that country have
already learned to read and write.
If the international community, in particular some
developed countries, responds to the appeal made by
President Ramos-Horta and the Government of TimorLeste to contribute $8 million, then after only two
years the country will be able to declare itself free
from the scourge of illiteracy. We believe that this
would contribute significantly to internal peace and
stability. What Cuba is doing today for Timor-Leste is
just a modest example of how much could be achieved
in that country through international cooperation and
solidarity, in particular by States with greater economic
and financial resources.
I would like to conclude by expressing, on behalf
of the people and the Government of Cuba, our deepest
gratitude to the people and the Government of TimorLeste for the solidarity offered to our country in
difficult moments, including their significant assistance
in 2008 to repair the extensive damage caused in Cuba
by hurricanes Gustav and Ike. The people of TimorLeste can always count on the firm resolve of Cuba to
continue strengthening its assistance to and solidarity
with them. In this way, we fulfil our duty and honour a
debt of gratitude to Timor-Leste and to other thirdworld peoples who have always expressed their firm
and unwavering friendship and solidarity with Cuba.

33

S/PV.6085

The President: I call on the representative of
South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Mr. President, we
thank you for allowing us to participate in today’s open
meeting and to share our views on the situation in
Timor-Leste. We especially welcome the presence of
the President of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, at
today’s debate. My delegation is also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/72) and for
his participation in this meeting.
South Africa is pleased with the progress made by
Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis. Both the people and
the political leadership of Timor-Leste have risen to
overcome those events, and many strides have been
made towards restoring normalcy and bringing
sustainable peace and stability to their country. We
particularly applaud the personal efforts of President
Ramos-Horta in leading his nation throughout a period
of uncertainty and enormous challenges.
South Africa notes with appreciation that the
current report of the Secretary-General reflects many
positive developments in Timor-Leste. On the political
front, my delegation is encouraged by and supports
ongoing efforts to foster dialogue and national
reconciliation in Timor-Leste through various
mechanisms, in particular the High-level Coordination
Committee meetings, the Trilateral Coordination
Forum and the good offices of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Khare.
We are also encouraged that some of the critical
challenges noted during the Security Council visit to
Timor-Leste last year were resolved in an amicable
manner. In this regard, we welcome the approach taken
by the Government of Timor-Leste in addressing the
issues of the internally displaced persons and the
petitioners.
South Africa underlines the continued importance
of a comprehensive approach to security sector review
and reform in Timor-Leste with a view to achieving the
country’s full national ownership of the sector. In this
regard, we need to ensure a clear separation of internal
and external security roles and responsibilities between
the national police and the military. We are confident
that the Government of Timor-Leste will enhance its
efforts to that end.
We believe that the significant strides made thus
far in Timor-Leste now require that its people, in

34

partnership with the international community, focus on
the economic development of Timor-Leste and help
launch that nation on a path to sustainable and longterm development and security. There can be no
security without development.
The international community must make a longterm commitment towards assisting the Government
and people of Timor-Leste to achieve sustainable peace
and prosperity. It is also crucial that bilateral and
multilateral partners continue to assist the country to
develop and strengthen its institutions and further build
capacities in various sectors, in line with the country’s
national priorities. For its part, the leadership of TimorLeste should continue to seize the opportunity of
working with all segments of society in building
national unity and reconciliation and in promoting
human rights, justice and peace.
In conclusion, we wish to commend efforts made
by the United Nations and, in particular, Special
Representative Khare and the entire team of the United
Nations Interim Mission in Timor-Leste for their
invaluable work in Timor-Leste. We would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for your
leadership on this issue in the Security Council.
Working with other partners, South Africa is
ready to join the international community in assisting
the people of Timor-Leste in their efforts to consolidate
the progress made thus far. We are convinced that
Timor-Leste can succeed only to the extent to which
the international community can provide political
support and much-needed resources for development.
The President: I would like to take this
opportunity to thank South Africa for its leadership and
hard work in the Security Council last year on the
question of Timor-Leste.
I call on the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) —
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
At the outset, ASEAN would like to congratulate
Japan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. We
commend Japan for organizing an open debate on this
important issue for our region. We would like to extend

09-24239

S/PV.6085

our warm welcome to Mr. José Ramos-Horta, President
of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. We also
commend the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Timor-Leste for their tireless
dedication and hard work to support Timor-Leste.
ASEAN stands firmly in solidarity with the
Government and people of Timor-Leste in their nationbuilding process and their admirable effort to achieve a
stable, democratic and prosperous Timor-Leste.
ASEAN’s support for the United Nations in TimorLeste has always been strong and consistent. Member
States of ASEAN have contributed their troops and
police observers to successive United Nations missions
in Timor-Leste, including the current United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
ASEAN welcomes the remarkable progress
achieved by the Government and people of TimorLeste in overcoming various challenges to nationbuilding and commends the resilience that the country
has shown in response to the events of 11 February
2008. We welcome the fact that the overall situation
has returned to normalcy and that the security situation
remains calm, while notable progress has been made to
address the two major residual consequences of the
2006 crisis, namely, the issues of the petitioners and
the internally displaced persons.
ASEAN believes that a holistic approach is
important to ensure that Timor-Leste progresses
smoothly from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and to
durable peace, security and development. Peace,
stability, development, the rule of law and good
governance are all interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. Therefore, ASEAN supports the holistic
approach of UNMIT, as reflected in the four mandated
priority areas — review and reform of the security
sector; strengthening of the rule of law; economic and
social development, particularly in the rural areas; and
the promotion of a culture of democratic governance
and dialogue.
ASEAN strongly believes that national ownership
should not only continue to be a principle that guides
every work of UNMIT, but also be the ultimate goal
that the international community should strive to
achieve.
ASEAN believes that, guided by strong
leadership and assisted by international cooperation,
Timor-Leste is moving forward and in the right
direction. But many daunting challenges remain.

09-24239

Therefore, ASEAN strongly believes that substantial
and sustained international partnership will continue to
be vital to assisting Timor-Leste in building on past
gains and laying a solid foundation for the future.
Taking into account the express wish of the
Government of Timor-Leste for a continued robust
UNMIT presence, ASEAN is supportive of the
Secretary-General’s observation that an extension of
the UNMIT mandate for a period of 12 months at the
current composition and strength is essential.
While the international community should
continue to be consistent in its support for the stability
and security of Timor-Leste, ASEAN believes that
concerted and sustained international assistance to
support the socio-economic development of the
country is no less significant. Investment in human
capital and in the livelihood of the people, particularly
at the community level, is an investment in the longterm peace, stability and prosperity of the country. In
this regard, we are pleased that the Government of
Timor-Leste and UNMIT recently signed the five-year
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for 2009-2013, which, in our view, constitutes a good
framework for achieving national solidarity and
development.
Development is always close to the heart of
ASEAN because we know that development, peace and
security are interlinked. So far, many ASEAN member
States have been working with the Government of
Timor-Leste on development and technical assistance
programmes, in accordance with the needs and
priorities of Timor-Leste in areas such as human
resources development, capacity-building, poverty
alleviation, employment generation, rural development,
infrastructure development, agriculture, fisheries and
public health.
In conclusion, ASEAN would like to reiterate our
support for the work of the United Nations in TimorLeste. ASEAN will continue to stand in solidarity and
friendship with the Government and people of TimorLeste, who are our friends and regional partner, in their
nation-building effort and wishes them success in
overcoming future challenges. ASEAN will continue to
engage with Timor-Leste. We look forward to TimorLeste’s attendance at the 42nd ASEAN ministerial
meeting as a guest of the Chair and its participation in
the sixteenth ASEAN Regional Forum in Thailand later
in 2009.

35

S/PV.6085

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): First and foremost, Sir, I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for organizing this open debate on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I wish to also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on the operation of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). Most importantly, I also wish to
acknowledge and welcome the presence of Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste, and thank him for his statement and kind
words with regard to Malaysia.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement just
made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Nevertheless,
we wish to make the following statement as a country
and neighbour that would like nothing more than to see
a peaceful and prosperous Timor-Leste.
Malaysia welcomes the progress achieved
by Timor-Leste. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/72) highlights the fact that the situation has
returned to normalcy. What was a crisis has turned into
an opportunity to solve the two major residual issues
from the conflict of 2006 — those of petitioners and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). To date, the
petitioners have fully disbanded and been reintegrated
into society, and 54 of the 63 IDP camps have closed.
We wish to congratulate the leaders and people of
Timor-Leste, who, with the assistance of UNMIT and
other international partners, have been successful in
maintaining peace and stability in the country. This
proves yet again that the Timorese are more than
capable of reconciling whatever differences emerge for
the sake of the peace and prosperity of their country.
The encouraging security situation augurs well
for the planned resumption of policing responsibility
by the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL).
National ownership of policing responsibilities will
represent a major milestone in the rehabilitation of the
security sector in Timor-Leste and enable Timor-Leste
to graduate from UNMIT soon. In spite of that positive
development, Malaysia believes that the resumption
process should be carefully implemented in a phased
approach that emphasizes the need for PNTL units to
meet the criteria mutually agreed to by the Government
of Timor-Leste and UNMIT, in accordance with the

36

related arrangements, as set out in paragraphs 21 and
22 of the Secretary-General’s report. In that regard, we
would like UNMIT and the international community to
continue providing the necessary support so that
Timor-Leste can take on the policing responsibility
based on mutually agreed criteria and without
imposing arbitrary deadlines.
As to the issue of security, we are of the view that
it requires a holistic approach. In that regard, Malaysia
welcomes UNMIT’s medium-term strategy, which is
focused on economic and social development and the
promotion of a culture of democratic governance and
dialogue, besides security sector reform and the
strengthening of the rule of law. The introduction of
benchmarks for the medium-term strategy is important.
Benchmarks will facilitate measurement of the
performance both of UNMIT and of the Government of
Timor-Leste. That will enable adjustments to be made
to the strength and mandate of UNMIT in due course.
While there is progress, stability remains fragile.
The Secretary-General’s report underlines several
major root causes, such as poverty and unemployment,
urban migration, the absence of an effective land and
property regime, a weak judicial system and weak
security institutions.
Consequently, Timor-Leste still requires the
robust presence of UNMIT. In that regard, Malaysia
supports Timor-Leste’s expressed interest for the
mandate of UNMIT to be further continued on a yearly
basis. UNMIT’s continued presence and support is
critical, as it allows for proper traction in the reform of
the security sector, especially with regard to
reconstituting the PNTL, integrating the rule of law,
implementing economic and social development and
consolidating effective and sustainable democratic
institutions and governance. We wish to reassure
Timor-Leste of Malaysia’s continued support and
cooperation, be it bilateral or multilateral through
UNMIT or other regional and international
mechanisms.
Finally, Sir, Malaysia is happy to see you chairing
the core group on Timor-Leste. We wish to also
commend Mr. Atul Khare, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and his team
for the good work that they have accomplished for
Timor-Leste.
The President: I invite Special Representative
Khare to make a statement.

09-24239

S/PV.6085

Mr. Khare: Let me begin, Sir, by thanking you
and the Member States for the very kind words directed
towards myself and my Mission. I was particularly
touched by the reference made by President José
Ramos-Horta to the survey conducted by the
International Republican Institute, which showed a
75 per cent popularity rating for my Mission.
Since, in his usual humble fashion, the President
did not mention his own popularity rating, kindly allow
me to mention that he enjoys the highest popularity
rating of that survey — 82 per cent. The rating is
highly deserved and, in my mind, somewhat reflects
his devoted, constant and tireless efforts to bring peace,
prosperity and stability to his country.
I should also like, Sir, to thank you and the
Council for its constant support for the work of my
Mission and the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General for their constant guidance, advice
and encouragement, which has made our achievements
possible. I would also like to thank all Member States
for their support for the Mission’s extension for one
year at the current composition and strength.
Many speakers reflected on the need to define a
meaningful role for the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste
in a peace-time setting and to separate very clearly the
responsibilities for policing from those of the military
and, indeed, internal security from external defence.
They also recognized a very strong need to enhance the
mechanisms of internal accountability and civilian
oversight over both security forces.
I am very pleased to inform Council members
that those issues are at the forefront of the thinking of
the Timorese leadership, which is committed to those
developments. While some will be achieved through a
process of security sector review and reform,
essentially led by the Timorese authorities and
supported by the United Nations, substantial bilateral
assistance will be required for the development of
proper military doctrines. I would particularly like to
mention the bilateral cooperation being provided by
Australia, Brazil, Portugal, New Zealand and the
United States of America through its Pacific
Command, which has been extremely useful in helping
the Timorese authorities to achieve the goals of
defining, as I said, a meaningful role for their army in a
peace-time setting.
Several speakers referred to the forthcoming
resumption of policing responsibilities by the Polícia

09-24239

Nacional de Timor-Leste. This resumption would be
gradual; it would follow a phased approach. In my
view, depending on progress, it would take several
months or maybe up to a year. Thus, some time during
the last quarter of this year — 2009 — depending on
progress, my Mission will make a mid-term assessment
of the success of the resumption process to that point.
And, with the help of a technical assessment mission
from Headquarters, we will recommend benchmarks
for possible adjustments in the numbers of UNMIT
police — which also should be carried out in a gradual,
step-by-step fashion, without endangering continued
stability. That recommendation could be included,
perhaps, with the approval of the Secretary-General, in
the next report of the Secretary-General, to be issued in
February 2010.
At this stage I should like to recall that the record
of my Mission in releasing assets that are no longer
required speaks for itself. For example, immediately
after the constitution of the new Government in August
2007, following the 2007 elections, we ensured that the
additional 140 police officers that the Security Council
provided for security during the electoral period
through its resolution 1745 (2007) were immediately
released, along with nearly 400 electoral officers. So,
we are very happy to release assets at the first possible
moment when they are no longer required; but
currently I believe that, at this stage when we are just
commencing the resumption process, the present
strength of international police must be maintained for
a period of a full year, until February 2010.
On the reform of the justice sector, and on the
need for an independent comprehensive needs
assessment — and, of course, on strengthening the
justice sector to provide greater accountability and to
combat any perception of impunity — I would like to
report that at the last meeting of the Committee on
High-level Coordination, chaired by His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta on 29 January, a decision was
taken
to
quickly
conduct
an
independent
comprehensive needs assessment. I trust that within the
next 12 to 18 weeks this independent comprehensive
needs assessment should become a reality and should
thereafter permit the international community to plan
its assistance to the justice sector.
Some speakers raised the issue of the need to
fight domestic violence and the need to fight and curb
any limited trafficking in persons that might be taking
place. I want to put on record my deepest appreciation

37

S/PV.6085

to His Excellency the President, who in fact in March
last year, on International Women’s Day — from his
hospital bed, at a time when he was still recovering —
issued a public message to the people of Timor-Leste
to combat these evils. And more recently, on
3 February, he released the latest report of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women on the status of
women and committed himself and his country to
fighting the social evils of domestic violence and
gender-based violence.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the efforts
of Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão in promoting
gender-responsive budgeting in the latest budget and in
appointing gender focal points in all ministries to
ensure that the work of those ministries is as attuned as
possible to these concerns of women and development.
Since I have already taken more than five minutes
of the Council’s time, allow me to conclude by
thanking the international security forces and their
contributors, Australia and New Zealand; all the
members of the United Nations country team and,
indeed, of the wider United Nations family, including
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund;
and, in particular, the two Deputy Special
Representatives, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen and
Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, who are really my right and
left hands and who are pillars of great strength in my
efforts to assist the Timorese leaders and their people.

38

The President: I thank Mr. Khare for his
statement.
On this occasion I must say that the fact that so
many speakers, from five regions of the world, took the
floor in this open debate on Timor-Leste is a
manifestation of strong interest and support by all
Member States regarding the future, the democracy and
the stability of Timor-Leste. It seems that unanimous
strong support was expressed for the continued
presence of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and for an extension of its
mandate, as well as for the continued prosperity of
Timor-Leste.
I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of
my colleagues in the Council, to convey the deepest
possible appreciation to His Excellency President José
Ramos-Horta and his delegation for taking the trouble
to come to New York to attend this open debate on the
occasion of an extension of the mandate. I wish the
President good health and future success in his country.
I also express great appreciation to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Migiro for her patience and for staying with
the Council to show her solidarity with us.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

09-24239
