UNITED
NATIONS,
DAGHAh4MARSKJbl
IJBRARY

UNITED NATIONS

11949 00105 8762

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
UN Ll!-RARY

THIRTIETH

YEAR

.I869th

MEETING:

APR1 iI ;984

uit\r/slc\
ciclLLECili:ON
22 DECEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1869) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(Slll899) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1869

‘.

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of.such a.symbol indicates a referencc to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally ‘published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Couqcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became filly operative
on that date.

f

n

-.

1869th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,

22 December 1975, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Johari
(Ma!aysia),
Mr. Harry (Australia),
Mrs. Jeanne
Martin Cisse’ (Guinea) and Mr. Fernandes (GuineaBissau) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States? Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now continue its consideration
of the item on its
agenda. I have received an intimation
from the
representative
of Guinea that she would wish to
make a statement to the Council before it proceeds
to vote on the draft resolution which is before it.
In those circumstances,
I now invite the representative of Guinea to take a place at the Council table
and to make her statement.

agenda (S/Agenda/l869)

of the agenda

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative
of Portugal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1899)
The meeting

4. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSl? (GUINEA)
(interpretation from French): Mr. President, I should like first
to, congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and’
to extend our gratitude to you and your colleagues
for having given me an opportunity
to set forth
the position of my Gnvemment
on the question
before you.

was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

5. Fifteen years ago the General Assembly adopted,
in resolution
1514 (XV), the historic Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The United Nations marked by that
solemn Declaration. the will of the international
community it represents to see the oppressed peoples of
our world liberated.
This historic resolution
thus
opened new ,possibilities
to millions
of human
beings, men and women, humiliated,
downtrodden,
subjugated in the name of unjust principles which
served as justification
for domination
by a wealthy
minority.
By means of a stubborn struggle within
vanguard liberation movements, those oppressed men
and women dealt a fatal blow to colonial empires.
One by one, the colonial empires began to sink,
making way for new, free and sovereign nations on
the international
scene and thus contributed
to a
modification
of the balance of power.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11899)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance
with the
previous decisions [1864th and 1867th meetings],
I propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives
of -Portugal,
Indonesia,
Guinea and Guinea-Bissau
to
Malaysia,
Australia,
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Galvtio
Teles (Portugal)
and Mr. Anwar Sani (Indonesia)
took places at the Council table.

6.. Although one can draw up a balance-sheet of
-efforts made with regard to decolonization,
and
although one can take some satisfaction from the few
positive results, simultaneously
there are new manifestations which run counter to the principles laid
down in the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration in resolution 1514 (XV). The case of

2. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the, representatives
of Malaysia,
Australia,
Guinea and Guinea-Bissau
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is their wish to address the Council.
1

Timor is a typical
of attention.

exampIe

of this and one worthy

emerged from the qualitative
change in its policy,
and. we urge it. to assume its responsibilities
so
that, together with the Security Council and with
the countries of the region involved, it may help
create in Timor
a climate more. favourable
for
respect for the independence and territorial integrity
of that country and for the consolidation
of international peace and security in that region of the world.

7. Following the heroic peoples of Guinea-Bissau,
Cape Verde, Mozambique,
Sao Tome and Principe,
and Angola, and obeying the irresistible current of
decolonization,
East Timor, under the direction of
FRETILIN
[Frenfe Revoluciona’ria
de Timor Leste
Zndependente],
has just freed itself from colonial
tyranny, and on 28 November
1975 proclaimed
its
national independence.
The proclamation
of independence by the Republic of Timor has been welcomed
with enthusiasm by the valiant Party-State of Guinea,
which considers it a new victory in the struggle
of oppressed peoples. On that happy occasion, the
Supreme Head of the Revolution,
President of the
Republic of Guinea, Comrade Ahmed SCkou Tour-e,
addressed to the leaders of the new State a message
of congratulations
on behalf of our people and
informed them of our decision to recognize the Republic of Timor as an independent and sovereign State,
and to reiterate to them our people’s firm and
resolute support for the cause that they are defending.

12. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council
have before them the text of a draft resolution
[S/11915] that has been prepared in the course of
prior consultations among the members of the Council. Unless I hear any objection,
I shall now put
that draft resolution to the vote. Since I hear no
objection,
I now put to the vote draft resolution
s/11915.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution

was adopted

unaninzous1y.l

13. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
had indicated their wish to speak after the vote,
and I shall now call on them.

8. After the positive events of April 1974, new Portugal, to the satisfaction of all peace-loving and freedom-loving peoples, agreed to yield to the stubborn
strength of a people which had decided that it would
triumph, and it agreed to transfer its powers to its
former
African colonies.
My delegation
deeply
regrets that that same administering
Power, Portugal,
did not respect the same principle in the case of
East Timor, and thus madei it possible for new practices of annexation
to manifest themselves.
This
deeply concerns us and it may seriously compromise
international peace and security.

14. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translationfrom
Chinese):
In our statement in the Security Council on 16 December [1865th meeting], the Chinese delegation stated
our position on the’ question of East Timor. In a
nutshell, we are of the view that FRETILIN
already
proclaimed the independence of East Timor and the
founding of the Democratic Republic of East Timor
on 28 November this year and that this has reflected
the aspirations of the people of East Timor for independence and won the sympathy and support of the
people of the third world. The Indonesian Government’s dispatch of troops for armed invasion of
East Timor has laid bare Indonesia’s
attempt to
annex East Timor, which constitutes a direct violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
The
Chinese Government
and people firmly support the
struggle of the people of East Timor for national
liberation
and independence
and oppose Indonesia’s armed invasion of East Timor.

9. The delegation
of the Party-State
of Guinea
remains faithful to its belief that Indonesia, a State
Member of the United Nations, a State rich in an
age-old tradition
of struggle for liberation,
as it
demonstrated
in the 1950s~ would not support the
annexation of any State and would not impair the
exercise of the inalienable rjght of the people of East
Timor to self-determination
grid independence.
10. That is why the Party-State of Guinea condemns the invasion
of Timor
and requests the
Security Council to take any action necessary so that
all foreign military troops will withdraw from that
Territory. It appeals to Indonesia not to smeak the
path of emancipation
to which it has always adhered
and which has earned it an honoured place in the
movement
of the non-aligned
countries, countries
which were once oppressed, and we urge it to
respect the territorial integrity and independence of
the Republic of Timor.

15. The Chinese delegation has voted in favour
of the draft resolution just adopted because it
deplores the intervention of the armed forces of Indpnesia in East Timor and calls upon Indonesia to
withdraw without delay all its forces from the Territory. We maintain that the Indonesian Government
must comply with the above provisions
of the
Security Council resolution, truly respect the territorial integrity of East Timor, withdraw all its forces
from East Timor immediately
and unconditionally
and cease any intervention
in the affairs of East
Timor. Meanwhile,
the Chinese delegation cannot
but point out that the wording of paragraphs 3 and 4
is ambiguous and is not directly related to the question
which the Council is duty bound to settle under the
provisions
of the Charter. With regard to para-

11. With regard to the former administering
Power,
Portugal, which is responsible for the present situation, we would invite it to refrain from disrupting
the movement
towards reconciliation
which has
2

graph 5, we doubt the necessity and usefulness of
sending a representative
of the Secretary-General.
In our view, the responsibility
of the SecretaryGeneral is none other than to supervise the Indonesian Government’s
immediate
withdrawal of its
forces from East Timor. In view of the foregoing,
the Chinese delegation wishes to state that we have
reservations on paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the text.

21. Even if we admit that the intentions of Indonesia were at the outset of the best, it is to be
regretted that, like the bear in the fable, Indonesia,
by succouring its neighbour, really caused it tragic
harm. Therefore, my delegation considers that the’initiation of a process which will make it possible for a
normal situation to be restored to the island implies
as a prior and immediate
step the withdrawal of
Indonesian military forces, and means that there has to
be a certain amount of moderation and responsible
behaviour
on the part of the .three main political parties on the island-FRETILIN,
APODETI
[AssociaqHo Popular Democrdtica
Timorense]
and
UDT [UniGo Democra’tica de Tintor]-and
that they
have to play down their hostilities and learn how to
decide on the future of the people of Timor after
having learned to heed their most authentic and
profound aspirations.

16. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from French): The delegation of the
United Republic of Cameroon voted in favour of
draft resolution S/11915, which the Security Council
has just unanimously
adopted in connexion with the
situation which has arisen and which still prevails
in East Timor as a result of the tragic events which
recently occurred there.
17. In so doing, the Council, as the outcome of
the lengthy and difftcult consultations
which it has
carried out in recent days, has, in the final analysis,
taken a balanced decision of a more or less conciliatory nature which will be likely to reduce tension
and to promote conditions which will make for a
calm and normal evolution of events in East Timor,
at the same time safeguarding international
peace
and security in the area.

22. It is only in such a climate of pacification that
the decision which the Council has taken can be
operative. This is in fact a decision which is essentially
geared .to one of the paramount
principles of the
Organization,
which has been reaffirmed in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), namely, the principle
of self-determination.
23. It is by dint of this principle and of its application that the peoples of former colonized territories
have been able to choose and to ensure full control
over their destiny on the basis of the options presented
to them, since it is true that the principle of the selfdetermination
of peoples, to which the United Republic of Cameroon is profoundly attached, constitutes for
those peoples who are still anachronistically
placed
under colonial domination the only decisive and peaceful way in which they can proceed from one status to
another.

18. It was, in fact, deliberately-that
is, in a spirit
of realism-that
the Council finally did not feel it
should energetically condemn the intervention of Indonesian armed forces in that Territory.
At first right
this may appear paradoxical and may even seem to
demonstrate undue laxity on the part of the .Council
when we are aware of the fact that Indonesia, a
country of 138 million inhabitants,
did not shrink
from using all its means, since it mobilized its land,
air and naval forces to establish what it calls order
in East Timor, which has only 645.000 inhabitants.
This has resulted in a tremendous loss of human life
and considerable material damage.

24. If the people of East Timor have also long
nourished this hope, the-deterioration
of the political
climate in the Territory, aggravated by foreign interference, does not make it possible in the present
state of affairs for there to be a proper application
of this principle.
Therefore, we must dedramatize
the situation so as to enable the United Nations to take
appropriate steps to make possible the implementation
of resolution 1514 (XV) as well as General Assembly
resolution 3485 (XXX). In this connexion, the Council, in its decision, has singled out the responsibilities which belong to it from those falling within
the competence ofthe General Assembly in this matter.

19. It can be said that responsibility
for this tragedy
is largely shared. At the origin of these events is
undoubtedly
the characteristic
incapacity of Portuguese colonial history, aggravated by the uncertainties of power at Lisbon. This has led in East Timor,
which, furthermore, is situated at the antipodes of the
administering
Power, and whose population of mixed
origin was hardly fitted to profess the creed of unity,
to the unbridled
venting of antagonisms from all
quarters, unleashing centrifugal forces and even going
so far as to imperil the territorial
integrity of the
island.

25. The mandate which the Council has in this case
entrusted to the Secretary-General
is in the context
of its role as a body to safeguard international
peace
and security in general and particularly in this region
which marks the confluence of the Indian Ocean and
the Pacific Ocean, it being perfectly understood that
the General Assembly is the only competent body to
deal with the decolonization
of Timor, a question
which is already before it.

20. Did that situation warrant the intervention
of
Indonesia, whose concerns about that region we are
aware of? The United Republic of Cameroon does
not think so, in the same way as it finds questionable the metaphor of putting out the fire which was
used by Indonesia to justify its intervention.
3

..:.

on established principles which the United Nations has
long. recognized ,and enshrined in such resolutions as
General Assembly resolution 1514 (Xv) on the Declaration on the Granting of Independence. to Colonial
Countries and .Peoplef, and General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX) on the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
in the Domestic Affairs of
States and the Protection
of Their Independence
and Sovereignty. More recently the General ‘Assembly,
which alone has the responsibility
for .decolonization
of Territories,
pointed the way forward for the
decolonization
of East Timor when it adopted by
72 votes to 10 resolution 3485 (XXX).

26. Regarding the concern about a possible vacuum
which might be created in Timor by the absence of
the administering
Power in the island and because
of the withdrawal of Indonesian troops, the United
Republic of Cameroon considers that, despite the
reservations that it has about the return of Portugal,
we should nevertheless accept the offer of assistance
made by that country, particularly
since it will be
carried out through the United Nations, which will be
the real architects of this progress.
27. In conclusion, my delegation would like to make
an appeal to Indonesia, a fraternal country belonging
to the great family of non-aligned countries, and ask it
to refrain from any acts which might aggravate tension
in the region and to display a spirit of tolerance
and to support the United Nations in the difficult
task which it will have to fulfil in order to apply the
principle of self-determination
to East Timor. It is up
‘to Indonesia, which is by far the most powerful party
in this affair, to remove from this region a climate
of distrust and to refrain from undertaking acts which
go beyond what might be demanded by its security
requirements.

32. These resolutions proclaim that all peoples have
the right to self-determination
and, by virtue of that
right, they should freely determine their political status
and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural
development,
that all armed action or repressive
measures of all kinds directed against dependent peoples should cease in order to enable them to exercise
peacefully and freely their right to complete independence, that the integrity of their national territory should be respected and that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and territorial integrity of a country is incompatible
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
so in keeping with these principles of intemationa “y law, no State has the right
to intervene directly or indirectly
for any reason
whatever in the internal or external affairs of any
other State and consequently armed intervention and
all other forms of interference or attempted threats
against the personality of the State or against its
economic
and cultural
elements
are
political,
condemned.

28. Mr. SANDERS
(Guyana): When my Foreign
Minister, Comrade Frederick R. Wills, addressed the
General Assembly a few weeks ago, he said then:
“Guyana follows with keen interest the struggle
for independence of the people of East Timor. We
have always upheld the policy that all peoples
should be given the opportunity to chart their own
course for development
without external interference of any sort. In this respect, we support the
liberation movement in East Timor. We call upon
those forces which may wish to intervene in an
attempt to redirect the course chosen by the East
Timorese to desist from any activity which would
violate the right of the people of East Timor to
self-determination.“*

33. The United Nations has also long recognized
that the strict observance of these principles is an
essential condition to ensure that nations live together
in peace with one another since the practice of any
form of intervention not only violates the spirit and
letter of the Charter but also leads to the creation
of situations which threaten international
peace and
security.

29. It is clear that in the weeks following that statement by my Foreign Minister the unfortunate sequence
of events has tended to confirm our apprehension
regarding action by forces exterior to East Timor to
frustrate the legitimate aspirations of the people of
that territory.

34. Such indeed is the situation we are, faced with
in East Timor and that is why my Government was
dismayed, to say the least, by the action taken by the
Government of Indonesia in East Timor-the
more
so since Indonesia is an active member of the nonaligned movement and a State which itself emerged
from colonialism
after a long and arduous struggle.
Indeed, my Governme,nt is ail the more disturbed at
the action of Indonesia, because it is a country which
has contributed so much to the progressive development of international law in various forums and committees of the Organization.

30. I shall not recount those events because the members of the Security Council are all familiar with
them, having listened carefully to the statements by
the representatives of Portugal and Indonesia and of
other States in the region and also to the statements
by representatives of the people of East Timor.
31. In this matter of East Timor, as far as the
Government of Guyana is concerned, the way forward
is clear: there should be no outside interference
in the domestic affairs of East Timor and the people
of the territory should be allowed to exercise freely
their right to self-determination.
This position is based

35. In supporting this resolution on the situation in
East Timor, which the Security Council has just unanimously adopted, my Government, among other things,
4

calls upon the Government of Indonesia to withdraw
without delay all’its armed forces from the territory,
and upon all States to respect the territorial integrity
of East Timor and ,the right of its’ people to selfdetermination.
i ’i
‘_

bers of the Council. It is quite obvious that conflicting .interests and expectations
are connected
with the question of East Timor. In this situation,
it is natural to try, in the interests of peace, to
find as much common ground as possible, and thus the
Security Council has, through the resolution just
adopted, formulated a compromise between varying
positions which should and could form the basis for
finding a solution to the problem before us. In the
view of my delegation, this compromise is a reason*able solution, although there are parts of the resolution
we have just adopted that we would have preferred
to have formulated
in a more unambiguous
way.
Thus Sweden wishes to put special emphasis on the
necessity of the rapid withdrawal of all Indonesian
troops from East Timor. The United Nations should
not in any way condone foreign occupation, under
whatever pretext. Sweden wishes also to stress the
responsibility of Portugal as the administering
Power.

36. Mr. Jackson, who could not be, here with us
today, has asked me to convey to the members
of the Council his best wishes for this season. In
particular, he has asked that I convey publicly to those
representatives
who will be leaving the Council on
the expiration of their States’ term of office a special
word of tribute for the service they have rendered
during their period on the Council. The individual
experience of Guyana over the past year has been
greatly .emiched and enhanced by its co-operation
with the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Costa
Rica, Iraq, Mauritania,
and the United Republic of
Cameroon,
in our off-times long and strenuous
efforts in 1975 to deal with the problems the Council
has faced.

41. The Swedish Government appeals to all States
and other partiessconcerned
to heed the call of the
Security Council to co-operate fully with the SecretaryGeneral and his special representative.
We hope it
will be possible for the Secretary-General
and his
collaborators
to find a reasonable course of United
Nations action for the purpose.of creating the conditions of peace that will ‘safeguard the realization
of self-determination
for the people of East Timor.
Only a solution which takes fully into account the
principle of self-determination
can lead to a just,
lasting and peaceful solution of this problem.

37. The commitment
of those countries and their
representatives, to whom we now did farewell, to the
maintenance of peace and security in the world, and
their concern with the lot of those deprived peoples
,still under colonial
domination,
have served to
strengthen the faith of the international
community in
the Organization. My delegation looks forward to continued co-operation
with all of these States in the
General Assembly and in other international
forums.
38. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): Recent developments
in East Timor have once again demonstrated the difficulties and risks inherent in the process of decolonization. The transition from colonial status to independence is not only a period of high expectations
for the people concerned but also a period of
vulnerability
and insecurity.
This transition
also
creates new political patterns in the region concerned,
with both opportunities and problems for other peoples
in the area. The risks of conflicts as a.consequence
‘of national
ambitions
and conflicting
interests are
unfortunately
always at hand. Deeply aware of the
complications
and potential risks connected with the
decolonization
process, the General Assembly has
outlined the basic principles for the decolonization
process in its resolution
15.14 (XV). Of those principles, that of self-determination
is the fundamental
one when we are searching for a solution to all
the many problems connected with decolonization.

42. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation voted in
favour of draft resolution S/11915, which has just
been adopted unanimously.
Although the resolution
does not seem to fully satisfy all delegations,
we
feel relieved to see the Council unanimously
take
practical action to dispose of the situation in East,
Timor. In adopting the present resolution the Council has requested the Secretary-General
to send a
special representative
to the Territory urgently for
the purpose of making an on-the-spot assessment
of the existing situation and establishing contact with
all the parties in the Territory and all States co.ncerned with a view to recommending
to the Council
ways and means for the restoration of peace and
order in the Territory. My delegation wishes herewith
to pay a particular tribute to the members of the
Council from the non-aligned group who took the
initiative
in drafting a resolution
and generously
held extensive consultations
to accommodate
the
views of other members, thus finally enabling the
Council to proauce the resolution
we have just
adopted.

39. The main task of the Security Council is the
safeguarding of peace and security. In performing this
task the Council cannot, however, disregard the
political realities behind threats to international peace,
even though, as in the present case, they may be
related to the process of decolonization,
which is
within the prerogative of the General Assembly.

43. My delegation takes the view that it is the primary
task of the Security Council to establish peace and
order in the area and to enable Indonesia to withdraw its forces from the Territory
without delay,
creating the conditions that will permit the people
of East Timor to exercise fully their right to self-

40. The Swedish delegation has listened with great
attention to the statements by the parties and by mem5

./

.
. ._
,

::

determination.
It therefore gives us satisfaction that the
Council has to that end decided to request the
Secretary-General
to send his representative
to the
Territory.

.

behalf of which the Security Council speaks, with
regard to a controversial situation concerning which a
rapid solution must be found. The resolution itself
lays down a mandate that the Secretary-General,
through his special representative, assess the situation
existing in East Timor, which will be of great value
in aiding the Council to take any subsequent action.
Even given the limitations
within which we have
had to work, my delegation has been able to appreciate the seriousness of the events, and regrets that,
in a Territory under colonial domination
which was
already approaching the moment at which its people
would decide upon its future, a confused situation
has arisen and, for the time being, has disrupted
what was to .have been a peaceful and orderly
process of decolonization,
on the verge of culmination in self-determination.

44. It is my delegation’s
hope that the SecretaryGeneral’s representative will leave for the Territory
immediately
and that he will be able promptly
to
submit a report to the Secretary-General,
upon which
the Secretary-General
will recommend to the Council
procedures and arrangements to ensure the establishment of conditions which will enable the people of
East Timor freely to exercise their right to selfdetermination
in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

:
I-

45. I shall conclude by expressing the hope that
all the parties concerned
and all States will
co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General
in
regard to the implementation
of the resolution adopted
by the Council in order to achieve the objectives
stated in that resolution.

50. It is very difficult to fix blame, and my delegation does not wish to do so. But that should not
be regarded as a position that implies that we in any
way justify actions which, on the contrary, we deeply
deplore because they have interfered with the right
that each people has to self-determination.

46.

Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from
The resolution that has just been adopted
has, in the view of my delegation,
the merit of
imparting a legal character to the connexion between
the Security Council and the problems that have
recently occurred in East Timor; however, my delegation shares with the parties most directly concerned in the problem a feeling of dissatisfaction
because of the opinions contained therein. This dissatisfaction may perhaps be mitigated by the fact
that in truth the Council would have been unable
to go any further, in view of the scanty information
it had available to it, in making a judgement
on a
complex situation.

Spanish):

51. It is regrettable that the political forces that
emerged in East Timor acted so equivocally in offering
the people the alternatives available to it once Portugal
had terminated its functions as administering
Power.
For if there is anything that has become clear in the
Council it is the deep disagreements that divide the
political parties that have emerged in East Timor
as a result of the changes which occurred in Portugal
on 25 April 1974.
52. If any cause for the deterioration of the situation
in East Timor is to be established, we cannot overlook
the unbridled struggle between the political parties.
One need only look at the sad example of another
African nation that recently achieved its independence,
a nation in which a domestic struggle between. antagonistic factions has served as a pretext for foreign
intervention,
to realize the risks of choosing political
cannibalism instead of peaceful discussion.

47. It is true that all of the parties involved and
concerned have expressed their views to the Council,
but it is also true that when testimony received
comes only from the parties themselves, which are
frequently indulgent in describing their own conduct,
the Council finds itself in a situation of uncertainty
and even of confusion when it tries fully to assess
the facts.

53. Nor can my delegation find any justification
for
Portugal’s weakness as the administering Power. Portugal, at the final stage of its mandate, lost control
over the domestic situation in East Timor. We find no
justification
either for Indonesia’s
armed intervention-which,
indeed, is deplored in the resolution
just adopted-for
that intervention
only complicated even furtheran already deteriorating situation.

48. We attest to the fact that in other complex
situations the Security Council has had available to
it information
coming from visiting missions of the
United Nations, or from the Secretary-General
or
from his special representative, providing fully trustworthy criteria. Unfortunately,
in the situation we have
been studying; such factors did not come from
sources of the kind that usually
rovide the Council
with information.
While not disc Paiming the positive
aspects of the testimony we have received, we feel
the absence of, those ~which rightfully aid us in our
decision-making.

::

54. Perhaps my delegation,
as a member of the
Security Council, should not refer to future developments in the serious situation in East Timor. But I
must say that the task of achieving a peaceful solution
that will respect the fundamental right of the people
to self-determination
will be constantly supported
by Costa Rica in all the international
bodies and
forums to which we belong.

49. What is important about this, resolution is that it
reveals the concern of the internatjonal community, on
6

.-,

--

the five permanent members has the power to paralyse
a decision is a heavy responsibility,
rather than the
privilege that some feel it is.

55. My delegation sincerely hopes that this first
resolution, in’ addition to demonstrating
the international community’s
interest, will represent an initial
step towards an early solution to the controversy
in East Timor, a solution in which Portugal and Indonesia will be involved and in respect of which they
will discharge the responsibilities
incumbent
upon
them. Above all, it is those who within the political
parties assume the responsibility
of representing
the interests of the people who must give the greatest
indication of their love for their country.

60. Within the concept of actively seeking peace,
the Security Council must truly fulfil its duty to find
solutions to the problems confronting it. Generally
speaking, these problems cannot be easily avoided
since they bear directly on world peace. There is
always an urgent need to reach a decision on them.
We have maintained that this urgency should oblige
the Council to take decisions as quickly as possible.
The Council fails to discharge its duty both if it
abstains from taking a decision and if it takes a decision with too much delay.

56. This will probably be the last meeting of the
Security Council in which my delegation will participate, since our term of office ends on 3 1 December.
Hence I should like to refer to some matters that
are not on the agenda. I cannot conclude these two
years of service without saying how encouraging
and stimulating it has been for a delegation like mine,
assuming this important
task for the first time, to
have worked in the Council. It has been a memorable
experience,
despite
the heavy
responsibilities
involved. As we come to the end of our term of
of&e, we should like to indicate how pleased we have
been to participate, to the best of our ability, in the
work of the body entrusted
with the task of
maintaining international
peace and security.

61. With regard to the many questions that arise
when there is a lack of desire to take a decision,
or when a decision is delayed indefinitely,
the greater
responsibility
rests, in my view, with the permanent
members. That is so because, usually, if all the
permanent members do not agree, the work of the
Security Council is impeded. I say “usually”
because
there are rare cases in which decisions are impeded
because of the action of non-permanent
members.
The 10 non-permanent
members do have a kind of
shared veto, because there must be a minimum of nine
votes for the Council to act. Hence, one can envisage
a situation in which it would not be possible to
obtain the four votes, in addition to the five votes
of the so-called great Powers, necessary to make
up the majority of nine.

57. We have positively
benefited from our participation in a body so important to world order, and
without boasting we can venture to say that my
delegation has attempted to give its very best to the
work here. That has been in line with the values of
our country, a peace-loving country, and a projection
of our internal conduct. My delegation has already
demonstrated its deep respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and its strong convictions concerning
the rules of international
coexistence.

62. But my delegation would not wish to encourage
the non-permanent
members of the Council to use a
right of veto which is more theoretical than real.
Our intention is to demonstrate
how powerful this
right of veto is. It is a responsibility
much more than
a privilege, in accordance with the Charter. Having
said that, I wish to express here in the Council my
delegation’s
admiration
and respect for the way in
which the five permanent members of the Council
have conducted themselves. Despite the differences
that sometimes divide them, they are aware of the
heavy responsibility
they bear both with regard to the
fate of the world at present and with regard to the
world that will be left for succeeding generations.

58. During these two years Costa Rica has been
able to set forth its position on a variety of very
delicate questions that were capable of endangering
world peace. We have contributed to mitigating
the
risks by supporting all those decisions that we felt
provided for realistic solutions to the difficult questions
that the Council examined during those two years.
59. My delegation has been aware of its role as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council. While
all the members of the Council participate on an
equal footing in decision-making
in the Council, the
fact that I have been able to see from the inside, as it
were, the operation of the main organ of the United
Nations entrusted with the maintenance
of intemational peace and security gives me a certain licence
to make some judgements. My delegation believes that
the Charter, in establishing
the principle
of the
unanimity of the permanent members with regard to
the most important decisions, the so-called right of
veto, actually gave the heaviest responsibility
to
those members. The Council’s tasks are carried out
through the decisions it takes, and the fact that any of

63. We have seen the non-permanent
members act
with equal dedication in difficult moments of internal
confrontations,
playing the role of catalysers, as it
were, which can lead to final arrangements
and
solutions of difficult problems during our usually
lengthy and onerous informal meetings. We would
like to express our particular recognition to those who
are leaving and to those who remain.
64. Generally, let me express to all those gathered
around this table and to their delegations my deep
thanks for the co-operation
which ‘has been personally offered to me and which has been offered
to my delegation as a whole during our term on
7

the Coun$l. I believe that it has been a privilege
to ,have- been connected,
both personally
and
officially,
with such outstanding representatives
of
friendly
countries.
Their friendship
has greatly
honoured me, and I feel that it will serve as a basis
for lasting relations.

sought to elevate the debate in the Security Council to a higher level by stating theii unreserved support for the dynamic gontext and framework
of
decolonization,
which ha,s been acsepted and which
should-be supported by aall political parties in East
Timor. Such a process, which makes it possible for not
one party but for all the political parties in East
Timor to have a say. in the future .of, their country,
will undoubtedly
make it possible for the political
climate to improve, which will contribute in turn to
the reconciliation
not only of the Timorese but also
between the people of Timor and the people of its
immediate neighbour, Inqonesia.

65. I should like to express my admiration
and
thanks to the Secretary-General
for his work with
the Council and for the cordial relations he has
maintained
with my delegation
during these two
years particularly on two occasions when Costa Rica
presided over the Security Council. My gratitude is
extended also to those who have worked closely
with him and the Council, and to other members
of the Secretariat who have worked with my delegation while we served on the Council.

69. I should like to take this opportunity
to pay
a tribute to all the parties directly or indirectly concerned in the situation in Timor for the moderation
and the wisdom which they have demonstrated
throughout
the discussion in the Security Council
and for the extremely constructive contribution
they
have made, which made it possible for the present
resolution to be adopted.

66. In a few days, when bells ring in the New
Year, I shall feel relieved to a certain extent because
a responsibility
which at times overwhelmed
my
strengh and capacity will be removed from my
shoulders. But I do harbour a feeling of nostalgia
as I will now be abandoning one of the richest
experiences of my life and friends that I will never
forget. With relief and nostalgia, I should also like
to express my hope that the vital role played by the
Security Council will grow. The world places its
trust in it to maintain its peace and security.

70. I am convinced that with the help of reason
the difficulties
at presjent being experienced
by
East Timor will be resolved and that the region
in the very near future will experience both the
peace and stability which has been so earnestly
hoped for by all its inhabitants.

67. Mr. KANE
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
from
French): We have now reached the end of our work,
at least for the time being, after a number of days of
pooling our thoughts on a question whose importance
can escape no one. For more than two weeks
now, with the assitance of the parties concerned,
the Security Council has sought ways and means of
reconciling the application of certain principles contained in the Charter which, in relation to the present
situation, require a great deal of discernment which
goes beyond the narrow context in which it has often
been sought to enshrine them. Thus, giving up
restrictive interpretations
of the resolutions which
deal with decolonization,
the Security Council in its
wisdom saw fit rather to adopt a decision which takes
due account both of the fundamental principles of the
Charter. and of the direct threat which the present
situation in East Timor represents for the entire
region, and particularly
for the neighbouring
countries, including Indonesia.

71. Before concluding,
I should like to thank the
delegation of Guyana whole-heartedly
for the very
friendly words which it addressed to my delegation
at a time when our term of office on the Security
Council is coming to an end. It is my hope that
before the end of the year we will have an opportunity to express all the satisfaction we have felt at
being able to work for the past two years with
all members of the Security Council.
72. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation has already made its position clear
on the substance of the matter when I addressed the
Council on 18 December [1867th meeting]. There will,
therefore, be no need for me to make a lengthy
explanation of vote since it is our view that the resolution which the Council has adopted falls in line with
the spirit of the position we have articulated.
73. In my statement
I had then concluded by
asserting that “we would view with favour any decisions by the Security Council which wouia have the
effect of accomplishing
the objectives enunciated
in General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX)”
[ibid.,
para. 261. We view the present resolution as being
one such decision. Like the Assembly, the Council
has deplored the intervention
on the armed forces
of Indonesia in Timor.
Like the Assembly,
the
Council has called upon Indonesia to withdraw without delay all its forces from East Timor. Furthermore, the Council, like the Assembiy, has underscored the call for respect for the territorial integrity

68. Such an objective approach, which transcends
differences of opinion, will undoubtedly contribute to
bringing about a climate which will favour both
dialogue and negotiation
among all parties. It is
because the resolution which the Security Council has
just adopted offers dynamic prospects for the settlement of the situation in East Timor that my delegation saw fit to support it. The support which my
delegation has given this resolution is all the more
justified since all parties to the dispute have refused
to indulge in facile condemnations
and have rather
8

of Timor as well as resnect for the inalienable
rights of its people to self-determination
in accordance with the principles of the Charter and of the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

the invasion of Timor and the consequences of that
invasion. Clearly, therefore, the Council could not and
does not in any way desire to take over the role
of the General Assembly in the field of decolonization. And it is with a clear understanding
of the
differentiation
of roles between the Assembly and the
Council that the resolution,
while mandating
the
Secretary-General
to send a special representative
and later on to submit his own recommendations
to the Council, had earlier on taken note that the
’ General Assembly, through its resolution 3485 (XXX)
of 12 December 1975, had, inter alia, requested the
Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to send a fact-finding mission to East Timor.

74. Of no less importance; the resolution which the
Council ‘has adopted, like resolution
3485 (XXX)
adopted by the General Assembly 10 days ago, clearly
and unambiguously
expects the Government. of Portugal, as the administering
Power, to discharge fully
its responsibilities
under the Charter and thus take
measures which would enable the people of East
Timor to exercise fully and in an atmosphere of
peace and without duress their right to self-determination. My delegation notes with satisfaction that
the role that is envisaged to’be taken by Portugal
is consistent ‘with its responsibilities
as the administering Power, and that in the process of fulfilling
its responsibilities
it is required to co-operate fully
with the United Nations.

78. The Tanzanian delegation, like other non-aligned
member delegations in the Council, has been very
much involved in the preparation
and negotiations
leading to the present resolution. Naturally, this is not
a perfect resolution;
indeed, my delegation would
have preferred a clearer and unequivocal resolution.
But, taking all factors into account, it is the belief
of my delegation that the resolution lives up to the
requirements of the situation. We supported it in the
conviction that, if fully implemented,
this Council’s
decision would make an important contribution to the
restoration of the conditions conducive to enabling
the people of Timor to exercise their legitimate
rights to self-determination,
freedom
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV).

75. It is the firm hope and expectation of my delegation that the Government of Indonesia will respond
positively and without delay to the decision of the
Security Council. In this connexion, we wish once
again SO stress the urgent requirement for the withdrawal of Indonesian forces from East Timor. For, as
I stressed in my intervention
of 18 December, withdrawal of those forces is a first and-here.
I must
add-indeed,
an indispensable step in the direction of
restoring conditions of calm in the Territory.
The
Tanzanian delegation also expects a more positive
and active role on the part of the Portuguese
Government,
as called for by the present resolution as well as by the resolution
of the General
Assembly.

79. I should like to express our conviction that the
Secretary-General
will proceed
with deliberate
speed to the discharge of the mandate entrusted to
him by the resolution,
for the situation in East
Timor is an urgent one and demands prompt action.

76. Before concluding, I should like to make a few
observations in respect to the role of the SecretaryGeneral and his representative
as provided for in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of the resolution.
We believe
that the presence of the Secretary-General’s
special
representative
in the Territory and the contacts he
will establish with the parties and States concerned
should help to facilitate the smooth and speedy
implementation
of the Council’s resolution.
In this
respect, we must clearly underscore the point that
the terms of reference of the representative,
as
well as those of the Secretary-General,
are confined
to the present resolution.

80. I shall refrain, from paying a tribute to our
retiring colleagues because although I share their
optimism,
I do believe that if the Council does not
meet for the rest of the year I shall have an opportunity to pay my tribute at the beginning of the new
year.
81. Mr. vINC1 (Italy): Mr. President, I wish to
explain very briefly the reasons that have prompted
my delegation fully to support and vote in favour of
the draft resolution you put to the vote in the Council
and which was unanimously
adopted.’ The debate
which we had last week in this chamber on the
situation in East Timor has given us some striking
and, at times, moving evidence of the rapid sequence
of events which have taken place in that Territory
from the end of November on. In the light of what
we heard we could by and large realize the complexity of the problem with which the United Nations
is confronted and the difficulties which the Council
would have to overcome in order effectively to fulfil
the task of restoring peace and order in that troubled

77. Needless to say, the Security Council is not
considering the decolonization
of East Timor. That
aspect of the problem is clearly within the .domain
of the General Assembly. In fact, here I can only
reiterate what I stated on 18 December, that “as
for modalities
for the decolonization
of Timor in
accordance with known United Nations principles
and practices, we believe that that remains the purview of, the General Assembly”
[ibid., para. 261.
What the Security Council has been considering is
9

Territory and ensure to its people the right to decide
freely their own destiny.

otherwise, we fail to see how :an administration
capable of maintaining public order. in the Territory
can be set up and work properly. !n this connexion,
we welcome the. announcement
made by the Portuguese Government. that it ‘has not- relinquished
its
sovereign rights over the Territory ,and is ready to
resume its responsibilities
as administering
Power.
We believe that that. is important
in so far as it
avoids, with due regard given to international
law,
any legal gap at least between the past and the future
of the Territory.
Furthermore,
it helps to build up
such normal legal and political
conditions
as are
necessary to ensure an orderly development
of the
process of decolonization
in accordance with the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly.

82. I must add in all candour, that the picture of
the events, as we could draw it in our minds, was
far from clear, except in its tragic humanconnotations. It was indeed a picture rather blurred by the
often vague and contradictory
news we received,
which, in turn, must be the effect of the shock produced
on the local population by the unexpected, quick and
radical changes which occurred there. It was thus not
surprising to my delegation that representatives of the
various political groups operating in the Territory
gave us rathei differing views about both the causes
of the present troubles and the feelings of the population.
83. What we could, however, sum up from their
statements is the confirmation
that a factional strife
had been going on for some months in the Territory
causing heavy losses of life and undue sufferings to
the people, and that that situation had led first to
the withdrawal
of the administering
Power and
secondly to armed intervention
by a neighbouring
country.

88. My Government
has constantly
supported
the right to self-determination
of all the peoples still
under colonial rule. We earnestly hope that the people
of East Timor will not be denied that right, and that,
in view of the undeniable difficulties which the United
Nations will face in dealing with the decolonization
process in that Territory,
full co-operation
and
assistance will be given to. the Organization
by all
.its Members, and in particular by those more directly
concerned with the future of Portuguese Timor.

84. In the face of such a situation, it is the opinion
of my delegation -that the resolution just adopted
by the Council takes due- account of what has
apparently been going on in East Timor and has
chosen the most realistic and proper course of action
at this stage. The Council rightly calls for a prompt
cessation of armed intervention
in Portuguese Timor
and for the withdrawal of foreign troops. But, at the
same time, looking beyond the present local situation,
it tries to make the presence of the United Nations
felt at once in the Territory in order to avoid any
danger of complete anarchy or vacuum, since the main
purpose of the General Assembly,
to assist the
people of Portuguese Timor in the exercise of their
right to self-determination,
would be immediately
defeated an nullified.

89. Before I conclude, I wish to pay a sincere and
well-deserved tribute to the representatives
of the
United Republic
of Cameroon,
Guyana and the
United Republic of Tanzania,
who are the main
authors of the resolution adopted today. Once again
they have shown, along with their other colleagues of
the non-aligned
countries, a remarkable
spirit of
understanding and co-operation vis-a-vis other delegations, including my own, and a great sense of
responsibility
as representatives of members of the
Security Council. The final result at the end of
protracted, intense consultations,
under your firm,
objective guidance, Mr. President, is the text of the
present resolution, which is the most balanced and
forward-looking
we could hope for at this stage.

85. That is why, in the opinion of my delegation,
it is of the utmost importance that the special representative to be appointed by the Secretary-General
should establish contacts with all the Governments
and parties concerned in order fo promote the cessation of factional strife as a first step to reconciliation
among the fighters. At the same time, he should
collect all relevant information
for the SecretaryGeneral, whose following recommendations
to the
Council will guide our future most appropriate action.

90. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
French): The French delegation is extremely pleased
that the Security Council has unanimously
adopted
the draft resolution. It would like to pay a tribute
to the efforts made by all, and in particular by the
representatives
of the non-aligned
States members
of the Council, to conciliate existing views so as to
permit tne submission of a well-balanced text. This
balance in fact is what we believe to be the main
merit of this resolution. It is more even-handed, in
our view, towards the various parties concerned
than was General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX),
on which the French delegation abstained.

86. We fully rely on the well-known and highly
appreciated
capacity, skill and dedication
of the
closest assistants to the Secretary-General.
Whoever
he will choose, we are sure that under his guidance
that special representative will carry out this delicate,
painstaking mission in a mosr’satisfactory
manner.

91. The mission of the Council in this case is not to
lay blame, and even less to attribute it to a single
one of the parties involved. We know that historic
situations are rarely simple enough for good and evil

87. We sincerely hope that the mission will produce,
as a first result, an early cessation of all hostilities;
10

to be discerned from a single vantage point.
is no exception to that rule.

Timor

discussed by the Council arose as a result of difficulties encountered in implementing
the decolonization
process with regard to the territory of East Timor.
A very tense internal situation arose in that Territory,
which was further complicated
by outside military
intervention.

92. A series of circumstances ‘has plunged the
Territory .of East Timor into a war, both civil and
foreign, to which we must put and end. The administering Power, despite its obvious goodwill and the
sincerity of its commitments,
has certainly been
unable to devote all due attention and diligence to the
decolonization
of that far-off island. We invite it to
co-operate with the United Nations
so that the
serious difficulties created by the temporary power
vacuum may be redressed. We urge it amicably to
do this in the light of our affinity’ with the new
Portugal. However, we also urge the neighbouring
Power to refrain from finding in the ethnic and cultural similarities
which clearly exist between the
two parts of ,the island any pretext to intervene in
the domestic’ affairs of a population which has the
right to self-determination.
For this to occur; the
military operation of the Indonesian troops there must
be terminated as soon as possible, for, were it to
continue, it would obviously compromise the freedom
of decision of the inhabitants of Timor.

96. In East Timor a situation arose which the Security Council, as the organ which bears special responsibility in questions of the peace and security of peoples, had to take up. The Council took this matter
up and has outlined steps designed to normalize the
situation there and create the conditions that are
essential if the people of East Timor are to exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination.
97. The Byelorussian SSR has invariably favoured
the speedy implementation
of the provisions contained
in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries
and Peoples,
which was
adopted 15 years ago on the initiative of the Soviet
Union. Our delegation has always come out in favour
of the .right of every colonial people to decide its
own future independently
without outside interference. We still hold this view, and we hold it when
considering the question of East Timor.

93. While not underestimating
the huge problems
inherent, even in our era, in the perfect exercise
France
of the principle
of self-determination,
remains sufficiently devoted to this principle to hope
that an agreement will be reached, with the help
of the Secretary-General
and his special representative, between .the various political factions in Portuguese Timor. Once the political movements whose
representatives
we have heard here declare their
readiness to hear the opinions of their fellow citiiens,
would it not be possible to organize an open and
democratic
referendum
during which each could
counterpose its own arguments rather than waging
war? My country hopes that the special representative of the Secretary-General
will tell us that this
solution-the
only just solution-is
still possible,
despite the dangerous initiatives
which have been
taken by those who have resorted to force.

98. As is known, the non-aligned States members
of the Security Council have made considerable
efforts in order to come up with a draft resolution
which in the specific situation that has arisen could
help to solve the complex problems in connexion
with the decolonization
of East Timor. At the same
time, we cannot fail to note that the nature of the
resolution
which has been adopted will help to
hold in check any further ‘development
of events
that might endanger peace in that region.
99. Furthermore,
the Security Council’s resolution‘
will help to solve the problem which has arisen,
in the interests of the. people of East Timor and
in accordance with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and resolutions of the General
Assembly-in
particular, those adopted at its thirtieth
session-and
the provisions of the Declaration on the
Granting
of Independence
to Colonial
Countries
and Peoples.

94. So that the sensitive period of transition between
the requested withdrawal of the Indonesian forces
and the implementation
of an authority freely chosen
by the people of East Timor may elapse without
further confrontations,
the United Nations and the
Secretary-General,
we believe, will be called upon to
play a decisive role. We remain attentive to whatever
the Secretary-General
might recommend to us, and
my delegation would like to reassure him of our
trust and of our admiration for his tireless devotion
in so many difficult matters.

100. Since this is apparently the last meeting of the
Security Council to be held this year, and since the
participation
of the Byelorussian
SSR in the work
of the Security Council as a non-permanent
member
is now drawing to a close, we should like, first
and. foremost, to express our gratitude for the effective co-operation and. understanding
which has been
offered us throughout this period by the other members of the Council. Similarly,
we should also like
to make particular mention oftbe constant. spirit -of
co-operation
which.. has been-. displayed
by the
Secretary-General.
We should like also to thank
the many United Nations Secretariat members who
are connected with the work of the Security Council

95. Mr.
TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation
from
Russian):
The delegation of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic voted in favour of the resolution
on the question of East Timor which was adopted by
the Security Council today. This item which has been
11

r

for their efforts to ensure normal working conditions
for this most important body of the United Nations.

.I

_’

_”

+,

.l

i,

comprises 144 States; tihich in itself bears abundant
witness to the fact that the process ‘of decolonization has reached a culminating
stage and shows
that there is ‘a ‘culmination
also ;in the complete
liberation
of all countjies
and peoples from the
oppression of colonialism.

101. In recent years there have occurred in the
international arena considerable and positive changes,
marked by the further extension of the process of
international detente in various concrete forms:These
changes show that there is now a material possibility
for us to implement
the main task of the United
Nations, which is to preclude war from the life of
future generations.
The countries of the socialist
community
have done a great deal to strengthen
peace and security and to solve a number of international problems, including problems tackled within
the United Nations framework. In this connexion,
we cannot fail to refer to the important and positive
role which has constantly been played by the nonaligned movement.

106. However, in the Security Council we have not
always had a situation
which would favour the
adoption of such decisions, the sort of decisions
which would be a faithful reflection of the interests
of peoples and which would be in accordance with
the spirit of international
detente, the strengthening
of co-operation
among peoples and the settlement
and solution
of cardinal international
problems.
There has still been evidence that certain Powers
wish to ignore the real facts. Precisely for that
reason and because of reasons which are well known
to all, the Security Council was unable to take
a decision on the admission of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
to United Nations membership.
The Council was
also unable to take a firm stand regarding the racist
regime in the Republic of South Africa.

102. All this has naturally left its mark on the work
of the Security Council and on the United Nations
as a whole. The spirit of co-operation and intemational detente has come into evidence in the work
of the Security Council, particularly in the preparation
of important
decisions during consultations
among
Council members,
when, as a result of mutual
efforts mutually
acceptable decisions have been
arrived at and important
steps have been taken to
help to solve international problems.

107. At the same time, we cannot fail to point out
that the Security Council in most cases was equal
to the responsible tasks which it must undertake
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations.
It is not the fault of the Security Council. that the
positive decisions which it took and which were
rightly regarded as a basis for the political settlement of international
problems,
in particular
in
the Middle East and in Cyprus, have to date failed
to be implemented.

103. In practice this was really a demonstration
of
the principle of peaceful coexistence, when opinions
and positions were combined in an organic way, both
among permanent members of the Security Council
that bear a particular responsibility
for what is done
by the Council in maintaining international
peace and
security, and also among its non-permanent
members, which play an important part in this work.

108. In participating
in the work of the Security
Council, the Byelorussian SSR has constantly and
consistently favoured and defended the adoption of
the sort of decisions which would take the greatest
account of the fundamental
changes which have
occurred in international
relations and of the need
to extend further the process of international
detente
and to favour the solution of still outstanding interna-.
tional
disputes
and conficts
and, finally,
the
strengthening
of international
peace and security
among peoples.

104. In this connexion, we cannot fail to refer to
the considerable contribution
which has been and
continues to be made to the work of the Council
by the non-aligned States members of the Council.
During the past two years the attention
of the
Security Council has been focused on important
issues connected with questions of peace and security, the.settlement
of conflicts, the struggle against
colonialism and the policies of apartheid and racism
pursued by South Africa, and other’matters. Following
in the footsteps of the General Assembly,
the
Council took a decision of great political moment when
it invited the Palestine Liberation
Organization
to
participate
in the discussion of the Middle East
question on an equal footing with other interested
parties.

109. For us Soviet people the end of this year is
particularly noteworthy since it marks ‘the eve of the
Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union. Now it is with a feeling of immense
pride that we can refer to the implementation
of the
decisions taken by the TGenty-fourth
Congress of the
Communist
Party of the Soviet Union. The peace
programme
which was approved by that Congress
and its provisions
have indeed proved to be a
powerful and effective factor which have had a
historic impact on the entire international
situation.
The holding of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe, the end of the war in IndoChina, progress in the fields of disarmament. and

105. Nor can we fail to advert to the fact that
during
these two years the Security
Council
frequently
considered the question of the admission of new members to the United Nations and
recommended
the admission of nine new fledgling
States. The membership of the United Nations now
12

decolonization
and in many other areas where positive
results have been: achieved-all
that shows that the
peace programme. has indeed triumphed.
_
:
110. In an, article .recently published in the Soviet
press, the First Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist
Party of the Byelorussian
SSR,
P. M. Masherov,
emphasized
that “impressive
success has been achieved in improving the intemational situation
and in implementing
the peace
programme
which was drawn up by the Twentyfourth Party Congress”.

the Secretary-General
will be able to send a special
representative
to. Timor
at the earliest possible
moment so that this Council, in turn, may have an
early report on the situation
there and on the
progress made in implementing
the present resolution.
116.. We believe also that the recommendations
that
the Secretary-General
is requested to make to t.he
Council, taking into account the report of his special
representative,
will assist us greatly next year. We
shall then have to consider how best the people of
Timor should express their views, what should be
the contribution
of the United Nations and perhaps
of other countries in the area, as well as of the
administering
Power, and how we can best encourage
talks between the various political parties in Timor.
All these are very important
questions which will
need our deep and careful thought.

111. In conclusion, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR .would like once again to express its satisfaction at having been able to participate for these
past two years in the work of the Security Council.
Our delegation would like to congratulate
the five
new non-permanent
members of the Council that will
participate in the work of the Council starting on
1 January 1976, and also to express our conviction
that their efforts will promote the effective implementation by this most important body of the United
Nations of the tasks facing it..

117. I should like to close by paying a tribute,
with which I am sure all members of the Council
would associate themselves,
to our distinguished
and hard-working
Secretary-General.
We are now
putting new responsibilities
on him. I can assure him
that we do not do so unadvisedly or capriciously.
We have the greatest confidence in his objectivity
and in his qualities of patience and conciliation.
I
thank him again for all he has done for the Organization in the past and for all that I am sure he will
continue to do for it in the future.

112. The delegation
of the Byelorussian
SSR is
convinced that the Security Council will in the future,
with a growing awareness of its duty and the responsibility which is incumbent upon it under the Charter,
accomplish the work of maintaining peace and security
for peoples.

118. I would not wish to anticipate events, and it
would be a foolish President who, with a week of
December still to run, proclaimed that we were today
holding our last meeting in 1975. But, to use a neutral
phrase, this is a possibility, and a possibility perhaps
not totally unwelcome to the Council.

113. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make
a statement in my capacity as representative
of
the UNITED
KINGDOM.
My delegation
voted
in favour of draft resolution S/11915, now Security
Council resolution 384 (1975), which is the outcome,
as members of the Council know, of prolonged
consultations last Friday between various groups.

119. I do not know whether we 15 will be meeting
again in this chamber. I am sure I will be understood if I say I hope not. Indeed,. I go further, and
say that, as President of the Council, I will do all I
can to ensure that we do not. But in a purely contingent manner, therefore, would members allow me
to express my own good wishes and those of the
Council as a whole to the five representatives
of the member States who will be leaving us at the
end of this year. We shall be sad to see them go.
They have brought wisdom, skill and dedication to
this table. They have also brought good humour
and patience. I personally am grateful to them for
many kindnesses and for much support. The sense
of partnership,
indeed of friendship,
within the
Council is, I believe, essential if we are to do our
work well, and if we are to reach, as we have
done today, agreements which reflect a determination
to do justice and to reconcile a variety of different
views.

114. I should like to pay a particular tribute to the
non-aligned
members of the Council for all their
efforts in putting forward a text .for our consideration,
and in so facilitating
the work of the Councii. I
should equally like to thank Mr. Vinci and Mr. Saito
and the other members of the Council for their
invaluable assistance last .Friday. If I may say so, I
think th@ our joint efforts on the subject of timor,
coming as they did at the end of a long and an
exhausting General Assembly, reflect some credit on
the Council and bear witness to its determination
to carry out fully its obligations and responsibilities
under the Charter.
113. Turning, if I may, to the future, my Govemment considers it of the greatest importance
that
the people of Timor should be enabled freely to express
their views on their future form of Government
in
conditions of peace and of order. In this context,
we attach great significance to the role of the SecretaryGeneral and his representative
as outlined in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the resolution before us. We hope

120. On behalf of the Council and on behalf of my
own Government,
and, indeed, on my own behalf,
may I therefore thank the distinguished
represen13

tatives of the Byelorussian Soviet Sodialist Republic, the United Republic of CBmeroon, Costa Rica,
Iraq and Mauritania
for the jpxitribution
.they have
made to the Council and wish them all good fortune
in the future.

provided ‘to Indonesia for internal beburity purposes.
But in fact these military resources-weapons,
ammunition, aircraft and ships-are
being ‘used against
the people of East Timor. May I also point out
to the Government of Japan ‘that, in helping to stop
this conflict, it has an opportunity
to make some
reparation for the damage and loss of life, estimated
at 40.000 killed, suffered by the East Timorese
people during the Second World War.

121. I have received, in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
an indication
that Mr. Jo& Ramos Horta would
like to address the Council again. Under rule 39 of
the provisional rules Qf procedure, the Council may
invite members of the Secretariat or other persons
to supply it with information
or to give other assistance in examining matters within its competence.
Although Mr. Horta has spoken once [186&h meeting],
and although we have already adopted a resolution
unanimously,
so that in one sense our examination
of these matters has possibly been concluded, since
I hear no objection
to the contrary,
I propose
to invite Mr. Horta to address the Council again,
as he has requested. I -therefore invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

127. Our brave people have since the UDT coup
in August shown our determination
to fight for
national
liberation
and independence.
Thus any
manceuvre to undermine the resistance of the Democratic Republic of East Timor will bring more war,
blood and death. We hope that the Council will take
the necessary action to prevent this conflict from
becoming another Viet-Nam.
128. The history of East Timor will be written bv
the people of East Timor, and everyone should
realize that it is not possible to stop the march of
the people in their struggle for national independence
and liberation. The presence of Indonesian forces in
East Timor is a factor in the war and instability.
The longer Indonesian armed forces remain in our
territory, the greater and more prolonged will be the
suffering and bloodshed.

122. Mr. HORTA: The in_vasion of Dili, capital of
the Democratic Republic of East Timor, by aggressor forces of Indonesia began on 7 December. Today
is 22 December, and the invading forces have not
succeeded in occupying the capital. Two thirds of
Dili are controlled by the nationalist forces of the
Government
of the Democrtitic
Republic of East
Timor under the leadership of FRETILIN,
vanguard
of the brave people of East Timor.

129. Our actions and statements have shown that
we have always been willing to talk and negotiate
with other groups. In our statement of 14 September, when FRETILIN
was in full control of East
Timor, we called for talks and a joint border peace
force with Indonesia. We also said that we would
expect to co-operate closely with our neighbouring
countries, and particularly
ASEAN [Association of
South-East
Asian Nations],
when we achieved
independence.
Despite aggression and the suffering
of the past weeks, our attitude remains the same.
We want peace. We want independence.
We are
willing to talk and to discuss.

123. The seat of Government ,remains in Dill, from
where our Prime Minister,
Nicolau
Lobato, has
informed my delegation about the progress of the
struggle in our country. Fighting continues in Dili
and -Baukau. In both places, the invading forces have
already lost more than 5.000 men, killed or wounded.
Reports from -Dili state that 2.000 Indonesian reinforcements are now being landed to extend what has
become a bloody war of repression.
124. Indonesian
air and naval forces have kept
Dili under constant bombardment.
The city has be&
partially destroyed. The hospital has been hit twice,
and approximately
100 sick and wounded patients
have been killed. More than 2.000 women and children
have been killed in Dili by the iqvading forces.

130. We welcome the fact that the Security Council
resolution deplores the intervention
of the armed
forces of Indonesia in East Timor, that it calls upon
all States to respect the territorial integrity of East
Timor, that it calls upon the Government
of Indonesia to withdraw without delay all its forces from the
Territory.
We shall also welcome the visit to our
country, the Democratic
Republic of East Timor,
of a special representative of the Secretary-General.
We hope that the representative
of the SecretaryGeneral will consider as a matter of urgency paragraphs 1 and 2 of the resolution. Thank you, Mr. President and members of the Security Council, for the
opportunity we have been given to seek your understanding and support.

125. Two Indonesian Mitchell bombers were shot
down in Baukau, and large quqntities of arms ‘have
been captured from Indonesian forces. The list of
captured arms includes 300 United States-made submachine-guns;
18 United
States-made
machineguns; 11 81-mm mortars; 7 bazookas and large
quantities of grenades and ammunition.
126. Please allow me to take this opportunity
to
say to the Governments
of the United States of
America, the United Kingdom
and Australia-the
countries that have provided military aid to Indonesia-that
we realize that military
aid has been

131. The PRESIDENT:
I thank Mr. Horta for the
statement he has made to the Council. In accordance with the Council’s usual procedure, I now
14

done ,so that .!‘the military aggression by Indonesia
may be <terminated ,and conditiaas may be, established to enable the decolonizatiea
.process to continue; ‘-under the auspices of the United Nations”
[S/Z18995 We must therefore express our gratification at the fact that the Security Council resolution meets the fundamental
requests made by my
Government.
Indeed, after having deplored Indonesia’s’ military intervention,
the Council clearly and
unambiguously
calls upon Indonesia
to withdraw
all its ~troops from the Territory
of East Timor.
That should no doubt be regarded as a first step
towards ending Indonesia’s
military aggression, as
called for by Portugal. The request addressed to
the Secretary-General
to send a special representative to Timor is also in line with a suggestion made
by my delegation before the Council. Furthermore,
the recognition of the fundamental part to be played
by the United Nations in the process of the decolonization of Timor also meets the position of my
Government
on this matter. That idea is spelled
out particularly
clearly in paragraphs 3, 5 and 6 of
the resolution adopted today.

ask him to withdraw from the ,Cowncil table and
resume the, Iplace .reserved for him at the side -of
the ,Council chamber.
(.
1,
l*_ ’
132. Mr, SAITO
(Japan): I wish ,to make a brief
statement in connexion with some ,remarks made by
the previous speaker, Mr. Horta,. of FRETILIN.
In the first ~place, he said that 40.000 East Timorese
people were killed during the Second World War,
but, since I have no evidence of that, I must reserve
my position as to its factuality.
133. Secondly, Japan is now a peaceful nation.
We have no armed forces for an attack of that sort.
Therefore, even though Mr. Horta insists that the
Japanese army did what he has .said, present-day
Japan had nothing to do with it.
134. Thirdly,
even though his remarks are based
upon some statistics, that has nothing to do’ with
the question we are considering at the present time,
and we cannot agree that they should be taken into
account in this case.
135. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Portugal.

I now call on the represen-

139. I should now like to refer to the last preambular paragraph of the resolution, which states that
the Council regrets that “,the Government
of Portugal did not discharge fully its responsibilities
as
administering Power in the Territory under Chapter XI
of the Charter”. I must say in all candour that that
formulation
does not appear to us to be fair because
the paragraph, although it notes a fact, does not
expressly state the reasons and circumstances which
go to explain that fact. Thus, we believe that the
Security Council’s judgement in this connexion should
have referred to two specific aspects: first, that the
difficulties encountered by the administering
Power
were the result of Indonesia’s
interference
and,
secondly, that despite everything, Portugal did all it
could to perform successfully its mission of enabling
the people of Timor to exercise its right to selfdetermination
and independence. It must be recalled
also that Portugal has never sought to conceal the
difficulties
it has encountered
in carrying out its
obligations
as administering
Power. On the contrary, it has always informed the United Nations
of those difficulties and problems and even has tried,
particularly since August, to involve the Organization
more actively in the process of the decolonization
of Timor.

136.

Mr. GALVAO
TELES
(Portugal) (interprefioti
French): A resolution
has just been
adopted unanimously
by the Security Council. In
view of the difficulties inherent in the question and
the gap between the various views expressed in the
Council, we believe that this result has been possible
only because of the devotion and efforts of the delegations of all the States members of the -Council.
But it must be emphasized-and
I do so with the
greatest pleasure-that
your experience, Mr. President, your skill and your dynamic approach have
been decisive both with regard to the effective conduct of the Council’s work and with regard to the
possibility
of reaching a constructive
and realistic
resolution.

tation

137. I believe that the Portuguese Government’s
position is well known because my delegation not
only has spoken on three occasions during this
debate, but also has had an opportunity
to disc.uss
the matter informally with several delegations and to
explain its position in detail. Thus, I do not think I
shall be telling anybody anything new if I state
that we would have preferred some paragraphs of
the resolution to be drafted differently, and pa&ularly we would have preferred a stronger and more
direct condemnation
of Indonesia’s
armed intervention. Nevertheless,
we believe that this resolution is an extremely important step towards the peaceful and negotiated solution of a conflict created in
East Timor by foreign ambitions and intervention.

140. What I have just said allows for the conclusion that as a whole the resolution just adopted
seems to us to be positive. Indeed, what is essentially at stake here is the need to put an end to
aggression and military intervention in East Timor, in
order to make it possible. for the people of that
Territory freely to exercise its right to self-determination and independence.
There can be no doubt
that that is the crux .of the matter,‘~and it must be
recognized that the resolution adopted today is a first
step in that direction.

138. In its letter of 7 December 1975, the Government of Portugal requested that the Council be convened urgently, emphasizing
that that should be
15

14 1, For its part, Portugal is prepared to ,discharge
its obligations at it is called upon to do in the Security
Council resolution and as is dictated by its duty
towards the people of Timor and the international
community.
It expresses the very sincere hope that
the implementation
of this resolution will make it
possible for the people of East Timor finally to
become free and responsible for its own fate.
142. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker at this
afternoon’s meeting is the representative
of Indonesia, on whom I now call.
143. Mr. ANWAR
SAN1 (Indonesia): When I first
spoke before the Council, I expressed my conviction
that under your competent guidance, Mr. President,
this august body would be able to make a constructive contribution
to the solution of the question of
East Timor. Now that this series of meetings has
come to a close, I should like to express the sincere
thanks and appreciation of my delegation to you and
to the other members of the Council for the efforts
that have been made.
144. My delegation
has studied with great care
the resolution
that the Council has just adopted.
We are not happy with it because, in my delegation’s
view, it does not take sufficiently
into account
what has really been happening in East Timor since
August of this year. Again and again I have stated
on behalf of my delegation that Indonesia respects
the right of the people of East Timor to self-determination and that the Indonesian
presence in East
Timor has been upon the specific request of the
people of East Timor, represented by four of their
parties.

145. But, whatever o r own evaluation may be of
the practicability
and e ectiveness .of the resolution,
it has become a decis’on of the. Security Council.
May I be allowed to st ss the followingtwo
points:
first, that the measure to be taken by the United
Nations to ‘implement
this resolution
will indeed
re-establish peaceful co ditions to enable the people
of East Timor freely t exercise their right to selfdetermination,
and that those measures will not lead
to a return to the situ tion of bloody conflict and
1 therefore; whatever action
chaos, and secondly, that
the United Nations may decide to take to enable
the people of East Timor to exercise freely their
right to self-determination,
such action should be
the result of thorough consultations with the people
of the Territory.
146. Indonesia remains of the view that the future political status of East Timor must be decided by
its own people as the outcome of the free exercise
of their right of self-determinationin conditions of
peace and order on the basis of General Assembly
resolutions
1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV). Indonesia,
for its part, will do its best to co-operate as far as
possible with the United Nations, taking into account
the wishes of the people of the Territory.and
existing
realities in East Timor. In the present circumstances,
the people of the Territory themselves who are the
party directly concerned must play the decisive role
in charting the road of decolonization
in East Timor.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
Notes

I Seeresolution 384 (1975).

2 See OJIJicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2370th meeting.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS
8

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UMES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou GeGve.
IEAK. nOJIYUHTh

tI3AAHIIR

MJAPHWR
Opra~wsaqw~
sftiax
w arewrcmax

OPI’AHEI

O~~~~HH~HH~IX
BO BC~X pahonax

r3arueM

KHHXKHO~~ Mara3sHe

Has&f,

Cexqu~

COMO

CONSEGUIR

no npo~axe

3AvMN

OE’bEAkfHEHHhIX

HAUZIH

~ynmb
B KHH~~KH~IX
brat-acnparm~
06 mAaHRRX
a
WIIH ~UUIHT~ no aapecy : OpraHki3aunfi
06’beJWHeHHbIX
usAaHui%,
Hbm-FfopK
unw ~KeHeaa.

PUBLICACIONES

HarwtR
bmpa.

raom~o
HaBoAHTe

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciqnes Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. ConsuIte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in UnitedNations.

NewY

ark

00400

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
