.UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

UN

LBRSARY

FE0 2 3 134’

1851 st

MEETING:

23 OCTOBER

m/u
1975

~j&Y-J-!~fq

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/l85 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency Force
(S/l 1849) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

S/PV. 1851

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations,document,
:
L.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Dqcisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

’ ’

1851st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
Presidenf:

Mr. Olof RYDBECK

23 October

(Sweden).

Protocol TS/I1818/Add.l-51
and have indicated the
reinforcements
both in personnel and in equipment
which UNEF will require if it is to carry out these
tasks effectively. I am very much aware that these
reinforcements
impose a new financial burden on the
Organization. I wish therefore to assure the members
of the Council that we have studied the recommendations from the field in this regard with the greatest
care and have had very much in mind the need for
the maximum possible economy, compatible with the
effective discharge by UNEF of its task.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic,
China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania,
Sweden, Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/lW)
5. The future operation of UNEF is envisaged in a
northern and a southern area which together comprise
a line more than twice as long as the previous area of
deployment.
In addition, a number of detailed and
complex tasks are envisaged for UNEF which it was
previously not called upon to carry out. The terrain in
most of the new area of deployment
is extremely
difficult, comprising desert, some mountainous areas
and a long coastal strip along the Gulf of Suez.
Inevitably,
such a task requires an increase in
manpower, in logistical capacity and in various forms
of communication.

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/ 11849)
The meeting

1975, at 10.30 a.m.

was called to order

Adoption

at II .I0 a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-Generai on the United Nations
Emergency Force (S/11849)

6. In addition to these circumstances, the new tasks
conferred on UNEF call for two forms of activity in
which it has not engaged before, namely, aerial and
coastal surveillance.
It is for this reason that four
helicopters, two light aircraft and a small naval unit are
included in the reinforcements.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to direct the
attention of the members of the Council to the draft
resolution S/11856. During consultations prior to this
meeting an agreement was reached among the members
of the Council on this draft resolution, as well as on
the procedure to be followed, to the effect that
representatives
wishing to speak would do so after
the vote on the draft resolution.

7. As I have indicated in my report, I hope that at
least some of the additional
requirements
will be
provided on a voluntary basis, free of cost to the
United
Nations.
I have made some preliminary
soundings in this regard and as soon as the Council
has made its decision I shall make more formal
approaches. I hope very much that the Member
States will respond as generously as possible to these
approaches in the interest of ensuring the proper and
efficient conduct of this important peace-keeping task.

2. Before the Council proceeds to the vote, I shall
call on the Secretary-General
in connexion with his
report.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The Security
Council has before it my report on the United Nations
Emergency
Force (UNEF).
As members of the
Council will have noted, this report deals with the
carrying out by UNEF of its duties during the past
three months, and also covers new responsibilities.

8. Before concluding, I wish to emphasize the great
significance
of the United Nations peace-keeping
function as it has developed in the Middle East and
the importance which I attach to the full and understanding support which the Council continues to show
for these operations. We demand a great deal from the
officers and men of the peace-keeping forces and I
can safely say that, up to now, they have responded
magnificently
to the challenge. In the new period

4. In my report I have set out the new tasks
conferred upon UNEF under the Agreement between
Egypt and Israel of 4 September, its annex and the
1

which is before us, subject, of course, to the decisions
which the Council may take on this matter, I am sure
that they will continue to carry out their difficult
duties in accordance with the highest standards of
the Organization,
and that the Council will not fail
to continue to afford to them all necessary support.
For our part, I and my zolleagues will continue to do
ourutmosttorecmrc&thetwo~ofthe
highest efficiency with economy and good administration.
9. The PRESIDENT:
for his statement.

“Egypt is confident that the Council will continue
to follow closely the developments
in the Middle
East, and that the momentum
for, achieving a
comprehensive
settlement
in accordance
with
United Nations resolutions will be preserved and
enhanced, in particular
through the , reconvening
of the Geneva Conference in the immediate future
with the full par&@&m
of all, the parties
concerned.”
11. I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
S/11856, in accordance with the procedure agreed
upon previously.

I thank the Secretary-General

10. I want to inform members of the Council that I
have this morning received a letter from Mr. Ysmail
Fahmy, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister
for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, with a request that this letter
be read to the Council, which I now propose to do:

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
none. l

was adopted

by 13 votes to

Two members (China and Iraq) did not participate
the voting.

“I am writing to you in connection
with the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Emergency Force, due on 24 October1975

in

12. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have asked to speak, following the voting, and I
shall now call on them.

“You may recall that the appeal [see S/11771]
addressed by the President of the Security Council
on behalf of the Council to the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt on 23 July 1975 has stressed
the concern of the Council over the situation in the
Middle East as well as the assurance that the
Council will follow closely the situation in the region
and accordingly
appealed to President Sadat to
reconsider Egypt’s position on the renewal-of the
mandate. Furthermore, the Council has emphasized
the importance of achieving further progress towards
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

13. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Iraq has once again
refrained from participating
in the voting on the
extension of the mandate of UNEF in the Sinai. We
believe that every extension of the mandate of the
Force is providing the Israeli aggressors with more
time to consolidate their occupation.
The Zionists
continue to persist in their notorious policy of “creating
new facts” by establishing
new settlements
and
colonies in the occupied Arab lands. If the Security
Council is genuinely engaged in attempting to find a
just solution for the conflict in the area, it should, a
long time ago, have stopped Israel from pursuing its
illegal actions in the occupied territories. We believe
that the Council’s failure to take a firm stand towards
the Zionists’ flagrant acts of aggression can only
weaken the United Nations and establish dangerous
precedents which the whole world will come to regret.

“You may also recall the views my Government
has formally conveyed to the Secretary-General
on
26 October 1973 [S/11055], in particular that the
presence of the Force on its territory is governed by
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and accepted norms of international
law which safeguard Egypt’s sovereignty
and
territorial integrity.
“Furthermore,
in its reply [see S/11771] to the
appeal of the Council, the Government
of Egypt
stated that it shall continue to cooperate with the
Council in all matters relating to the establishment
of a just and lasting peace in the region within the
realm of the Charter and the framework of the
United Nations resolutions on the question of the
Middle East.

14. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
frbm
French): The question before us falls within a familiar
framework-too
familiar indeed, underlining
vicissitudes of this questiondf
our efforts to find a settlement in the Middle East. These efforts constitute
the contribution
which the international
community,
like the parties directly concerned, expect of us in a
situation which threatens international
peace and
security. It has been our responsibility,
and it still
is, to meet these expectations.

“Consistent with this policy, and in the light of
the efforts currently undertaken
with a view to
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, as well as in conformity with its sovereign
rights, Egypt consents to a further extension of the
mandate of the Force for one year, that is, until
24 October 1976.

15. Sometimes for this purpose, we have adopted
ad hoc texts to deal with an immediate
crisis, and
sometimes
we have laid down, on a longer-term
basis, the principles for a future settlement. In the first
category are the resolutions on the cease-fire and those
which established emergency or observer forces; to the
second group belong resolution 242 (1967) and certain
2

aspects of resolution 338 (1973) of the’Security Council,
to the extent that it ,relates to a type of ‘procedure
for seeking a settlement; excluding the use of force.

expenditure,
although,. of course, we are in no way
denying that the expenditure is essential.
20. As when the mandate of the Force was renewed
on previous occasions, the Council certainly does not
feel that its decision represents any lasting solution.
The action it authorizes belongs in the category of the
ad hoc measures I referred to earlier. The Council,
therefore,
has not forgotten
the more long-term
objectives which it has also established. It is just
because it understands how time presses that it has
the duty of responding to immediate needs by trying
to avert the more obvious threats. It can hope in this
way to open the way for consideration of the substance
of the problem. This consideration,
in turn, calls for
an -approach that takes into the account the three
principles
on which we believe a lasting peace
settlement
could be based, principles
which we
recently reafftrmed in the Declaration on the Development of Friendship and co-operation between France
and the Soviet Union, signed jointly on 17 October
1975, at the end of the visit to the Soviet Union of
the President of the French Republic [see S/11877].

16. Obviously there can be no contradiction between
these two kinds of texts; and one cannot prevent
the implementation
of ‘the other. Equally obviously,
the Council, except where the Charter confers upon
it exclusive competence,
does not act in isolation.
The General Assembly,’ too, has made recommendations on various aspects of the question, by no means
the least important.
The parties themselves have
concluded agreements, and the Powers interested in a
settlement of the problem have offered their assistance.
In this complex tangle, what counts finally is the result
and the will to maintain
this were to be paralysed in the present circumstances
by obstacles encountered
on the road, inevitably
there would be the most serious consequences,
because the situation remains explosive.
17. It is within this general context that we should
view the decision we have just taken. Two of the
principal parties to the conflict have agreed, with the
assistance of the Secretary of State of the United
States, to undertake a new disengagement restoring to
Egypt an additional
portion of its territory. This is
progress to the extent that this agreement makes it
possible to reduce tension and to promote the continuation of over-all negotiation.
This is also progress
towards the evacuation
of the Arab territories
occupied by Israel, which has been called for since
1967 by the Council, progress for which President
Sadat deserves the credit.

21. I should like to remind members, as I did at
previous meetings of the Council on the same subject,
these principles
are, first, the evacuation of the
territories occupied by Israel in 1967; secondly, the
recognition
of the right of the Palestinians
to a
homeland; and thirdly, the right of all States in the
region to live in peace within secure, recognized and
guaranteed frontiers. With regard to guarantees for a
future settlement, I should also remind members that
my country remains ready to make an active contribution to a system of over-all guarantees with a view
to strengthening peace in the area.

18. This agreement makes even more necessary the
maintenance
of the Force, which has been in the
region since the autumn of 1973, because it is now
being given a wider responsibility,
much broader in
scope, although in substance it is not different from
the task agreed on at the outset. This responsibility
also demonstrates
the growing confidence of the
parties in the Force, in the light of past experience.
At the same time, it is a tribute to those who had
responsibility
for the Force and to the contingents
that make it up, a tribute with which my delegation
fully associates itself. This is also a confirmation
of
the irreplaceable contribution
that the United Nations
can make in situations where peace itself is threatened.
It is therefore entirely logical and fully justified that in
response to the expectations of the parties the Council
should have renewed the mandate of the Force.

22. We therefore express the hope that the necessary
conditions for resuming the Geneva Conference can
be established as soon as possible or, in any case,
the conditions for genuine negotiation so that we can
finally deal with the essential problems and apply the
principles I have mentioned. Only an ‘over-all settlement bearing on all the aspects of the conflict can
bring about the just and lasting peace that the whole
region needs so sorely.
23. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
My delegation was very pleased to vote for the draft resolution
which we have just adopted renewing the mandate of
UNEF for a further year. As the Secretary-General
put it in his report, the presence of UNEF remains
essential not only to help maintain the cease-fire
called for in resolution 338 (1973), but also to assist
in the implementation
of the new agreement concluded
between Israel and Egypt. Despite the progress that has
been made, the situation in the area remains fragile.
We have no doubt that UNEF’s presence continues
to be essential to provide the necessary calm within
which alone efforts can continue towards the conclusion of an over-all settlement. At the same time,
under the terms of the new agreement, to which my

19. While recognizing that the new responsibilities
of UNEF and the broadening of its field of operations
justify a substantial increase in its expenditures,
we
are nevertheless very much concerned about the
financial aspects of the operation. This will be an
additional burden on the budget of the Organization,
and consequently upon all Member States. In these
circumstances,
stringent and continuing
efforts at
economy should be made to avoid a too rapid rise in
3

delegation attaches the greatest importince,
a number
of essential new tasks are assigned to UNEF. The role
of UNEF in the area has thus become more important
than ever before.

at Geneva. The contribution which the United Nations
has made, both to the maintenance of peace in the
Middle East and to the progress of the negotiations,
is a very significant one indeed. The part which UNEF
has played is one in which we can all take pride and
one which deserves our continuing support.

24. In previous meetings of the Council to extend the
mandate of UNEF, we made clear our view that UNEF
remains in the Middle East not to serve as a substitute
for a settlement but to provide the essential conditions
for negotiations
towards a settlement.
My Govemment has therefore been very glad to note the progress
which has been made towards this end by the conclusion of the recent Agreement
between Israel
and Egypt for a further withdrawal in the Sinai. As
the Agreement itself says, it represents no more than
a step towards a just and lasting peace. It is, however,
an extremely valuable step not only in its own practical
effects, but even more for the impetus which we hope
it will provide to making progress towards a Middle
East settlement as a whole. I would like to place on
record our ,admiration for the tremendous efforts of
statesmanship,
and also perseverance, which have
been made in bringing the negotiations for this Agreement to a successful conclusion.

27. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation voted for
the draft resolution. We are fully satisfie,d with the
Council’s decision of today. We also wish to express
our satisfaction and appreciation over Egypt’s action
in’ consenting to the extension of the mandate ,of
UNEF for one year. The fact that UNEF’s mandate
has been extended for a year this time, instead of for
three or six months as in previous cases, reassures us
that significant progress has been made towards a
settlement
of the Middle
East problem.
In this
connexion
we have read with great interest the
Secretary-General’s
report for the three months ending
16 October 1975.
28. I avail myself of this opportunity to pay a sincere
tribute to the Governments which have contributed
troops to UNEF; to the Commanders of the Force,
-Lieutenant-General
Ensio Siilasvuo until 20 August
1975, and since that time Major-Genera1
Bengt
Liljestrand;
to the officers and men of the Force and
its civilian staff, and also to the military observers of
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO)
who co-operated with and assisted UNEF
in the fulfilment of its responsibilities.
And I cannot
fail to express my appreciation
to ‘the SecretaryGeneral and his devoted assistants for their work in
organizing,
depioying
and supplying
UNEF.
My
delegation feels highly gratified that the Council has
given its endorsement
to the Agreement between
Egypt and Israel, concluded last September,
by
renewing the mandate of UNEF.
The Agreement
reflects the determination
of the parties concerned to
move towards peace, as stipulated in’ article I. We
offer our high praise to all those whose attitudes and
efforts made this Agreement possible.

25. It is now; however, of the utmost importance that
this Agreement should be followed up by further efforts
to carry the negotiations forward. The conclusion of
this Agreement and the renewal of the mandate of
UNEF for one year provide a real opportunity
for
progress to be made towards the comprehensive
settlement which we all seek and without which, as the
Secretary-Genera1 has himself noted, there can be no
real security in the Middle East. At all costs, therefore,
we must now resist allowing the pace of the negotiations to slacken. The momentum
of the negotiations
has been regained and it is vitally important that full
advantage should be taken. of this to make. further
progress.
26. In conclusion,
I should like to express my
admiration to the Secretary-Genera1 and his staff, and
to Genera1 Siilasvuo and the staff of UNEF,
first
for the way in which UNEF has carried out its tasks
over the past three months and, secondly, for the speed
and efficiency with which they have responded in
difticult circumstances
and in the very short time
available to them to the additional tasks now being
placed on UNEF by the new agreement. I would
like to add here, too, a tribute to the Governments of
Canada, Finland, Ghana, Indonesia, Poland, Senegal
and Sweden, which provide the contingents making
up the Force and which will also now be. making
additional personnel available to undertake these new
tasks. We appreciate the. sacrifices which they are
making in the cause of peace in the Middle East. I
would also like to commend the important role played
by Genera1 Siilasvuo and the United Nations Secretariat in the complex negotiations leading up to the
signing of the Protocol [see S111818/AddS, of 10 October 197.51 to the Agreement in the Military Working
Group of the Peace Conference on the Middle East,

29. The conclusion of the Agreement brightens our
hopes for still further progress towards a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, but the situation in the area
continues to be potentially dangerous. My delegation
fully shares the Secretary-General’s
observations in
paragraph 28 of his report, from which I quote:
“The interim
agreement
between Egypt and
Israel, concluded last September, is an important
development. However, any relaxation of the search
for a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects
of the Middle East problem could be especially
dangerous in the months to come.”
30. It is our conviction that it is all the more necessary
to maintain the momentum of negotiations towards a
final solution in compliance
with Security Council
resolution 338 (1973).
4

_-

31. The basic position of Japan towards the Middle
East problem is well known. I shall not repeat it today,
but I wish to recall the statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan, Mr. Kiichi Miyazawa, in the
General Assembly on 23 September this year. After
remarking
that much more remained to be done,
Mr. Miyazawa continued:

“A Middle East settlement cannot make a headway if those crucial problems are left unsolved.
Without their solution a settlement in ,the Middle
East can only be delayed indefinitely, with increasing
dangers for the situation. No palliative measures
or camouflaging
can change the substance of the
matter.

“My Government
strongly urges the countries
concerned’ to maintain their momentum
towards
a peaceful settlement,
specifically
towards the
speedy implementation
of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in accordance with Security Council
resolution 338 (1973).2

.. .

“The main problems of the Middle East are still
awaiting solution. There is appropriate machinery
for their examination-the
Geneva Peace Conference. The Soviet Union stands for the reconvening of the Conference with the participation
of
all-and
I stress ‘all’-parties
concerned, including
representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. It will be recalled that the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly reaffirmed by an
overwhelming majority the right of the Arab people
of Palestine to self-determination
and national
sovereignty. The solution of the Palestine problem is
an integral part of an over-all settlement in the
Middle East.“3

32. Indeed, in the past 27 years the United Nations
managed on four different occasions to set up ceasefire machinery that would assist and encourage a just
and durable settlement of the Middle East problem.
On the three occasions in the past, however, the
cease-fire machinery failed to provide the time and
the circumstances necessary for a settlement. Today,
my delegation views the outlook with real hope and
feels confident that the cease-fire, and with it the
extension of the mandate of UNEF for one year, will
provide the time necessary to negotiate a final solution
of the problem.

36. It was also stressed that the Soviet Union was
ready to continue to do everything in its power to see
the Middle East became a zone of lasting,and durable
peace. That is the most important thing that we, the
Soviet people, want to see in the Middle East, an
area directly adjacent to. the southern frontiers of
our own country. Regardless of the slander engaged
in by malicious anti-Soviet people against the policy
and position of the USSR on the Middle East question,
this remains precisely our policy: to see to it that the
Middle East should become an area of lasting and
reliable peace. .This is the only correct and just
policy, both with regard to the Arab peoples, the
victims of aggression,“and
with regard to Israel, the
aggressor, which has occupied the lands of others by
force and continues to hold them.

33. In concluding,
we earnestly hope that today’s
action by the Council constitutes a real and welcome
milestone in the long effort to solve the problem of the
Middle East.
34. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interprctution
from Russian): The Security Council
is once again discussing the question of extending
the mandate of UNEF in the Middle East, a Force
which, as is well known, was created by resolution 340 (1973) of the Council to ensure the ceasefire and prevent a resumption of hostilities and thus
speed up the achievement of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, on the basis of United Nations
decisions and primarily the resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) of the Security Council.

37. The position of principle of the Soviet Union on
the Middle East problem was once again confirmed
in the Declaration
on the Development
of Friendship and Co-operation between France and the Soviet
Union,
signed by the General Secretary of the
Central Committee
of the Communist
Party of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, and the President of
the French Republic, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing, on the
occasion of an official visit to the Soviet Union by
the President of France. This has been mentioned
here already by the representative
of France [see
para. 20 above]. The following was stated in that
joint Declaration:

35. In this regard, the delegation
of the USSR
considers it necessary once again to confirm the
position of principle of the Soviet Union with regard
to the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, in the interests of all States and peoples
of the area. The USSR still firmly believes in the need
for the total elimination of the consequences of Israeli
aggression; the liberation of all Arab lands occupied
by Israel in 1967; ensuring the lawful rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including its right to the
creation of its own State; and guaranteeing the rights
of all States of the Middle East to an independent
existence and development.
This position of the
Soviet Union was once again exhaustively set forth
at the current session of the General Assembly by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, Mr. Gromyko. In his statement Mr. Gromyko, setting forth
the position of the USSR, stated:

“Great attention has been given to the situation
in the Middle East, which continues to be a source
of grave concern to France and the Soviet Union.
The two Parties are convinced that a just and
lasting cannot be established in that region unless the
Israeli troops are withdrawn from all the Arab
5

41. In this regard, the Soviet delegation would like
to express its satisfaction at the fact that, in the draft
resolution just adopted by the Council,, there is a
reflection of a provision contained in paragraph 28
ofthe report of the Secretary-General
to the effect that:

territories occupied in 1967, the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people are secured, including their
right to have a homeland, and the right of all States
and peoples of that region to independent existence
and development,
with in secure and recognized
frontiers, is solidly guaranteed.

“any relaxation of the search for a comprehensive
settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East
problem could be especially dangerous in the months
to come... [and] that urgent efforts will be undertaken by all concerned to tackle the Middle East
problem in all its aspects, with a view both to
maintaining
quiet in the region and to arriving at
the comprehensive
settlement called for by the
Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973):’

“France and the Soviet Union will continue. to
maintain constant contact with each other and to
hold appropriate
consultations
on questions concerning a settlement in the Middle East.
The Soviet delegation
would like to express its
profound satisfaction at the fact that the position of the
Soviet Union with regard to the achievement of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East coincides with
France’s position.

The Soviet delegation,
upon whose initiative
the
resolution came to contain these provisions,
fully
supports them. The Soviet Union firmly advocates
and will continue firmly to advocate an immediate
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem
and will make every effort to see to it that real progress
is achieved towards a final and lasting solution to this
question.

38. With reference to the question of the extension
of the mandate of UNEF in the disengagement zone in
the Sinai Peninsula, now under consideration by the
Council, the delegation of the USSR considers it
necessary to make the following statement.
39. It would be a dangerous illusion and a serious
mistake
to attempt
to use disengagement
as a
pretext for freezing the existing situation in the Middle
East, to cover up and justify the continuation
of the
occupation by Israeli troops of the Arab lands occupied
in 1967 or for disregarding the lawful national rights
of the Arab people of-Palestine.
The.problem
of the
Middle East should be solved as a whole. Its individual,
separate aspects, parts or stages should be indissolubly
linked with a general and immediate
settlement and
should be parts of a whole; otherwise,
partial
measures such as the disengagement of the troops of
the two sides carry within them the danger of being
confirmed into an illusory palliative,
with all the
dangerous consequences flowing therefrom for the
situation in the Middle East and for the cause of
peace. A comprehensive
settlement of the problem
of the Middle East should in no way be postponed,
and still less should it be frozen. It is precisely in this
regard that the Soviet delegation should like once
again to confirm that United Nations troops in the
Middle East should in no way be used as a means of
perpetuating
the occupation of Arab territories by
Israel.

42. The USSR will continue to pursue its position of
principle of support for the Arab countries and peoples
in their just struggle for their rights and for the elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression. Until
such time as Israel stops flouting the lawful rights of
other countries, its neighbours, and occupying their
lands, there can be:.no lasting peace in the Middle
East.
43. In discussing the question of renewing the
mandate of UNEF, the Security Council cannot fail
to notice the fact once again, as emerges clearly from
paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s
report, that
Israel, despite the decisions of the Security Council
and in violation thereof, and displaying an obstinacy
worthy of a better cause, is continuing its discrimination against the majority of the contingents making
up UNEF,
limiting
their freedom of movement
to
Egyptian territory occupied by Israeli troops. The
fundamental and practical need for ensuring equality
of attitude towards all contingents
of the United
Nations
international
forces, regardless of their
nationality,
and the granting to them of total freedom
of movement,
has assumed particular importance in
the circumstances of a certain expansion and complication of the zone of operations of UNEF,
as was
reported to us by the Secretary-General.

40. The delegation of the USSR has no intention of
objecting at the present time to a further extension
of the mandate of UNEF for one year, on the understanding that its present functions, as defined in the
relevant decisions of the Security Council, will not
change in substance. The consent of the Soviet Union
to an extension of the mandate of UNEF in the EgyptIsraeli sector is also given on the understanding that
the period of this extension should be actively used
to take real steps towards a genuine peace settlement
in the Middle -East, in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

44. No one would deny the obvious fact that a solution to this problem will determine, to a considerable
extent, the effectiveness of the operations of UNEF
as a single and effective military unit, something which
the Secretary-General
and the Commander of UNEF
stress. This will also make possible the carrying out of
UNEF operations in these new circumstances without
increasing their strength and with the maximum
economy of funds to maintain them. It would exclude
6

I^,

duplication
and parallelism
in the carrying out of
operations caused by the. discriminatory
measures
taken by the Israeli occupation authorities.

in the establishment
of UNEF in the Middle
After all, UNEF is also led by generals.

East.

49. The initial request, as we all know, with regard
to the strength of UNEF was presented to the Security
Council as 7,000 men [see S/f 1052/Rev.I]. We objected
to such a figure at that time and experience has really
confirmed the correctness of our position. The facts
have substantially altered those figures. At the present
time the strength of UNEF, as is clear from the report
of the Secretary-General,
is less than 4,000 men, that
is, 3,000 less than the initial estimates. Nevertheless,
with almost half the number, UNEF is still coping
with its tasks. Accordingly,
at that time the request
was excessively high, and in this light, serious doubts
arise about the necessity for an additional increase
in the strength of UNEF by almost 1,000 men.

45. The discrimination
by Israel against a number of
the contingents
of States Members of the United
Nations which make up the United Nations international force, and the limitation on their freedom of
movement, shackles and paralyses the work of those
troops. As a result of this, the Secretary-General
was forced to put before the Council the question of
a further increase in strength and also a considerable
increase-by
a sum of more than $30 million-of
expenditure for the maintenance of those troops at the
expense of all States Members of the United Nations..
States Members of t%e United Nations are forced
to pay, and, what is more, to bear-tremendous
additional expenditure, primarily for the consequences
of Israeli aggression, and secondly, for the consequences of their discriminatory
policy against a
majority of the contingents of UNEF. In the circumstances, it would be fair to allocate to the aggressor
at least half the expenditure involved in the maintenance of UNEF.

50. In view of these reasons and factors, and in the
light of the resolution just adopted, in which the
Council calls for UNEF to display maximum economy
and to ensure maximum
efficiency,
it would be
advisable for the Secretary-General
and the UNEF
Command once again to review this question so that
the increase in strength of UNEF and the related
expenditure
could be really minimal.
The Soviet
delegation would like to express the hope that this
provision of the resolution with regard to maximum
economy of resources for maintaining UNEF will be
unswervingly complied with by the Secretariat of the
United Nations and the UNEF
Command
in the
Middle East.

46. It is precisely as a consequence of these and a
number of other reasons, that the delegation
of
the USSR sees no grounds for such a great increase
in the strength of UNEF and the related expenditure.
Such an increase is not occasioned, as is quite clear
from the report of the Secretary-General,
by the actual
situation in the disengagement
area. The situation
there, as is clear from his report, is calm, at least for
today. In any case an increase in the strength of
UNEF and its expenditure
should be minimal,
as
has quite correctly been provided for in the resolution
adopted by the Council today.

51. The objection may be raised that as a result of
the expansion of the zone of disengagement and the
inclusion in that zone even of water space, the need
might arise that, to judge from the report of the
Secretary-General,
UNEF should be equipped with
four coastal patrol vessels and also four helicopters
and three aircraft for air patrols and other purposes.
In this regard it is appropriate and correct to expect
assistance for UNEF on the part of the parties directly
concerned, the parties to the Disengagement
Agreement [see S/11198]. Indeed, both parties to that
Agreement, as we all know, have in their possession
patrol vessels, helicopters and aircraft. It would be
appropriate, therefore, for the Secretary-General
and
the UNEF Command to ask them to help UNEF in
this matter. I believe that a positive reaction to this
request on the part of the parties to the Agreement
would be favourably received by the Security Council.
There is also no doubt that such a gesture and act of
goodwill on the part of both parties to the Agreement
would meet with a positive response on the part of
Member States which are being forced to bear the
burden of expenditures to pay for UNEF in the Middle
East.

47. Indeed, it is clear to everyone that even the
slightest increase in expenditure for the maintenance
of UNEF places an additional burden on the budgets
of States Member of the United Nations and hurts
their pocket-books.
These compulsory
levies on
Member States, in the form of additional contributions
to pay for Israeli aggression, prove to be a very
heavy financial burden for many countries, which is
borne out by the fact that up to 1 October this year
an overwhelming
majority
of Member
States
-119 countries-had
not paid their full contributions
for these purposes for 1975 and 54 States had not fully
paid their contributions
for these purposes from the
very beginning of the establishment
of UNEF.
Of
those, 23 States have not paid a single dollar of their
contributions.
Those
are the actual facts and the
‘. Council cannot disregard them.
48. A further increase in the strength of UNEF must
also relate to our experience of its creation and
functioning. It is said that certain generals prefer to
have under their command
two divisions,
as a
minimum,
instead of one and that is what happened

52. To sum up, the Soviet delegation would like
once again to stress that the consent of the Soviet
Union to the renewal of the mandate of UNEF is
given on the understanding that such a renewal should
7

.

.,.

_.

be actively used for the taking of real steps towards
a genuinely peaceful settlement of the Middle East
problem in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) of the Security Council, without further
procrastination
or delay, and without any attempts to
freeze the present abnormal, unjust, and consequently
dangerous situation for peace in the Middle East.

Palestinians are not ,allowed .to return to their homes
and to recover ,their rights, any peace can ,only be
provisional, and ,even potentially dangerous;,
58. We could even say that this relative cairn which
today prevails on the Egyptian, Jordanian and Syrian
fronts can be jeopardized
at any time, particularly
when one knows that Israel’s military .potential is
growing substantially and in’s most serious manner,
which could have ominous consequences. This state
of affairs has often been emphasized in the Council.
We therefore hope that the presence of UNEF will
not serve to consolidate the status quo but will promote
the urgent quest for a comprehensive
solution to the
entire problem.
.’

53. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
The renewal today of UNEF’s mandate for a period
of one year, and its continuing role as envisaged in
the Secretary-General’s
report, is an essential part of
the process leading towards a viable solution to the
conflict in the Middle East. Together, with the Agreement signed by Egypt and Israel on 4 September, it
presents us with an opportunity that we must not miss.
This is the opportunity to move forward, to continue
the process, to maintain the momentum. We therefore
welcome the extension of the mandate of UNEF with
a sense of dedication and determination
to continue
in our efforts for a negotiated settlement in the Middle
East that will ensure a just and lasting peace.

59. It is in this spirit that we consider this decision
of the Council as a step in that direction-a
step that
should lead as soon as possible .to progress in other
sectors. It is for this reason that we have supported
:
this decision -of the Council. ’
60. We should have preferred, of course, that the
mandate of the Force be of ,a more limited duration
so as to avoid prolonging for another year the situation
of no-war, no-peace. ,But Egypt in this case being
the only party which could decide on the duration -of
the mandate of UNEF on its national territory, we
have agreed to the one-year period decided on by the
Council. We must insist on the fact that, just as Egypt
alone can agree to renewal of the mandate, of course,
the Council can shorten the duration, of the mandate
if Egypt so requests.. It could not be otherwise, since
the Force is carrying .out its mandate on Egyptian
national soil.

54. It is the policy of the United States, as expressed
by Secretary of State Kissinger
to the General
Assembly on 22 September, that we are: “determined
to take every feasible step to... promote further
practical progress towards final peace’*4.
55. I am pleased to note from the Secretary-General’s
report the continuing stability and quiet in the area of
UNEF’s
operation and the exemplary bearing and
general discipline of all members of the Force. I am
confident that UNEF, praiseworthily led by Generals
Siilasvuo and Liljestrand,
and ably supported by the
Secretariat staff, will meet the challenge of its continuing heavy responsibilities.
I congratulate them and
you, Mr. President, for your leadership in bringing
us today to this important and essential renewal of
UNEF’s mandate.

61. In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General
and his aides for the remarkable
manner in which UNEF
is acquitting itself of its
mission. May I extend my gratitude also to the Member
States supplying contingents to the Force, thereby
contributing
to the quest for a solution
to this
distressing problem of the Middle East.

56. Mr. LAI Ya-ii (China) (translation from Chinese):
During the general debate at the current session of the
General Assembly, the Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs already expounded in a comprehensive
way
the Chinese Government’s position on the Middle East
question, and I am not going to repeat it here. With
regard to the question concerning UNEF, now under
discussion at the Security Council,
the Chinese
delegation has always held a different position in
principle.
Based on such a position,
we did not
participate in the voting on the draft resolution.

62. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): The draft resolution
we have just adopted extends the mandate of UNEF
once more, but on this occasion for a period of one
year. The Council
has thus departed from the
precedents set in relation to its previous decisions
extending the mandates of the United Nations forces
in the area, which have seen extensions for periods
of no more than six months. This longer but welcome
extension has come about as a .result of the Agreement between Egypt and Israel of 4 September 1975.
It is an agreement which has required of the Egyptian
people and their leaders much fortitude and courage
in circumstances of great difficulty, and despite the
situation in which their lands continue to be despoiled
by a foreign occupier.

57. Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(inferpretation
from French): The draft resolution just adopted by
the Council, renewing the mandate of UNEF, is part
of our quest for a solution to the problem of the Middle
East, as regards the liberation of the occupied Arab
territories as well as the restoration of the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people. However,
as long as the Arab territories of Egypt, Jordan and
Syria remain occupied by force, and as long as the

63. In referring to this Agreement in a statement in the
general debate in the General Assembly on 1 October,
my Minister for Foreign Affairs stated:
8

“Thecprospects
for lasting peace in the Middle
East begin and end with the rights of the Palestinian
people. For their struggle is an integral part of the
liberation struggle throughout the world. This area,
the ancient cradle of so many cultures and religions,
is today the arena in which is being played out the
competition
and conflict of the interests of major
Powers, Powers which are intent on supporting the
expansionist aims of Zionism, or securing the control
of communications
or of energy resources.

problem
and would fully support the SecretaryGeneral in his sustained efforts to achieve the objective
of freedom of movement of personnel.
67. I should like to make one further observation.
In his report, the Secretary-General
drew the
Council’s attention to high-level meetings between
the Co-Chairmen
of the Geneva Conference and
advised us that he was not privy to the results of
those efforts. I do not know- whether the situation
has improved since then. Now, however, that the
prospects of peace in the Middle’ East appear, no
matter how tentatively, to be less dismal than hitherto,
it is ev.en more necessary for the Council to be
fully apprised of developments in this regard. I would
therefore repeat what I said at an earlier meeting:
my delegation trusts that modalities will be found to
keep the Council informed, through the SecretaryGeneral, of the developments
in relation to the
Geneva Conference, which, it must not be forgotten,
is being held under the auspices of the United Nations.

“1.n the ‘welter of such turbulence we must continue to insist that the foremost responsibility
of
the international
.community
in this area is the
restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people.
“At the same time, we welcome the recent
agreement which has been negotiated, the first agreement not spawned in the immediate wake of armed
conflict. It may be that such gradualist approaches
can lead to an ultimate peace... Such a peace must
be founded on an acceptable
solution
to the
Palestinian problem and on an Israeli withdrawal
from the territories occupied by force.“5

68. Finally, my delegation wishes once again to pay
a tribute to the Secretary-General
and. to his staff
for their untiring efforts, and to express its appreciation
to the men in the Force for their services and to the
countries which provide the contingents.
We are
indeed profoundly grateful to them all.

My delegation hopes that this new agreement will
give an important impetus towards the search for an
over-all settlement leading to just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.

69.

Republic of Cameroon)
The United Republic of
Cameroon has just voted in favour of the draft resolution, by’which the Security Council ‘has’renewed for
one year the mandate of UNEF stationed in the EgyptIsrael sector. Our reasons for that are sufficiently
well known to everyone here to make it unnecessary
for us to emphasize the concern that we feel regarding
the very unstable and potentially explosive situation
which still exists in that part of the world and which
has led the Secretary-General
once again to
recommend, in his report, the continuation by UNEF
of its necessary and complex peace mission.

64. It is in that context that Guyana has been able
to support .the extension of the mandate of UNEF
for a period of one year. We remain conscious,
however, of the Secretary-General’s
most pertinent
observation in paragraph 28 of his report, which has
found a place in our resolution, that

Mr.

(interpretation

“any relaxation of the search for a comprehensive
settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East
problem could be especially dangerous in the months
to come.”

OYONO

(United

frum

French):

Guyana fully subscribes to that analysis.
70. Since the most recent developments in that region
have substantially
increased the important
obligations of UNEF,
my delegation believes that it is
justified
for additional
resources to be given the
Secretary-General
to enable him effectively
to
discharge the task that the Security Council entrusted
to him in resolutions
340 (1973) and 341 (1973)
regarding UNEF.

65. There ,are certain aspects of the SecretaryGeneral’s report which are of special concern to the
Council. It is to,be noted that with the expanded role
envisaged for UNEF the cost of maintaining
the
Force for the period of the next year may amount to
some $100 million. It is a well-worn cliche to say that
the price of peace, though heavy, must be paid. But
that does not absolve us from the responsibility
of
being aware of how heavy that price is becoming.
How much better if this large expenditure could have
been devoted to the economic and social programmes
of ‘the United Nations, which are always without
adequate resources.

71. My delegation is gratified at the peace efforts
which were given specific form in the Agreement
signed on 14 September 1975 between Egypt and Israel
and which made it possible to unfreeze a situation
that had entailed serious risks of armed confrontation.
The .Governments
of Israel and Egypt have made it
clear that they regard that Agreement as an important
step towards a just and lasting peace, and not as a
peace agreement. In other words, additional efforts
must be made in the dynamic atmosphere of goodwill

66. My delegation notes also from the report that
the problem of restrictions on the freedom of movement of personnel of certain specified contingents
still exists. We repeat our concern at this continuing
9

.‘.

that has been created, in order to accelerate the
establishment
of a peace which, if it is to be lasting
in that region must above all be just.

,.;;

$5:

.

with respect% the efforts displayed through the years
in’ order to reach the final. objective of a just and
durable .peace in .the Middle East. To this’tnd, some
significant results have already been achieved, and
among the most recent we must attach to.the reopening
of the Suez Canal all the symbolic
and factual
importance. it deserves. Moreover, there is a widespread feeling that further encouraging progress may be
in sight. At this juncture,
renewing the current
mandate of UNEF appears a necessary ‘measure to
safeguard the pursuance of a dynamic negotiating
process, leading to the implementation
of resolution
338 (1973) of the Council.

72. My delegation is convinced, that, as the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Cameroon
emphasized on 30 September last, during the general
debate at the thirtieth
session of the General
Assembly,6 a felicitous outcome of the Middle East
problem is to be found in an over-all solution of the
basic causes of the present situation, a solution taking
into account the interests of all the parties concerned,
and particularly
the legitimacy
of the claims of the
Palestinian people for the full exercise of all their
rights, including their right to their own homeland.

78. The Secretary-General’s
report exhaustively
illustrates the activity of UNEF in the three-month
period which is about to end, and gives abundant
proof that this body has offtcially fulfilled its assignment, thus assuring the stability of the area under
its control. Among various tasks, those mentioned in
paragraphs 15 and 19 of the report, and the new tasks
referred to in paragraph 20, have been of particular
importance
in this period.
Their
prompt
and
courageous implementation
has provided a considerable contribution
to the maintenance of the ceasefire. On the other hand, it has to be emphasized that
a further renewal and the prolongation of the present
situation should by no means be considered in itself
a result on which we can rest. Rather, we share the
Secretary-General’s
assessment that the next months
will be crucial for bringing
about new positive
negotiating results~in the. interests of the Middle Eastern
region.‘
.

73. It is because we are convinced that peace and
security in the Middle East can be achieved only
through such an over-all approach, and without underestimating the complexity of the problem which has
led, for practical
considerations
and reasons of
effectiveness,
to step-by-step
approaches
to the
settlement of the problem, that my delegation accepts
the renewal of the mandate of UNEF for one year,
in the hope that the parties directly concerned will
make good use of the time thus given to them to speed
up the process of a total and peaceful settlement of the
Middle East question in accordance with Security
Council resolution 338 (1973).
74. In conclusion, my delegation would once again
express its sincere gratitude to the Secretary-Genetil,
to General Ensio Siilasvuo, Commander of the Force
until August, and to his successor, General Bengt
Liljestrand, as well as to all the staff of UNEF, for the
efforts they have made in carrying out their delicate
task.

79. In this connexion, my delegation has taken note
with appreciation and satisfaction of the letter which
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt has addressed to you, Mr. President,
and which you read to us at the opening of this
meeting. The progress advocated seems to have been
the main inspiration, indeed, of the interested parties
themselves when they reached the Agreement
of
4 September 1975.

75. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The important decision taken
by the Security Council this morning to renew for one
whole year the mandate of UNEF seems to indicate
that circumstances
and conditions
have somewhat
improved. Recalling those hard-working and anxious
days last July when the previous renewal for three
months was negotiated, I feel in duty bound to express
the satisfaction of my Government at the betterment
of the situation in the Sinai, and I must also acknowledge that this is due to strenuous, relentless efforts
from many sides to overcome
various difficult
problems with which they were confronted.

80. I should like to express once again the appreciation of my delegation to the parties, Governments
and individuals
alike, who endeavoured with such
dedication
to reach agreement.
The constructive
approach assumed on that occasion and at present
both by Egypt, in further consenting to the stationing
of the Force, and Israel, is still the best ground for
encouragement
to all those who have followed with
great anxiety the development
of the Middle East
situation over 30 years, including many painful crises
and tragic events.

76. The Security Council’s resolution 371 (1975) has
proved a crucial and indispensable step towards new
and major negotiations
and achievements,
as was
rightly foreseen by all those who at the time worked
for its adoption.

81. I should also like to pay tribute to the positive
role played by the Government
of the United States
of America in reconciling opposed positions, and to the
Secretary of State for his personal diplomatic efforts.

77. It is generally acknowledged
that today even
more than before, UNEF appears an irreplaceable
instrument
in fulfilling
the aim of maintaining
tranquillity
and international
order in the area. In so
doing, the Force plays an outstanding auxiliary role

82. It goes without saying that in supporting
adoption
of the Secretary-General’s
report,
10

the
my

delegation joins previous speakers in praising the
dedication -demonstrated by the Commander
of the
Force, by its staff, and -by individual
members ‘of
UNEF, and wishes to express particular gratitude‘and
appreciation of the role of co-ordination
armsupervision played by the Secretary-General
himself with h,is
characteristic efficiency.

East without a solution to these fundamental problems.
In order to achieve a general settlement in the Middle
East, what we need is not separate measures which do
not resolve the fundamental issues, but a renewal of
the work of the Geneva Peace Conference with the
participation
of all interested parties, including the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).

83. I should like to conclude by thanking
the
Secretary-General
for the further information
he has
provided us with this morning.
My delegation
in
particular appreciates the assurance he has given
that the greatest care will be taken in order to reach
, the maximum economy compatible with the effective
discharge of the task conferred upon UNEF.

88. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR voted in
favour of the draft resolution which renews for one
year the mandate of UNEF in the Middle East. In
so doing we considered that the Force should on no
account be used as a means of perpetuating
the
occupation of the Arab territories by Israel.
89. With regard to the financial aspects of the problem
of UNEF’s activities, reference to which is made in
paragraph 24 of the Secretary-General’s
report, we
should like to stress that the Council has repeatedly
said that UNEF
should be maintained
with the
maximum efficiency and economy; reference is made
to this in the draft resolution just adopted by the
Council.

84. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic)
(interpretation
from
Russian): In the course of this year the Security
Council has for the third time now had occasion to
consider the question of renewing the mandate of
UNEF in the Middle East. Unfortunately
one thing
can be said today: the situation in the Middle East
remains complicated
and explosive.
In practice,
because of the position of the aggressor, no steps
have been taken which would demonstrate that the
relevant decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly are being successfully implemented,
decisions designed to bring about a settlement of the
Middle East problem and the establishment there of a
just and lasting peace, something in which the peoples,
not only of the Middle East but of all the countries
of the world, have an interest.

90. In his report, the Secretary-General
once more,
as he has done time and time again, noted the discrimination
by Israel against certain contingents of
UNEF in restricting their freedom of movement. This
obviously reduces the efficiency of UNEF and, in
turn, makes it impossible
to bring the strength of
these troops down to the minimum
required and to
carry out the operations of the United Nations with
the utmost economy. Direct responsibility
for this
situation lies with Israel, and it is time to demand that
Israel cease this discriminatory
practice.

85. In this regard, I must remind you that in its
resolution adopted three months ago [resofufioti 371
f/975)], the Council once again called upon the
interested parties immediately
to implement
resolution 338 (1973) of the Security Council. However,
it is really difficult to talk about any progress in the
implementation
of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338
(1973). The blame for this lies entirely with Israel,
which continues to occupy Arab lands and disregards
decisions of the United Nations, doing everything
it can to delay a comprehensive
settlement in the
Middle East on the basis of those decisions.

91. Without going into detail on the points made in
the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the
increase in the strength of UNEF or the other proposed
additional appropriations,
our delegation would like
to express its conviction that maximum economy will
be achieved and that the Secretariat of the United
Nations will take measures necessary to achieve that
goal, including
decisions to avoid increasing the
strength of UNEF.
92. At the same time, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR would like to state with regard to the
implementation
of the provisions of the resolutions
of the Security Council concerning maximum economy
of funds appropriated
for UNEF operations in the
Middle East, that it is important to have an accounting
of the expenditures for the maintenance of UNEF in
that area. In our view this question deserves attention
and has assumed even greater urgency because the
proposed general volume of expenditure
for the
maintenance
of these forces, if not substantially
reduced, will amount to a sum almost equal to one
third of the annual budget of the United Nations.
The Security Council-and
we are sure of this-is
entitled to know how in practice. these vast sums of
money are being spent, sums which are presented for

86. The Byelorussian SSR, in the Council and in other
organs of the United Nations, has invariably favoured
the idea that just and lasting peace should be
established in the Middle East. In this regard, the key
conditions for establishing that peace are: the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967; the ensuring of the lawful rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right
to the establishment
of an independent
Palestinian
state; and the guaranteeing of the rights of all States
and peoples of the area to an independent existence
and development.
87. Our delegation
is firmly convinced
that no
progress can be achieved in a settlement in the Middle
11

“payment by Member States because ,of the. consequences of Israeli aggression.
93. In conclusion,
I should like to state that the
Byelorussian’ SSR has always been and ‘will continue
to be unswervingly on the side of the Arab peoples,
the victims of Israeli aggression. My country has
given them and will continue to give them support in
their just struggle for their rights, for the elimination
of the consequences of that aggression. Along with
other members of the Council who have spoken, we
should like to say how right the Secretary-General
was to say-and
this is reflected in the resolution
just adopted-that
“any relaxation of the search for
a comprehensive
settlement’
covering all aspects
of the Middle
East problem could be especially
dangerous in the months to come”.
94. The latest decision of the Council to renew the
mandate of UNEF in the Middle East should be used
not for freezing the existing situation, but for the
taking of real measures aimed at a comprehensive
and genuine settlement
in the Middle
East in
accordance with the relevant decisions of the Security
Council designed to establish a just and lasting peace
in that part of the world.

98.‘. Then presence. of UNEF continues .in the new
arrangement to be a vital factor for maintaining peace
and security in the region. As a contingent of vigilance
in observingthe
disengagement’of
armed forces in the
Sinai’and irraccordance
with the will df the parties,
it is essential that’ UNEF continue to ‘function. It
,was therefore’imperative
for the Security ‘Council to
renew the mandate, as it has just done, sothat UNEF
will remain in’ the region for an additional period of
one year.
’
..
99. Lastly, I should like to refer to. the report of
theSecretary-General,
which contains valuable judgements of the utmost value in assessing the various
aspects of the presence ,of UNEF
in. Sinai., The
Secretary-General
rightly points out in paragraph 29
of his report that “The presence of UNEF remains
essential, not only to help maintain the cease-fire
called for by the Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973), but also to assist in the implementation of the new Agreement;”
100. The report speaks of increased expenditures
for UNEF within the new role assigned to it. This is
an unavoidable cost which we must pay if the Force
is to be kept up to the level of requirements, ‘so as
not to disturb peace in the area. Despite all the very
understandable
appeals that while not reducing
efficiency, there should be maximum economy, the
cost of maintaining
the Force, as has been rightly
stated, is the contribution
which the international
community must make for the lofty purposes of peace.
It has been said that “peace has no price”,, and this
is a demonstrable reality in the Sinai.

95. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation is most pleased that the
Security Council has adopted the draft resolution,
and
for our part we are pleased to have been able to
contribute by our vote, to-its adoption.
96. In the context of the turbulent events which have
been occurring in the course of the last quarter of a
century in the Middle East, the recent Sinai Agreement which was signed between Egypt and Israel
is the most far-reaching
step towards the much
desired peace in the region. The Agreement reveals
that despite the profound differences between the
signatory parties, they have chosen the course of
negotiation
instead of hostile confrontation,
which
throughout the conflict has represented a high cost in
human lives and material losses.

101. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation was pleased to vote for the draft resolution. We did so in the hope that the extension of the
mandate would provide yet another opportunity
to
intensify efforts towards a just and lasting solution
of the Middle East conflict, a solution which must
entail the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the
Arab territories under their military occupation and the
recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians,
as amply championed by the PLO.

97. The world .must view with relief the fact that
because of the great negotiating capacity demonstrated
by the Israeli and Egyptian parties, for the first time
in many years there are real grounds to believe that
the agreement they have reached represents the most
solid.contribution
for later arrangements that will be
conducive to the establishment
of a just and lasting
peace. In paying a tribute to the heads of States of
both nations for their patient quest to find means to
avoid a new outbreak of hostilities,
my delegation
wishes to emphasize the invaluable contribution
made
by Mr. Henry Kissinger, the Secretary of State of the
United States, thanks to whose lucid mediation
it
was possible to get the parties to agree on a final
arrangement.

102. In brief, we voted for the draft resolution in
the hope that the one-year extension which has been
consented to by the Government of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, gives the parties concerned an opportunity
to move without equivocation to the implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We consider
the consent given by the Government
of Egypt to
extend the mandate as a clear manifestation
of that
country’s willingness to extend full co-operation with a
view to finding a peaceful solution of the problem.
Such a position is fully in accord with the wishes and
demands of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The fact that the mandate has been extended
for one full year, instead of the previous practice of a
quarterly or six-months’ extension, must be viewed as
a unique opportunity
for an intensification
of efforts
12

1*

and negotiation
settlement. ...

towards a peaceful, just and lasting
.<I

103. But’ pothing would be more .dangerous than to
use the length of the ‘extension as an opportunity for
further consolidation
of ,the forces of occupation.
And nothing would be more irresponsible than for the
Council, or’for that matter the international community
as a whole, ,to view. the situation with complacency,
for as the Secretary-General
has candidly pointed
out in paragraph 28 of his report and the Council
has rightly just endorsed in the resolution,
“any
relaxatio,n.of
the search for a comprehensive
settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East problem
could be especially dangerous in the months to come”.
We entirely endorse this pertinent observation of the
Secretary-General.
104. It is our hope, therefore, that the Se&.nity
Council and the United Nations in the days and months
to come will work relentlessly to. bring an end to the
injustice currently prevailing in the Middle East, as
characterized by the continued occupation of Arab land
and the flagrant violation and denial of the Palestinians’
legitimate rights and aspirations, and we should like,
to stress emphatically
that UNEF should under no
circumstances be used as an instrument to perpetuate
occupation.
105. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to join those
who have preceded me in paying a well deserved
tribute to the Secretary-General
for his untiring
efforts in the cause of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. We also fully associate ourselves with the
tribute
and commendation
rightly
paid to the
Commanders and men of UNEF for their dedicated
and efficient contribution
in the cause of peace.
Needless to say our gratitude also goes to the Governments contributing
troops to UNEF.
106. The PRESIDENT:
With the permission of the
Council I should now like to make a brief statement
as representative of the Government of SWEDEN.
107. My Government
shares the view of the
Secretary-General,
as expressed in his report, that the
presence of UNEF remains essential to help maintain
the cease-fire called for by the Security Council in its
resolution 338 (1973). My delegation thus was pleased

to vote today in favour of the draft resolution
has just been adopted.
._ ~
.

which
:

108. My Government also shares the view expressed
by the Secretary-General
in, his report that the
Agreement between Egypt and Israel concluded last
September is an important development.
The Agreement has assisted in achieving a considerable relaxation
of tension in the area concerned. However, it is in no
way a final peace agreement, and none of the parties
to it regard it as such.
109. Now, when the situation in the Sinai area is one
of relative calm, we urge the parties in the Middle
East to use this breathing spell for a thorough analysis
of all possibilities
of taking further steps towards a
just and lasting peace. No lasting peace is possible
without a solution of ‘all the basic problems in the
Middle East. The parties there now have an historic
opportunity which they must seize. If this opportunity
is not used creatively and actively, the consequences
will certainly be very serious indeed. They could even
be disastrous. The real importance of the 4 September
Agreement will thus in future be evaluated in the light
of what measures and steps the parties in the area are
prepared to take.
110. I want to use this opportunity
to congratulate
the Secretary-General
and his staff for their dedication
and untiring efforts in connexion with the UNEF
and its operation, not the least their skilful efforts
now under way to adjust the UNEF operations to the
new complicated picture created by the Sinai Agreement. The problems ahead are certainly difficult, but
if all Member States are prepared fully to assist the
Secretary-General
in implementation
of his report,
I am convinced that it will be possible for the UNEF
to continue to operate efficiently and smoothly, as it
has done up to now with a more limited task.
The meeting

rose at 12.45 p.m.
Notes

’ See resolution

378 (1975).

2 See OJticial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Plenary Sessions, 2358th meeting.
3 /bid., 2357th meeting.
* Ibid., 2355th meeting.
S /bid., 2370th meeting.
6 Ibid., 2368th meeting.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJISIIHTh

ll3AAHEifI

OPPAHEI

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

3A4HEi

OK~E~MHEHHMX

HAIWFf

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esmn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho In United Nations, New Y ork

00300

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
