S/2021/932

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 November 2021
Original: English

Electoral process in Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Mandate
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2576
(2021), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide it with a
detailed summary report on the electoral process in Iraq and the assistance provided
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for that process, no later
than 30 days after the conclusion of the elections.

II. Electoral process in Iraq
A.

Political and security developments
2.
On 10 October 2021, Iraq held elections to the Council of Representatives, its
fifth under the 2005 Constitution and the second following the military defeat of
Da’esh. Advance special voting took place on 8 October for, inter alia, the security
forces, internally displaced persons, prisoners and detainees.
3.
The elections were conducted in advance of the constitutional deadline of May
2022, in response to widespread public calls for more inclusive representation,
accountability and good governance.
4.
Starting on 1 October 2019, demonstrations took place in Baghdad and several
governorates in southern and central Iraq. They began as protests over corruption,
unemployment and a lack of basic services and rapidly turned into calls for
comprehensive reform of the political system. The countrywide demonstrations were
marked by violence and excessive use of force. From 1 October 2019 to 30 April
2020, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights documented the death of at least 487 protesters and injuries to at least 7,715
people at protest sites.
5.
Adil Abd Al-Mahdi resigned as Prime Minister on 1 December 2019, and the
Council of Representatives confirmed Mustafa Al-Kadhimi as his successor on 7 May
2020. During his inaugural address, Mr. Al-Kadhimi described his Government as
“transitional”, with the immediate task of prioritizing credible early elections.

21-15750 (E)

101121

*2115750*

S/2021/932

6.
Early elections were initially scheduled for 6 June 2021, but in order to allow
sufficient time for technical preparations, and on the advice of the Independent High
Electoral Commission, the Council of Ministers later approved the date of 10 October.
7.
In response to public calls for independent and impartial electoral management
as well as for more accessible and accountable elected representatives, the Council of
Representatives passed legislation in December 2019 mandating an organizational
restructuring of the Independent High Electoral Commission and adopting a single
non-transferable vote system and smaller constituencies. Subsequent legislation was
passed to delineate electoral districts, complete membership of the Federal Supreme
Court and allocate a budget for electoral preparations.
8.
In September 2021, most of the political leaders and candidates signe d up to an
electoral code of conduct, which sets out values and guidelines for ethical and
professional conduct among all actors participating in the electoral process and is
aimed at encouraging an environment that is conducive for voters and candidates.
UNAMI supported the drafting and promotion of the code of conduct.
9.
As the election date neared, prominent leaders increasingly emphasized the
importance of broad electoral participation and an electoral environment that was
conducive for both candidates and voters. On 29 September, the Office of Grand
Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani released a statement aimed at encouraging conscious and
responsible participation in the elections, which remain “the safest way to cross the
country into a future that is hoped to be better than the past”. The President, Barham
Salih, together with the Prime Minister, political parties and the Iraqi Jurisprudence
Council, among others, issued statements echoing the Grand Ayatollah’s calls.
10. Despite the many efforts to promote confidence in the electoral process, some
parties maintained their withdrawal from the electoral race, claiming that conditions
were not sufficiently conducive to their participation. On 27 August, Muqtada Al -Sadr
announced his return to the electoral process, from which he had publicly withdrawn
on 15 July.
11. On 7 October, the Council of Representatives dissolved itself, this being a
constitutional requirement for the holding of elections.
12. The election involved the participation of 3,249 candidates, in cluding 951
women (29 per cent). Overall, 21 coalitions presented 959 coalition candidates, 167
parties presented 1,501 candidates, while 789 candidates ran as independents.
13. The security environment of Iraq remained volatile during the electoral
preparations. From 25 August to 9 October, a total of 157 attacks against the security
forces were attributed to Da’esh, including an attack on 5 September in Kirkuk that
resulted in the killing of 13 police officers. The continued intimidation and targeting
of human rights defenders and civil society activists also highlighted the challenging
pre-electoral security environment.
14. In order to enable the elections to be conducted in a safe and orderly fashion,
the Government of Iraq and its security institutio ns adopted a stringent security plan
for all governorates. From 2 October, all security units were placed on high alert for
10 days, with restrictions imposed on movement and public gatherings before and
after the elections, alongside other security measures. Earlier, on 2 March, the General
Secretariat of the Council of Ministers had established a higher committee to promote
and monitor the participation of women in elections and adopted measures to prevent
and address violence against women candidates. These included the activation of free
telephone hotlines to receive and respond to complaints from women candidates
reporting harassment and violence.

2/14

21-15750

S/2021/932

B.

Human rights overview
15. During the election campaign period, UNAMI documented instances of
election-related violence. These consisted primarily of threats and intimidation
against candidates and their campaign teams, both in person and online, as well as
attacks on candidates and campaign meetings. For example, an attack by an
unidentified gunman at a campaign gathering near a candidate’s residence in Diyala
Governorate on 3 October killed a member of the candidate’s protection team and
injured two other men. An explosive device detonated at a campaign event in Salah
al-Din Governorate on 7 October, killing one boy and injuring four others. UNAMI
did not record any discernible patterns of violations against specific groups or
geographical areas.
16. As part of United Nations efforts to promote the protection of human rights
during the elections, UNAMI conducted interviews and focus group discussions with
women, minority and independent candidates, as well as human rights defenders,
activists, journalists, lawyers and public officials. It met with Iraqi non-governmental
organizations implementing civic and voter education activities aimed at women
voters, internally displaced persons, young people and persons with disabilities.
Overall, the vast majority of interlocutors did not report any direct human rights
violations, but pointed to a broadly challenging political climate. Women candidates
described a restrictive cultural environment that hindered effective campaigning,
some reporting that they had received threats on social media. Minority and
independent candidates reported difficulties in campaigning, fear of potential reprisal
and insufficient financial and political support, as well as concerns about the overall
security situation.

C.

Electoral legal framework
17. The primary legislation regulating elections to the Council of Representatives
consists of the Constitution of Iraq (2005), the new Council of Representatives
Election Law (Law No. 9 of 2020), the new Independent High Electoral Commission
Law (Law No. 31 of 2019) and the Law on Political Parties (Law No. 36 of 2015), as
well as regulations and procedures adopted by the Independent High Electoral
Commission.
18. According to article 49 of the Constitution, the number of parliamentary seats
is calculated on the basis of the population of Iraq, at a ratio of 1 seat per 100,000
people. Under the new Council of Representatives Election Law, the previously
established number of seats was maintained at 329, of which 83 (25 per cent) were
reserved for women and 9 were allocated to the country’s minority communities (5
for Christians and 1 each for Yazidis, Shabaks, Sabaean Mandaeans and Feyli Kurds).
The law divides each governorate into constituencies, with a total of 83 countrywide.
Each constituency is allotted three to five members of parliament, depending on its
population. The new electoral system, known as a single non -transferable vote
system, replaced the previous party-list system based on proportional representation.
19. The Law on Allocating and Financing the Expenditures of the Council of
Representatives Elections (2020) allotted a budget of 329 billion dinars
(approximately $225 million) for the organization and holding of the elections on
10 October. The first amendment to Federal Supreme Court Law No. 30 (2005 )
completed the membership of the Federal Supreme Court, which ratifies the electoral
results.

21-15750

3/14

S/2021/932

D.

Electoral administration
20. According to the Independent High Electoral Commission Law, the Independent
High Electoral Commission is a constitutional, independent and impartial public body
with financial and administrative autonomy mandated to oversee, organize and
conduct elections and referendums in Iraq. It adopts regulations, instructions and
policies for the administration of elections and referendums and ensures their
implementation. It is also empowered to promote an electoral culture, voter education
and democratic practices. Under the Constitution, the Commission is subject to
monitoring by the Council of Representatives.
21. The Independent High Electoral Commission is made up of a Board of
Commissioners and an electoral administration. The Independent High Electoral
Commission Law provided for the appointment of nine new commissioners by lottery,
selected among candidates from the High Judicial Council (five members), the High
Judicial Council of the Kurdistan Region (two members) and the State Council (two
members). The current Board members (eight men and one woman) took office on
13 January 2020 and are serving for a non-renewable period of four years.
22. The electoral administration of the Independent High Electoral Commission
consists of a national office in Baghdad, a regional office in Erbil in the Kurdistan
Region and governorate electoral offices in the other governorate s. The Commission
employs around 4,000 permanent civil servants across Iraq, in addition to temporary
staff during elections.

E.

Voter registration
23. On 7 September 2020, the Independent High Electoral Commission started
preparations to reopen biometric voter registration centres throughout Iraq to update
the voter register with biometric information. At the time, 14.3 million voters (of the
approximately 22.1 million registered voters in the Commission database) were
already registered biometrically. 1 A total of 1,079 biometric voter registration centres
were opened across the country on 2 January 2021.
24. Following advice from UNAMI, the Independent High Electoral Commission
expanded its biometric registration coverage and sped up the distri bution of voter
cards ahead of the elections. It deployed approximately 890 mobile registration teams
to bring the registration process closer to voters and launched public outreach and
mobilization campaigns. The biometric update period ended on 15 April.
25. Over a seven-day period, lasting until 22 April, the Independent High Electoral
Commission then organized the display of preliminary voter lists at voter registration
centres, to allow for objections to be raised and corrections to be requested.
26. Upon completion of the biometric voter registration update, the Independent
High Electoral Commission cleaned the voter registry by cross-checking and
removing duplicate entries. According to provisional numbers provided by the
Commission, some 2.7 million voters registered biometrically during the update
period, resulting in a total of 17 million biometrically registered voters out of 22.1
million registered voters. On the basis of these data, around 77 per cent of voters were
to be issued with biometric voter cards for use on polling day. The remaining 23 per

__________________
1

4/14

The most recent population census of Iraq dates back to 1997. The accuracy of the population
data used by the relevant authorities and institutions may therefore be in need of improvement.
In the absence of a recent population census, the number of elig ible voters is estimated at
approximately 26 million on the basis of the Ministry of Trade public distribution system
database, commonly known as the food ration card database.
21-15750

S/2021/932

cent could vote using electronic voter cards (which were non-biometric) in
combination with additional photographic identification documents. Biometric voter
cards were distributed through voter registration centres and mobile teams across the
country until 5 October. While most cards were successfully distributed, around
1.7 million were not collected by voters and remain in the custody of the Commission.

F.

Public outreach
27. To build public trust and inform voters about the electoral process, the
Independent High Electoral Commission, with the support of UNAMI, launched a
public outreach campaign that included content tailored to groups such as women,
young people, internally displaced persons, persons with disabilities, minorities and
the military. Information was disseminated on national television, other traditional
media and social media and through many direct engagement activities. Regular press
conferences were organized by the Commission and UNAMI, while #Vote4Iraq and
#Ivoted campaigns were launched on social media to interact directly with voters.
Thousands participated in live question-and-answer sessions organized by the
Commission, in which electoral experts addressed issues such as filing complaints,
special voting, the quota for women and campaigning.
28. More than 200 animated videos and infographics were developed, incorporating
sign language interpretation for the first time, which was also provided at press
conferences. Combating misinformation was also part of the Independent High
Electoral Commission’s efforts. Weekly meetings were held between the
Commission, UNAMI and media outlets to discuss technical, procedural and policy
issues. The Commission established a hotline to answer questions from voters and
other stakeholders. Bulk short message service campaigns were also used to reach a
maximum number of eligible voters. In addition, over 47 voter education projects,
such as training courses and workshops, were implemented in all governorates by
contracted civil society organizations to reach different groups of voters.
29. The Independent High Electoral Commission conducted three large -scale
simulations of polling, counting and results transmission involving 2,179 polling
stations throughout Iraq, which helped to identify outstanding technical issues in the
run-up to election day while also increasing transparency. The second and third
simulations were open events.

G.

Polling
30. A special voting day was held on 8 October, 48 hours in advance of the general
voting day, to allow specific categories of voters mentioned in article 39 of the
Council of Representatives Election Law – including military and security forces
(1,075,727 registered voters), internally displaced persons (120,126 registered voters)
and prisoners and detainees (671 registered voters) – to cast their ballot for any of the
83 constituencies. Special voting was open only to those in possession of biometric
voter cards. To prevent multiple voting, the voter cards were retained after the vote,
until the general election day had ended.
31. For internally displaced voters, 309 polling stations were established in 86
polling centres throughout 17 governorates. Despite efforts to enfranchise internally
displaced persons, some did not have sufficient documentation to apply for biometric
registration.
32. On general election day (10 October), 55,041 polling stations opened in 8,273
polling centres. Voters were assigned to polling centres on the basis of upda ted voter

21-15750

5/14

S/2021/932

registration data. The serial numbers on the ballots issued to individual polling
stations were recorded to ensure that any discrepancies could easily be detected.
Ballots were printed with sequential serial numbers to enable precise tracking, an d all
ballots featured QR codes. Sensitive election materials were stored securely under the
supervision of polling officers.
33. Each polling station was equipped with a voter verification device and a copy
of the voter list for that station, as well as electronic counting, sorting and results
transmission devices. The locking and unlocking of electronic devices and the
registration of serial numbers took place in the presence of observers and
representatives of political parties.
34. Upon entering the polling station, voters were required to present either a
biometric voter card and undergo fingerprint verification or an electronic voter card
along with a personal identification document. For those who presented an electronic
voter card, fingerprint scans of all their fingers were required. Each voter then
received a ballot paper and was required to sign the voter list. The voter verification
device then captured and recorded the QR code of the ballot paper issued to the voter.
These were matched with QR codes gathered by the ballot box optical scanner, to
make sure that only issued ballots were cast. Indelible ink was also applied to voters’
index fingers as a safeguard against multiple voting.
35. The Independent High Electoral Commission put in place num erous measures
to tackle misuse of the (non-biometric) electronic voter cards. First, 1,500,000
undistributed electronic voter cards printed before 2014 were destroyed. Furthermore,
all voters who used electronic voter cards were required to provide additi onal
photographic identity documents on polling day, and their 10 fingerprints were
scanned before the ballot papers were issued at the polling station. After election day,
these were matched against the fingerprint scans stored in the national voter regis try
as a way to mitigate the risk of multiple voting. The matching process has been
completed, and any violators are expected to be referred to the competent courts in
accordance with legal procedures. After voting, the electronic voter cards were
confiscated by the polling officers.

H.

Vote count, tabulation and display
36. At the polling stations, ballots were counted electronically by an optical scanner
attached to the ballot box. A results transmission system device was connected to each
optical scanner to transmit the results to the Independent High Electoral Commission
through a secure satellite link. All data were encrypted to prevent hacking. In addition
to this results transmission system, back-up USB flash drives were collected from
each polling station in order to ensure the accuracy of the results tabulation.
37. Furthermore, through a lottery witnessed by stakeholders (political party
representatives, the media and election observers) and broadcast publicly on
television, one polling station in each polling centre was selected for manual counting
(a total of 8,960 polling stations). If the discrepancy between the initial electronic
count and the manual count exceeded 5 per cent, all results from that polling centre
were to be manually counted, and the manual count results would prevail. Once the
count was completed, a copy of the results was posted for one day on the outer wall
of each polling station for viewing by political entity agents, observers and the public.
No discrepancies between the electronic and manual counts were reported for the
8,960 selected polling stations.
38. For stations that failed to transmit the results using either the results
transmission system, or the USB flash drives, or both, a manual tabulation system
was created, whereby the Independent High Electoral Commission cross-checked the

6/14

21-15750

S/2021/932

polling station ballots in question at the national manual counting centre in Baghdad
in the presence of international and domestic observers and political party agents.
After completing the cross-checks, the Commission would fill in results
reconciliation forms and deliver them to its data centre, where they would be entered
in a double-blind fashion (two data entry staff would enter the same form separately),
with a verification phase in which another staff member would verify the data entered
by the first two staff members. The results of both the electronic and the manual
transmission systems were then reconciled in the results server to produce the
electoral results. In cases of discrepancy, the data from the manual count would take
precedence. The results were then published on the Commission’s website and in the
results display centres in real time as they were made available.
39. With the support of UNAMI, the Independent High Electoral Commission
established results display centres at its headquarters and in all governorates. The
centres were open to electoral stakeholders, including political parties and candidates’
agents, international and national observers, civil society org anizations and the media.
This increased the level of transparency compared with previous elections.
40. For the first time, an independent international firm with extensive experience
in election technology reviewed and audited all hardware and software, as well as the
overall results management system. The company shared its reports with the
Oversight and Audit Committee, which consists of members of relevant State
institutions who monitor and evaluate the performance of the auditing company. The
Committee will submit a report on its findings to the incoming Council of
Representatives.

I.

Security on election day
41. Although election-related violence was largely absent on election day, isolated
security incidents resulted in some casualties. During the evening of 10 October, a
suspected Da’esh gunman targeted a voting centre in the Rashad subdistrict of Kirkuk
Governorate after it had closed, killing a police officer and wounding two others. A
quarrel between supporters of opposing political parties in Maysan Governorate led
to an altercation that resulted in the death of a civilian. Other reported security
incidents on election day included an indirect fire attack on a polling station in Salah
al-Din Governorate and a mortar attack near a polling station in Diyala Governorate,
neither of which resulted in casualties or damage. On 10 October, the Security Media
Cell of the Office of the Prime Minister announced that the election security plan had
been a success.

J.

Partial preliminary results
42. On 11 October, the Independent High Electoral Commission published partial
preliminary results of the elections, covering 78 per cent of polling stations, on its
website and at all results display centres. While the announcement was made within
the time frame set by the Council of Representatives Election Law, the results of the
8,960 polling stations selected by lottery for manual counting were not included
owing to a technical error.
43. The Independent High Electoral Commission included the results of 8,547 of
the 8,960 polling stations selected by lottery for manual counting in its announcement
of updated preliminary results on 13 October. The results of those stations had been
received after the polls closed but were awaiting clearance in the syste m. While the
results from the 8,547 stations were cleared and updated as part of the overall
preliminary results, the remaining 413 stations were flagged for further verification

21-15750

7/14

S/2021/932

by the national manual counting centre, as they had failed to transmit their results
using the results transmission system or USB flash drives.
44. Also on 13 October, the Independent High Electoral Commission started to
cross-check the 3,681 polling stations that had experienced technical issues with
electronic transmission (3,037 stations) or with the transfer of USB flash drives (504
stations) on election day, or both (140 stations). The cross-check and recount took
place at the national manual counting centre in Baghdad, in accordance with the
procedures adopted prior to election day. The process was completed on 16 October.

K.

Consolidated preliminary results
45. On 16 October, at a press conference, the Independent High Electoral
Commission declared that it had completed the counting of all polling stations and
announced the full preliminary results from all 83 constituencies. It also stated that,
with 9,602,876 actual voters among the 22,118,368 registered voters, turnout was 43
per cent.
46. The results remain subject to challenges and will not be final until ratified by
the Federal Supreme Court. The Chair of the Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission stressed during the press conference that
preliminary election results could be challenged within three days of their
announcement.

L.

Complaints and appeals
47. According to the Independent High Electoral Commission Law, the Board of
Commissioners has exclusive authority to address allegations of electoral
irregularities throughout the electoral process, including with regard to candidate
registration, the campaign period, polling and counting, and the publication of
preliminary results. The Law, as well as regulations and procedures that the
Commission has developed, sets out the complaints and adjudication processes.
According to its provisions, voters as well as agents of political parties, coalitions and
candidates have the right to file a complaint in the case of perceived electoral
violations. The Board is vested with the authority to adjudicate in all electoral
complaints.
48. Decisions of the Independent High Electoral Commission on complaints are to
be published on its website within three days of their issuance. Appeals against these
decisions may be filed within three days of publication and will be decided on by the
Electoral Judicial Panel, which comprises three judges. Once the Panel has ruled on
all appeals (no specific deadline is provided in current regulations), the Commission
will submit the final results to the Federal Supreme Court for ratification. The
timeline for ratifying the final election results is not fixed.
49. As at 21 October, the Independent High Electoral Commission had recorded a
total of 398 election day complaints, which it classified under three categories: green
(no influence on the outcome), yellow (dismissed on formal grounds) and red
(potential impact on the outcome). The Commission’s classification committees
processed the 398 election day complaints, with 10 classified as red, 217 as yellow
and 138 as green. A total of 33 complaints had not yet been classified.
50. A total of 1,436 challenges have been received against the preliminary results
announced, which will be submitted to the Electoral Judicial Panel along with the
proper documentation, including the legal, procedural and operational reasoning of
the Independent High Electoral Commission in each case.

8/14

21-15750

S/2021/932

M.

Ratification of final results
51. The Constitution of Iraq sets out the process for ratifying election results. It
vests in the Federal Supreme Court the authority to ratify the final resul ts of elections
to the Council of Representatives. Ratification takes place after the adjudication of
all appeals. The timeline for ratification is not fixed: for instance, it took 85 days from
polling day in 2010, 47 days in 2014 and 99 days in 2018.

N.

Electoral observation
52. The Independent High Electoral Commission accredited a total of 1,891
international observers (including national support staff), 160,148 domestic observers
and 495,733 political party representatives.
53. Preliminary statements were issued by international observers, notably the
European Union and the League of Arab States, which issued statements on 12 and
11 October, respectively; and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation issued a press
release on 31 October. These were published them on their respective websites.

III.

Mandate and activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq
54. At the request of the Government of Iraq (see S/2021/135) and pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2576 (2021), UNAMI was mandated to advise, support
and assist the Government of Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission
with efforts to plan and execute genuinely free and fair Iraqi-led, Iraqi-owned
elections.
55. In addition to the enhanced provision of technical electoral assistance and
advice pursuant to Security Council resolution 2522 (2020), and taking into account
the request of the Government of Iraq for additional support, the Council decided that
UNAMI should provide a strengthened, robust and visible United Nations team, with
additional staff, in advance of the election in Iraq, to monitor election day with the
broadest geographic coverage possible.
56. UNAMI was also mandated to engage and coordinate with international and
regional third-party observers invited by the Government of Iraq and to launch a
United Nations strategic messaging campaign to educate, inform and update Iraqi
voters on election preparations and United Nations activities in support of elections
in advance of and on election day.

A.

Technical electoral assistance of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq
57. To implement its enhanced electoral assistance mandate, UNAMI, in
coordination with the United Nations Development Programme, developed a project
entitled “Support to Iraq’s electoral process”. A total contribution of $32.4 million
from 11 donors enabled UNAMI to implement the two phases of the project. Phase I
was focused on capacity-building of the Independent High Electoral Commission,
while phase II provided for direct technical support in preparation for the elections in
Iraq.
58. As at 1 October, the United Nations had 160 electoral technical assistance
personnel in Iraq, of whom 49 were international and 111 were national staff, a

21-15750

9/14

S/2021/932

fivefold increase on its technical electoral assistance compared with the 2018
elections. Technical assistance activities were provided to the headquarters of the
Independent High Electoral Commission as well as its 19 governorate electoral
offices, working from UNAMI regional hubs in Baghdad, Basrah, Erbil, Kirkuk and
Ninawa.
59. Areas of electoral assistance included support for the development of electoral
regulations and procedures for, inter alia, the nomination and registration of
candidates, electoral campaigning, real-time results tabulation and the processing and
adjudication of electoral complaints and appeals. Furthermore, UNAMI assisted in
the recruitment and training of polling staff, the development of public outreach
campaigns, voter registration, the implementation of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) mitigation measures, the procurement of electoral mat erials (including
the printing of ballot papers), the establishment of results display centres, simulations
in advance of election day and support for the conduct of the independent audit.
60. Following the elections, UNAMI and the Independent High Elector al
Commission will engage in an exercise to determine lessons learned, with the
objective of further developing and strengthening the Commission’s capacity.

B.

Monitoring of election day
61. In line with its mandate, UNAMI, in collaboration with the United Nations
Office for Project Services, deployed 150 United Nations international electoral
experts and approximately 550 national support personnel in advance of and on
election day. The planned project budget was $15,811,008.
62. A preparatory team was deployed to Baghdad two months prior to the elections
to develop the monitoring methodology and begin operational preparations. Four
weeks before the elections, five regional teams were deployed to UNAMI hubs in
Baghdad, Basrah, Kirkuk, Mosul and Erbil to prepare the ground for the short -term
deployment of experts, while establishing the monitoring presence in the area of
responsibilities. United Nations electoral experts arrived one week before the
elections and were deployed in all 18 governorates. They monitored both the special
voting day and the general election day.
63. During the special voting day, United Nations experts visited 79 polling stations
in 25 polling centres. No major irregularities were reported. Overall, in the polling
stations visited, procedures were generally respected by polling staff and voters could
cast their ballot in an orderly manner. In a limited number of cases, voter verification
devices did not recognize voters’ fingerprints. Voters whose fingerprints were not
recognized were not allowed to cast a ballot. 2 The preliminary results of the special
voting day were announced on 11 October, on the same day as the first (partial)
preliminary results of the regular voting.
64. On the general election day, United Nations experts monitored 1,108 polling
stations in 301 polling centres in all 18 governorates. Election day was generally
peaceful. In stations monitored by United Nations experts, polling was generally well
managed. Most polling stations opened on time, although delays were encountered in
several stations owing to the lengthy set-up time or to technical issues associated with

__________________
2

10/14

Individual physical characteristics such as physically damaged, calloused o r dirty fingers may
result in failures. In other incidents, failure to recognize a person’s fingerprints could be
attributed to the voter verification device or to issues with the person’s registration.
21-15750

S/2021/932

the activation of optical scanners, 3 which were resolved by the Independent High
Electoral Commission later in the morning. Furthermore, as was the case during the
special voting day, voter verification devices did not recognize voters’ fingerprints in
a limited number of cases. According to the preliminary findings of the United
Nations experts, such incidents affected older persons and women in particular.
Overall, at polling centres visited by United Nations experts, procedures were
generally respected by polling staff and voters could cast their ballots in an orderly
manner.
65. A detailed analysis of all collected data will be published by UNAMI in due
course.

C.

Strategic communications
66. UNAMI strategic messaging campaigns sought to educate, inform and update
Iraqi voters on election preparations, as well as related United Nations activities. They
were also aimed at building public trust, spreading knowledge and tackling
misinformation.
67. Under the slogan “Your country. Your future. Your vote”, and with the hashtag
#Vote4Iraq, UNAMI engaged in human-centred storytelling projects, thereby
providing a platform for the Iraqi electorate, especially women, young people and
voters with disabilities, to share their views on how voting could advance their goals.
To demonstrate international support, the projects also underlined the wo rk of United
Nations personnel, including by increasing the visibility of election monitors through
photographic and video coverage.
68. Tools used during the campaign included: approximately 900 social media posts
(in Arabic, Kurdish and English, on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and YouTube); 40
murals in 11 governorates; 20 web stories; 14 videos; nine fact sheets; various media
interviews by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq; two press
conferences; one digital dialogue moderated by the Special Representative; one
online workshop for young people; promotional materials, such as #Vote4Iraq
T-shirts, stickers and buttons; and engagement with Iraqi artists and influencers.
Collectively, all social media posts earned more than 3.8 million impressions on
UNAMI social media channels alone.
69. The multilingual fact sheets, which were featured prominently on the UNAMI
election web page, disseminated widely on social media and accompanied by regular
reports on electoral preparations and processes, covered topics such as the new
technologies being rolled out to improve the voting process and the specific types of
operational support being provided by the United Nations to the Independent High
Electoral Commission. Other themes included the complaints and appeals process,
the quota for women, the role of international electoral observers and the participation
of internally displaced persons.
70. To complement the detailed information provided in the fact sheets and reports,
social media-friendly videos were produced in Arabic, Kurdish and English to convey
messaging in a more user-friendly manner. They explained the many technical areas
in which the United Nations was supporting the Independent High Electoral
Commission; the importance of simulations in preparing for the elections and United
Nations assistance in that regard; the specific actions that the Commission was taking
to prevent the misuse of electronic voter cards; and how these elections differed from

__________________
3

21-15750

Once the system has been activated, it cannot be turned off and on again without receiving a new
one-time password from the Independent High Electoral Commission, this being one of the
measures taken to mitigate the risk of fraud.
11/14

S/2021/932

past ones, given such factors as the new electoral system, the introduction of results
display centres and the expanded role of the United Nations.
71. Communications were frequently adjusted on the basis of feedback from Iraqi
audiences, including on misperceptions of the electoral as sistance role of the United
Nations. For example, in a digital dialogue that the Special Representative conducted
with Iraqi voters on 13 September, parts of which were covered live on local and
regional television networks, 52 per cent of participants inc orrectly thought that the
United Nations was organizing and supervising the elections. Messaging to combat
that misunderstanding was reinforced and clarified the Organization’s electoral
assistance role.

D.

Coordination of and support to international observers
72. The Independent High Electoral Commission, through the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, invited embassies and international organizations to send electoral observers
for the elections to the Council of Representatives. A total of 75 entities received
invitations, namely 54 embassies and 21 international organizations, including the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
73. As mandated by the Security Council, UNAMI engaged and coordinat ed with
international and regional third-party observers. It liaised with third-party observers
and the Government of Iraq on logistical and security support, including for
observation accreditation, vehicles, accommodation and security arrangements. Only
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the League of Arab States submitted
requests for logistical support, sharing their operational plans and needs with
UNAMI. In response, UNAMI helped to secure accreditation and observation badges
for their observers. It provided the League of Arab States with two briefing sessions
and helped the League to establish contacts with the Independent High Electoral
Commission, the European Union Election Observation Mission and domestic
observer organizations.
74. The European Union deployed a long-term observation mission, consisting of
20 long-term and 81 short-term international observers, with teams in 11 of the 18
governorates. The League of Arab States deployed 17 international observers for the
elections in the governorates of Baghdad, Basrah, Najaf, Erbil, Sulaymaniyah and
Diyala, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation deployed a five-member
observation team in Baghdad.
75. The Governments of Australia, Brazil, India, Lebanon, Pakistan, the
Philippines, the Russian Federation and Turkey, among others, responded to the
Independent High Electoral Commission’s invitation and deployed observer teams on
election day, comprising existing embassy staff who handled their own logistics and
security arrangements.

IV. Observations
76. The 2021 elections were the fifth parliamentary elections held in Iraq under the
2005 Constitution and the second since the military defeat of Da’esh in 2017. The
holding of the elections reaffirmed the strong commitment of the Governm ent and
people of Iraq to the fundamental democratic principle that vests the authority of
government in the will of the people as the best hope for political, economic and
social progress.

12/14

21-15750

S/2021/932

77. I commend the courage and determination of all Iraqis who part icipated in the
elections, including those internally displaced persons who cast their ballot despite
the difficult conditions that they were facing. I also pay tribute to the participation of
women as voters and candidates in the election. Preliminary ele ction results suggest
that there will be a historic number of women in the Council of Representatives,
surpassing the 25 per cent quota.
78. The elections took place in a challenging environment. I acknowledge the
essential role played by the Government and security forces of Iraq in ensuring a
largely peaceful and orderly electoral process. The Independent High Electoral
Commission, with a large number of new managers and electoral staff, has
demonstrated that it was able to conduct an electoral process w ithin constitutional
timelines, despite a number of complex operational challenges.
79. In a commendable effort to increase the transparency of and confidence in the
electoral process, the Independent High Electoral Commission implemented a
significant number of technical and procedural improvements, such as an independent
audit of software and hardware; wide-scale public polling simulations; methods to
more accurately and securely count, tabulate and transmit results; real -time
publication of preliminary results; banning of cameras and phones in voting booths;
manual counting of at least one polling station in each polling centre to compare
manual and electronic results; and manual counting of all polling stations in a given
polling centre if results differed by more than 5 per cent.
80. I further welcome the international community’s response to the call by the
Government of Iraq for electoral observation assistance and other support, including
from the European Union, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and individual Member States, which dispatched their own international
electoral observers to Iraq. The large number of domestic election observers
participating in these elections also demonstrates the dedication of Iraqi ci tizens to
democratic principles.
81. As the competent electoral bodies work towards ratifying the final election
results, I urge all political parties, candidates and other stakeholders to exercise
patience and address any outstanding concerns, including claims regarding alleged
electoral fraud, through established legal channels and within applicable timelines, as
well as in accordance with the code of conduct for the electoral process. This implies
refraining from making threats and spreading misinformati on about national
authorities, including the Independent High Electoral Commission, the electoral
process or the international support provided in advance of and on election day.
82. In the same context, I call on all stakeholders, political parties and c andidates
to create a post-electoral environment that fosters mutual understanding and national
unity through peaceful and constructive dialogue. The next priority is the expeditious
formation of an inclusive Government that is able to address the needs an d aspirations
of all Iraqis, including women, young people and marginalized communities. The new
Government will have a solemn responsibility to deliver on reforms that lead to more
effective governance exercised by more accountable institutions, capable o f providing
better basic services, combating corruption and building a diversified and equitable
economy.
83. The relatively modest voter turnout underscores the need to further invest in
promoting a democratic culture and trust in the democratic processes and institutions
of Iraq. In particular, it will be important for the Iraqi political leadership to reach out
to those Iraqis who did not participate in the elections out of disinterest,
disillusionment or a general lack of trust. In this regard, the impr ovement in
processes, procedures and transparency in the recent elections as well as lessons

21-15750

13/14

S/2021/932

learned for future electoral improvement can serve as stepping stones on a longer path
towards regaining public trust.
84. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, and all the United Nations staff who played a role in providing electoral
assistance for the Iraqi parliamentary elections on 10 October, including those from
the United Nations country team and notably the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office for Project Services.

14/14

21-15750
