S/2014/884

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 December 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict in South Sudan
Summary
The present report is the first report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict in South Sudan since South Sudan seceded from the Sudan on 9 July
2011. It contains information on the six grave violations against children and, more
broadly, on the situation of children affected by armed conflict during the period
from 1 March 2011 to 30 September 2014.
The report demonstrates that all parties to the conflict in South Sudan were
responsible for grave violations against children during the reporting period,
including killing and maiming, recruitment and use, abduction and rape and other
forms of sexual violence. Military use of schools, attacks aga inst schools and
hospitals and denial of humanitarian access were also reported. The scale of
violations has increased rapidly since the escalation of armed conflict in December
2013.
While progress was made on ending and preventing the recruitment and u se of
children by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) between March 2011 and
November 2013, including through the implementation of the action plan to end and
prevent recruitment signed by SPLA, the Government of South Sudan and the United
Nations, much of that progress was reversed after December 2013.
A series of recommendations to end and prevent grave violations against
children in South Sudan and to improve the protection of children are set out in the
report.

14-66027 (E)

291214

*1466027*

S/2014/884

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is my first report on children and armed conflict
in South Sudan following South Sudan’s accession to independence on 9 July 2011.
The report covers the period from 1 March 2011 to 30 September 2014 and contains
information on the major developments relating to the situation of children and
armed conflict in the country since my 2011 report on children and armed conflict in
the Sudan (S/2011/413). The latter report covered the geographical area of Southern
Sudan, which at that time was part of the Sudan. In particular, the present report sets
out grave violations perpetrated against children in South Sudan an d the progress
made in ending such violations, as recommended by myself and by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict in its conclusions on the situation of
children and armed conflict in South Sudan adopted on 11 October 2012 (see
S/AC.51/2012/2). The Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and SPLA in
Opposition are listed in annex I to my 2014 annual report on children and armed
conflict (A/68/878-S/2014/339) for recruitment, use, killing and maiming of
children, while the White Army is listed for recruitment and use. SPLA has been
listed for recruitment and use of children since 2005.
2.
The information contained herein was collected, verified and compil ed by the
Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting within the framework of Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005).

II. Political and security developments
A.

1 March 2011 to 14 December 2013
3.
The reporting period witnessed major political and security developments,
most notably the Declaration of Independence of 9 July 2011. Upon independence,
SPLA became the national army, while its political wing, the Sudan People ’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM), became the majority ruling party and formed the
first Government. The Chairman of SPLM, Salva Kiir Mayardit, became the
President and Riek Machar Teny Dhurgon was appointed Vice-President.
4.
The Security Council established the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) by its resolution 1996 (2011), effective 9 July 2011.
5.
Immediately following independence, in view of the instability prevailing in
some states, notably Jonglei and Upper Nile, owing to the presence of militia
groups, the spillover of the conflict in South Kordofan and Blue Ni le into South
Sudan and the sporadic clashes with the Sudan, the Government of South Sudan
took initiatives to neutralize internal security threats through the integration of
militia groups into SPLA. Elements of militias allied to Peter Gadet, the late
Gatluak Gai and David YauYau were subsequently integrated into SPLA; however,
the process was never fully completed and some, including David YauYau, later
split off from SPLA. In addition, the political landscape was mired in tensions with
the Sudan over unresolved issues remaining from the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, including lack of progress on border demarcation, non -agreement on
issues relating to citizenship and the temporary shutdown of oil production in
January 2012. The latter resulted in the adoption of austerity measures by the

2/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

Government, including delays in the payment of salaries for civil servants and
national security forces. This negatively affected the delivery of public services and
efforts to build institutions and a strong protective e nvironment for children.
6.
Intercommunal violence was observed throughout the reporting period and
contributed to massive displacement, deaths and the injuring and maiming of tens of
thousands of people, including children. Many civilians remained unaccou nted for,
including abducted children. In December 2011, the intercommunal violence
reached a dramatic peak in Jonglei State and turned into the Government ’s first
major crisis. An estimated 6,000 to 8,000 armed youths, known as the White Army
(a paramilitary organized group comprising primarily members of the Lou Nuer
ethnic group) mobilized in Jonglei State and launched a series of systematic attacks
over 12 days on areas inhabited by the Murle ethnic group. In response, smaller
groups of armed Murle youths launched retaliatory attacks on Lou Nuer and Bor
Dinka areas, which continued until 4 February 2012.
7.
In 2012, localized violence continued, often leading to civilian casualties,
particularly in Jonglei State but also in Unity, Upper Nile and Western BahralGhazal States. This violence involved militia groups but was also connected to
cattle raiding.
8.
Throughout 2013, intercommunal tensions, primarily over cattle raiding,
intensified in the States of Unity, Warrap and Lakes and in Pibor County (Jong lei
State), and fighting between David YauYau and SPLA contributed to a deterioration
in the situation. In July 2013, against the backdrop of divisions within SPLM, VicePresident Machar and most of the Cabinet were dismissed by President Kiir after a
Cabinet reshuffle, further escalating political tensions in the country.

B.

15 December 2013 to 30 September 2014
9.
On 15 December 2013, following a breakdown in discussions at a meeting of
the SPLM National Liberation Council, fighting broke out in Ju ba, initially among
members of the Presidential Guard. Within days, SPLA split between forces loyal to
the Government and forces loyal to former Vice-President Machar. The fighting
escalated and rapidly spread to various military installations and civilian
neighbourhoods. SPLA disintegrated in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States and
large numbers of defections to the armed opposition were reported. The capitals of
the three States fell to opposition forces in quick succession, with each capital
subsequently changing hands several times. SPLA eventually regained control in all
three State capitals. Fighting also reportedly occurred in rural areas, although
limited verified information is available on the extent and consequences.
10. Although the onset of the December 2013 conflict was triggered by political
interests, an ethnic dimension to the conflict emerged and quickly evolved, with
devastating effects for children. Girls and boys have been killed, maimed, raped and
orphaned, and hundreds of thousands have been rendered homeless by ethnic
violence. Displacement and insecurity have heightened the risk of exposure to
violations for children that were already vulnerable.
11. Government forces are constituted by SPLA soldiers, supported by non -State
armed groups, including a faction of the South Sudan Liberation Movement/Army
(SSLM/A), which had been partially integrated into SPLA in Unity State. Armed

14-66027

3/18

S/2014/884

groups from the Sudan, including the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), have
also supported SPLA. In addition, the Government has received support from the
Uganda People’s Defence Force. Although to date it has not played an active role in
the current conflict, the South Sudan Democratic Movement/Army (SSDM/A)
Cobra Faction aligned itself with the Government following the agreement of 9 May
2014 on the resolution of the conflict in Jonglei State. Opposition forces primarily
include former SPLA soldiers who defected to support Riek Machar (SPLA in
Opposition), backed by a faction of the South Sudan Liberation Army (SSLA) and
the White Army. Uniformed security forces, including elements of the South Sudan
National Police Service, have also fought on both sides of the conflict.
12. Since January 2014, peace talks have continued in Ethiopia under the auspices
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). A cessation of
hostilities agreement was signed in January 2014. In May 2014, the parties agreed to
form a transitional government, hold a participatory peace process and facilitate the
deployment of an IGAD monitoring and verification mechanism to monitor,
investigate and report on compliance by the parties with the cessation of hostilities
agreement. In June 2014, agreement was reached on transition modalities and on
forming a transitional government within 60 days, a deadline that was missed. Talks
led by IGAD reopened at the end of September but stalled again owing to lack of
agreement on power-sharing arrangements. In November 2014, the parties
recommitted to the cessation of hostilities agreement. Mean while, armed conflict
has continued in Upper Nile, Jonglei and Unity States.
13. Widespread violations and a worsening humanitarian crisis have led to the
emergence of protection of civilian sites, with civilians fleeing their homes and
seeking protection at UNMISS bases. Prior to December 2013, the humanitarian
situation was already challenging owing to an influx of returnees from the Sudan
and surrounding countries, limited infrastructure, weak capacity of government
institutions, high unemployment and illiteracy rates and food insecurity. After
December 2013, the situation worsened, with devastating consequences for the
population. Moreover, the violence has led to serious breaches of international
human rights and humanitarian law by both sides to the conflict.
14. The impact of the violence on children has been catastrophic. Children have
not only been affected by the conflict, they have been directly targeted. The number
of instances of grave violations (which are interdependent and cumulative)
perpetrated against children from mid-December 2013 to September 2014 is greater
than the number of instances in 2012 and 2013 combined. The vulnerability of
children has increased dramatically. They have faced significant protection risks,
such as recruitment by armed forces and groups, sexual violence, and killing and
maiming, including by landmines. The crisis has also presented challenges to family
tracing for unaccompanied/separated children, with some 6,000 children having
been registered as either separated from their families, unaccompanied or missing. It
has also increased opportunities for potential recruitment of children by armed
groups in refugee and internally displaced person camps.
15. As at September 2014, of the 3.8 million civilians designated f or assistance by
the humanitarian community’s crisis response plan, 3.1 million had received
assistance, including more than half a million children affected by psychosocial
distress. Meanwhile, an estimated 1.3 million people have been displaced within th e
country and another 452,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries.

4/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

Approximately 103,000 people have sought safety across 10 protection of civilian
sites within UNMISS bases, where the lack of space has made child -friendly
environments and emergency education difficult. Sexual violence against children
has also remained a risk inside these overcrowded sites.

III. Information on grave violations committed against children
16. Grave violations against children were committed by all parties to th e conflict
during the reporting period. Children have been directly and indirectly affected by
violence and armed conflict in multiple and often compounding ways. Recruitment
and use of children has remained a trend linked to the ongoing instability and
increased mobilization of armed groups. Incidences of recruitment and use and of
other grave violations peaked in late 2013 and early 2014 owing to the escalation of
the conflict, especially in the four states of Central Equatoria, Jonglei, Upper Nile
and Unity.
17. From March 2011 to September 2014, a total of 1,243 incidents were reported,
affecting 68,776 children (33,207 boys, 22,487 girls and 13,082 sex unknown), of
which 920 incidents affecting 54,674 children (25,018 boys, 17,744 girls and
11,912 sex unknown) were verified. Out of the 68,776 children affected, the military
use of schools alone has affected the access of more than 50,000 children to
education and safe spaces during times of conflict. The number and scale of
violations have increased dramatically since the outbreak of conflict between SPLA
and SPLA in Opposition. In fact, from December 2013 to September 2014, the
United Nations received reports of 591 incidents affecting 23,041 children, of which
475 incidents affecting 14,537 children have been verified. That is higher than the
number of incidents reported in 2012 and 2013 combined. Monitoring and reporting
mechanism reports indicate that both pro-Government and opposition actors,
including armed groups and forces allied to either side of the conflict and armed
youths, have conscripted and used children on a large scale and committed other
grave violations, including killing, maiming and sexual violence.

A.

Recruitment and use of children in armed forces and groups
18. A total of 171 incidents of recruitment and use of children were reported from
March 2011 to September 2014, affecting 3,731 children (3,702 boys and 29 girls),
of which 137 incidents affecting 1,219 children were verified. The main perpetrators
were SPLA, SPLA in Opposition and armed groups allied with David YauYau, Peter
Gadet, the late Gatluak Gai, Gabriel Tanginye and Hassan Deng. In addition,
children were mobilized from cattle camps to fight alongside the opposition, in what
is known as the White Army. The United Nations also received reports of crossborder mobilization of children by foreign armed groups, from within refugee
populations inside South Sudan along the Sudanese border.
19. Owing to a challenging security situation and safety concerns for individual
children when interviewed by United Nations child protection officers, it has not
always been possible to conduct interviews to effectively verify age, roles and with
whom the children were serving. In addition, the verification of cases has been
severely constrained by insecurity and lack of access to many areas.

14-66027

5/18

S/2014/884

20. The majority of the children identified as associated with armed forces and
groups performed support roles, such as cooks, porters and bodyguards, for senior
commanders. Children associated with SPLA have been identified in convoys
protecting high-ranking officials, wearing SPLA uniforms and sometimes armed,
during SPLA military recruitment drives and in SPLA barracks. Since December
2013, children have also been involved in fighting on the fro ntlines. Some of them
joined SPLA during the integration of armed groups, in which a pre -screening for
the release of children was never carried out. This was the case, for example, when
a faction deserted from SSDM/A Cobra Faction in October 2012 to join SPLA with
a total of 25 boys. In September 2014, this caseload of children was still awaiting
formal release and reintegration back to their families.
21. In October 2011, 10 boys who deserted from an SSLM/A training camp in
Nyama (South Kordofan, Sudan) reported to the United Nations that they, had been
taking military training, together with approximately 100 other children. The boys
reported that they had been approached by an SSLM/A commander in their cattle
camp in Mayom (Unity State), who told them that there were guns at the border of
South Sudan and the Sudan that could be collected to protect their cattle. When the
boys reached the collection point, they were forced into military training by SSLA.
They reported that most of the soldiers in the cattle camp were children. Since
December 2013, elements of SSLA have integrated into SPLA and it is believed that
these children could have been involved in the fighting in Unity State.
22. Recruitment and use of children by all parties to the conflict has sh own a
marked increase since the conflict erupted in December 2013. While the recruitment
and use of 121 and 163 children were verified in 2012 and 2013 respectively, the
United Nations has verified reports of the recruitment and use of 561 children
(556 boys and 5 girls) since 15 December 2013. In addition, the United Nations has
received reports indicating that several thousand children were reportedly associated
with non-State armed actors. The low verification rate is largely due to insecurity,
which has made some areas inaccessible to United Nations staff. For example, in
January 2014, a group comprising approximately several thousand armed youths
associated with the White Army was observed in Malakal (Upper Nile State). In
March 2014, a group of an estimated 2,000 armed youths was observed in Ulang
(Upper Nile State). The majority of both groups were believed to be under 18 years
of age and some as young as 12 or 13 years old. Since the onset of the current
conflict, the majority of children interviewed or observed as part of military units in
various locations have been wearing military uniforms and carrying firearms and
have indicated that they had received military training.
23. On 12 February 2014, an UNMISS team identified over 20 children aged 12 to
16 in military uniform at the State prison headquarters in Bentiu (Unity State).
Other children were lined up and undergoing registration/enlisting inside a container
at Giama Primary School, which SPLA was using for military purposes. The
children were recruited by an SSLA faction that had integrated into SPLA at the end
of November 2013.
24. Despite a written commitment made by the Chairman of SPLA in Opposition
to my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, in
Addis Ababa in May 2014 to refrain from the recruitment and use of children, the
United Nations has received reports of SPLA in Opposition organizing campaigns to
forcefully recruit young people, including children, in seven counties in Unity State.

6/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

In June 2014, the Unity State military commander of SPLA in Opposition, Major
General Peter Gadet, reportedly issued directives to military-appointed county
commissioners to conscript young people to serve in SPLA in Opposition, with each
county asked to provide 1,200 youths. Guit, Koch, Leer, Mayendit, Mayom,
Panyijar and Rubkona Counties reportedly complied. To date, it has not been
possible to establish how many children were forcibly recruited during these
campaigns, but children under the age of 18, in full military a ttire and carrying
weapons, have been observed by United Nations partners in those counties. While
commanders on the ground confirmed receiving a directive to end the recruitment
and use of children from the Chairman of SPLA in Opposition in May 2014,
following his commitment to my Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, information collected to date suggests that this has not been implemented
or enforced.
25. Schools have been used as places for child recruitment. In Unity State, in
December 2013, soldiers and officers who defected from SPLA forcibly recruited
children from schools in Bentiu and Rubkona to reinforce the strength of SPLA in
Opposition. For example, credible witness testimonies refer to 425 children
(245 from Rubkona Solo Secondary School and 180 from Rubkona Primary School)
recruited from their schools in December 2013 by SPLA in Opposition. The boys
had received three months of military training at a location close to the border with
the Sudan and took part in the fighting in Bentiu in April and May. While the United
Nations has not been able to further verify the total number of children involved in
the incident and their current whereabouts, it was able to verify three individual
cases (all boys).
26. In January and February 2014, 64 boys aged 14 to 17 were reportedly recruited
by JEM in Unity State. Fifty-five of the cases were verified, while nine remained
unconfirmed. Nine of the children were later released and reunited with their
families. Given the involvement of JEM in the conflict in South Sudan, it is
believed that the boys may have taken part in hostilities within the country.
27. In June 2014, during her visit to South Sudan, my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict observed several children in SP LA uniform in Bentiu
town and inside the SPLA headquarters. In Gumuruk, Pibor County (Jonglei State),
she met with David YauYau, who was surrounded by children associated with the
SSDM/A Cobra Faction. He acknowledged that he had recruited and used childre n
but declared himself ready to collaborate with the United Nations to release them.
Despite the fact that he was appointed Chief Administrator of the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area on 30 July 2014 by President Kiir and that the SSDM/A Cobra
Faction is in the process of integrating into SPLA, David YauYau has yet to release
the children.
28. Girl children have also been recruited and used by armed forces and groups.
One such case in June 2014 involved three girls aged 15 to 17, two of whom were
observed serving in an SPLA military house in Malakal, Upper Nile State. The third
girl stated that she had been recruited and raped by elements of an armed group
allied with SPLA since December 2013, along with 20 other girls the same age,
after being abducted in an incident that reportedly took place in Detang (Upper Nile
State). The report could not be verified.
29. The recruitment of children into armed forces and armed groups has taken
various forms, including coercion, abduction and children joining of their own

14-66027

7/18

S/2014/884

volition. Children have been at risk of recruitment in refugee camps, internally
displaced person camps, protection of civilian sites and their own communities. The
ability of armed forces and groups to recruit has been facilitated by a number of
factors. First, in the case of refugee and internally displaced person camps, the
national police forces tasked with policing the camps have failed to deny access to
the armed actors, many of whom have entered camps freely, in uniform and carrying
weapons. This has also been a challenge within the local communities. Second,
community and camp populations are closely affiliated with armed groups and have
not resisted — or could not resist — their entry and assimilation within camp and
community settings. Third, sufficient alternative livelihoods and education
opportunities have not been available, thus increasing vulnerability and risks of
recruitment. This has been particularly relevant in the case of children who were
formerly associated with armed forces and groups, many of whom had not been
provided with reintegration support such as education or livelihood opportunities.
Investment in vocational training is needed and support for a reintegration package
that addresses the individual needs of children is urgent ly required. Lastly, the
proliferation of small arms and easy access to weaponry has continued to compound
the problem.

B.

Killing and maiming of children
30. A total of 1,111 children (147 boys, 102 girls and 862 sex unknown) were
reportedly killed and 472 (262 boys, 140 girls and 70 sex unknown) injured during
the reporting period. Out of the 1,583 reportedly killed or injured, 451 cases were
verified by the United Nations. Between 15 December 2013 and 30 September
2014, 619 children (43 boys, 39 girls and 537 sex unknown) were killed and
219 (133 boys, 82 girls, 4 sex unknown) maimed. The killing and maiming of
305 children during that period has been verified. More children were killed and
maimed between December 2013 and September 2014 than in the previous two
years combined.
31. Intercommunal conflict, in particular in Jonglei State, resulted in many child
casualties. During the violence between the Lou Nuer and the Murle in the period
from December 2011 to January 2012, UNMISS verified the killi ng of 88 children,
primarily as a result of beatings with machetes, and the abduction of 42 children.
Additional reports of killing and abduction of children could not be verified. In July
2013, 49 boys were injured when Lou Nuer youths clashed with Murle youths in
Manyabol (Jonglei State). Some of the boys had gunshot wounds and other war related injuries. The boys were evacuated to Bor (Jonglei State) for medical
treatment and later reunited with their families by the United Nations Children ’s
Fund (UNICEF) and partners, along with the Government.
32. Explosive remnants of war have also claimed the lives of children. For
example, four children were seriously wounded by explosive remnants of war in
Bentiu town (Unity State) in April 2012 and, later that ye ar, one boy was confirmed
injured by an explosive remnant of war in Doro refugee camp (Upper Nile). In early
2013, four separate incidents of unexploded ordnance explosions resulted in the
deaths of five children (four boys and one girl) and the maiming of seven (five boys
and two girls).

8/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

33. Children have also been casualties of aerial bombardments by the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF). In April 2012, 4 children (one boy and three girls) were killed
and 9 injured (eight boys and one girl) during an aerial bombardment by SAF in
Unity State and one child was killed in November 2012 when SAF carried out aerial
bombardments in the Kiir Adem area (Northern Bahr al-Ghazal).
34. On 16 December 2013, in Juba, United Nations staff witnessed the summary
execution of two Nuer boys aged 12 and 16 by an officer of the South Sudan
National Police Service, who left their bodies on the roadside; the boys had been
arrested by SPLA forces while playing football and detained at the local police
station.
35. Following the fighting in Rubkona and Bentiu towns (Unity State) in April
2014, five boys were killed and three injured, apparently following execution by
gunshot. Two of the boys were found dead with their hands tied behind their back
outside a mosque, where civilians had fled to seek protection. In addition, children
were reportedly seen in piles of dead bodies left after the massacres at the hospital
and mosque in Bentiu. However, it has been a challenge to verify the actual
numbers of children affected in those attacks. The affiliation of the perpetrators and
the origin of individual bullets are unknown, since fire was exchanged between
SPLA and SPLA in Opposition.
36. In addition, the United Nations received reports according to which 490 dead
children were identified in the many mass graves found in and around Bor (Jonglei
State) following the heavy fighting there in late 2013 and early 2014.
37. Over 150 children have been treated in various UNMISS level II hospitals in
Bentiu, Bor, Juba and Malakal for conflict-related injuries, mainly gunshot wounds,
fractures and conflict-related sexual violence.
38. The United Nations received testimonies from boys aged 14 to 17 in Juba,
Central Equatoria State, who had been detained and subjected to inhumane and
degrading treatment, such as beatings, burning and being urinated on during
interrogations about ethnic affiliations and involvement in the conflict.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence against children
39. Rape and other forms of sexual violence have been committed, including in
connection with the recruitment and use of children, abductions and intercommunal
violence. During the reporting period, a total of 67 incidents were reported,
affecting 100 children (6 boys and 94 girls), of which 31 incidents were verified,
affecting 46 children (4 boys and 42 girls). While violations were recorded
throughout the reporting period, the rate of sexual violence perpetrated by armed
actors has increased since December 2013.
40. In 2012, eight incidents of sexual violence affecting 12 girls were reported.
Six of those incidents, affecting eight girls, were perpetrated by SPLA soldiers in
Jonglei, Unity and Western Bahral-Ghazal States, while one incident involving a
17-year-old girl who was attacked by an SPLA soldier was verified during the
civilian disarmament in Likuangole (Jonglei State). Two other girls were victims of
sexual violence when a group of armed men in military uniform attacked a village
in Mayendit (Unity State) in February 2012. In early 2013, an 11 -year-old who was
raped by a group of SPLA soldiers in Lakes State later died in hospital.

14-66027

9/18

S/2014/884

41. Sexual violence against abducted girls in the context of intercommunal
conflict was reported. One girl abducted in Pibor (Jonglei State) by armed elements
from the Lou Nuer tribe (the White Army) in late December 2011, who later
managed to escape after several weeks in captivity in Akobo County (Jonglei State),
reported that sexual violence had been perpetrated against her while in custody.
42. Since December 2013, the United Nations has received reports of incidents
affecting 64 children (58 girls and six boys), out of which 21 cases (involving
31 girls and 4 boys) were verified. Incidents have been attributed to both SPLA and
opposition-affiliated armed groups and include acts by individuals and groups of
soldiers, who reportedly raped girls in a systematic manner.
43. In Central Equatoria State, on 16 December 2013, three girls under 18 years of
age were gang-raped by SPLA soldiers when they broke into their house and found
them alone.
44. In April 2014, when SPLA in Opposition took control of Bentiu, hate speech
calling on people to kill, but also to commit sexual violence against non -Nuers and
foreigners, was broadcasted on the local radio.
45. The number of sexual violence cases involving children is likely to be
underreported, given the sensitivity of the issue and the social stigmatization of girls
and boys who report. The lack of available confidential and safe services in the
affected areas is also a challenge to the survivors. Basic post-rape care,
psychosocial support and counselling services are limited, especially in remote or
insecure locations. Consequently, most incidents of sexual violence are not reported
through health structures.
46. The limited capacity of the South Sudan National Police Service to investigate
cases of sexual violence, in addition to the breakdown in law and order in the
current crisis, is another challenge. The perpetration of rape and other forms of
sexual violence by security forces themselves has also undermined their credibility
with respect to receiving reports and conducting investigations. Moreover, the
closure of Government offices and the diversion of police to security operations
have further prevented reporting to security, judicial and social welfare actors.

D.

Attacks against schools and hospitals and military use of schools
47. During the reporting period, a total of 155 incidents involving attacks on
schools and hospitals and the military use of schools, affecting more than
50,000 boys and girls, were reported. The United Nations has verified 100 of those
cases. Out of the 155 incidents reported, 30 involved attacks on schools, 25 of
which have been verified.
48. Eighty-three incidents involving the military use of schools b y SPLA were
verified throughout the reporting period. Since January 2014, 33 schools have been
vacated by armed actors following advocacy efforts and changes in control over
individual areas. At the end of September 2014, 27 schools were still being used f or
military purposes by armed actors, including SPLA (21), SPLA in Opposition (1),
SSDM/A Cobra Faction (1) and unknown actors (4), affecting access to education
for almost 10,000 children.

10/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

49. In most cases, the military use of schools did not directly re sult in any reported
killing or injuring of children; it did, however, result in the partial or complete
closure of schools to allow armed actors to use the facility for accommodation or
temporary barracks. Stockpiles of unexploded ordnance and other remna nts of war
have been found inside schools previously used by SPLA or armed groups, as was
the case in 2012 when SPLA stored arms and ammunition in two rooms in Tonj
Secondary School (Warrap State) for over two months. This necessitated constant
engagement with the United Nations Mine Action Service; the stockpile was
verified as removed in October 2012.
50. While in most cases, schools were used as temporary barracks and
accommodation, verified cases of the use of schools for recruitment of children have
also been documented since the eruption of violence in December 2013, as
described in section III.A above.
51. Thirty-three incidents of attacks on hospitals were reported, of which 30 were
verified. The incidents comprise both damage to clinics and health -care centres
during fighting and looting of medical supplies and equipment. From March 2011 to
December 2013, the United Nations received very few reports about this type of
violation. However, beginning in December 2013, the numbers increased
dramatically, with 22 incidents reported and 21 verified. In one incident, on 15 April
2014, Bentiu Hospital was attacked by SPLA in Opposition: medical staff and
dozens of patients and civilians seeking protection inside the hospital were killed,
hospital buildings were vandalized and medical supplies looted.

E.

Abduction of children
52. During the reporting period, a total of 137 incidents were reported, affecting
1,222 children (448 boys, 443 girls and 331 sex unknown), of which 69 incidents
were verified, affecting 696 children (357 boys, 338 girls and one sex unknown).
53. Intercommunal abductions were reported in many states in South Sudan,
especially in Jonglei State. In 2011, 2012 and 2013, a total of 602, 129 and
250 children respectively were abducted. In addition, a further 243 children were
documented as missing in the context of intercommunal conflict in 2012. These
abductions are a key feature of the tribal violence that occurred throughout the
reporting period.
54. During the intercommunal violence in Jonglei in 2011 and 2012, the United
Nations observed an increase in the tendency of armed elements from the Lou Nuer
tribe to abduct women and children. This had traditionally been associated with the
cattle raiding practices of Murle-affiliated militia, but not with Lou Nuer armed
elements. Women and girls who are abducted are usually forced into marriage but
also subjected to sexual violence. For example, on 19 April 2011, a total of
128 children were abducted by armed militias from the Nuer tribe, re portedly in
retaliation against the Murle tribe, in Pibor County. Between May 2012 and October
2013, 16 children (8 boys and 8 girls, aged 2 to 10) were abducted from the Lulubo
tribe in Lokiliriby suspected Murle armed men from Jonglei State. During an at tack
in Kitkit village in Timsaha (Northern Bahr al-Ghazal) on 2 January 2013, a
significant number of women and children (52 boys and 44 girls) were abducted by
Rizeigat militia and allegedly taken to villages in East Darfur. On 15 April 2013,
127 of the women and children were released and reunited with their families. As a

14-66027

11/18

S/2014/884

result, families have been afraid to send children to school and cultivate their land,
resulting in lower educational achievement and limited access to food.
55. In February 2014, the United Nations also verified reports of 105 children
(29 boys and 76 girls) abducted by SPLA in Opposition in Malakal, Upper Nile
State. To date, the purpose of the abduction has not been confirmed, but it is
believed that the girls were taken for sexual purposes, while the boys may have been
forced to take part in hostilities. Similar unverified incidents were also reported in
Leer, Unity State, where 85 girls were reportedly abducted by tribesmen suspected
to be Murle.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
56. During the reporting period, 428 incidents were reported, of which 267 were
verified. Incidents included forceful entry into humanitarian compounds, looting of
compounds, seizure of assets and harassment of humanitarian workers at
checkpoints, all of which have significantly impacted the delivery of assistance to
affected populations, including women and children.
57. Commandeering and impounding of relief assets, in particular vehicles, at
SPLA and South Sudan National Police Service checkpoints were reported. For
example, in 2012, a total of 67 incidents in which vehicles were commandeered
and/or relief assets seized, either by State security forces or militia groups, were
reported.
58. These incidents negatively impacted the ability of humanitarian workers to
promptly and safely access populations in need. For example, during the first
quarter of 2012, violence against nine humanitarian workers by SPLA soldiers was
reported in Central Equatoria and Warrap States. In mid -March 2012, over
40 national non-governmental organization staff members were gathered by SPLA
in Agok (Warrap State) as part of a reported military mobilization drive. A similar
incident was reported in Pariang County (Unity State) during the third quarter of
2012, where five non-governmental organization staff members were subjected to a
forceful recruitment drive by a militia group. As a result, health care, water and
other types of humanitarian assistance were severely disrupted. All the affected
humanitarian aid workers were later released following intense advocacy by the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations.
59. The upsurge in insecurity after December 2013 created new challenges for
humanitarian operations. In August 2014, five humanitarian workers were executed
in Maban County, Upper Nile State, and official statements notwithstanding, there is
no progress in the investigations. Insecurity rendered many areas throughout the
country inaccessible to humanitarian assistance for needy populations, causing
several agencies to relocate, in particular from state capitals and remote locations,
sometimes repeatedly.

G.

Violations against children attributed to the Lord’s
Resistance Army
60. From March 2011 to September 2014, a total of 64 children (18 boys and
46 girls) either escaped or were rescued from the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).

12/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

However, since July 2011, LRA attacks have decreased significantly, with only one
LRA attack reported in November 2013, affecting two villages in Western Equatoria
State, close to the borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. No children were reported to be affected by those incidents. Prior
to that, in May 2011, three children (one boy and two girls) were abducted when
LRA carried out two attacks in Gangura (Western Equatoria State). The boy and one
of the girls were later rescued by the Home Guards, a community self -defence
group. In July 2011, a girl was abducted when a group believed to be LRA attacked
Raja (Western Bahr al-Ghazal). In addition, 18 girls who had either escaped or were
rescued from LRA in 2011 reported to have been subjected to sexual violence while
in captivity. Regional efforts among the LRA-affected countries continued, with
annual coordination meetings being held to deliberate on children affected by LRA.

IV. Follow-up to the conclusions of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and the recommendations of
the Secretary-General
A.

South Sudan country task force on monitoring and reporting
grave violations against children
61. The South Sudan country task force on monitoring and reporting grave
violations against children continued to meet regularly throughout the reporting
period at both the technical and policy levels. In its exchanges with the Government
authorities of South Sudan, the task force continued to bring my recommendations
and the conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to their
attention. Formal engagements to address violations were also carried out,
specifically with SPLA, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Ministry
of Justice, the South Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission and the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare, at both the
national and state levels.
62. On 2 June 2014, the co-chairs of the task force briefed the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict on the impact of the ongoing conflict on children by
videoteleconference, prior to a high-level visit by my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict to South Sudan.

B.

Progress made in the release of children from armed forces and
groups in South Sudan: implementation of the action plan
63. On 13 March 2012, the Government of South Sudan renewed the action plan
on the release of children from armed forces and groups, which was first signed on
20 November 2009 by SPLA, by signing a revised action plan, witnessed by my
former Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Radhika
Coomaraswamy. Prior to the escalation of armed conflict in Dec ember 2013, the
Government of South Sudan had been making progress in implementing the action
plan. A national technical committee comprising the SPLA Child Protection Unit,
the co-chairs of the country task force on monitoring and reporting grave violatio ns
against children, the South Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, SPLA military judge advocates and the Spokesperson’s Office had

14-66027

13/18

S/2014/884

been established in March 2012 to lead the implementation of the revised action
plan. The SPLA Child Protection Unit had established offices in seven military
divisions, with 1,043 dedicated SPLA child protection officers positioned at the
SPLA General Headquarters and state levels.
64. From January 2009 to 15 December 2013, 955 children associated wi th SPLA
were released. A system of screening and early identification of children was
established and, in 2012, 421 boys and 29 girls who sought to voluntarily enlist with
SPLA were rejected. In addition, SPLA and the United Nations conducted joint
verification visits to SPLA barracks; in 2012, the United Nations was granted access
to 71 of them. Furthermore, the Government initiated the development of civil and
birth registration systems, with the support of UNICEF.
65. A number of military command orders and punitive directives were issued by
SPLA. In 2013, eight targeted military command orders were issued concerning
unimpeded access to barracks for verification purposes, screening and registration
of children associated with SPLA, the prohibition of una uthorized redeployment of
SPLA child protection officers and the evacuation of all schools used by SPLA. The
order regarding the recruitment of children and the use of schools provided punitive
disciplinary measures for non-compliance. By December 2013, only seven schools
were being used and plans were made to vacate them. Despite those efforts, the
recruitment of children by some SPLA commanders and divisions continued. On
10 September 2014, the SPLA Deputy Chief of General Staff reinforced the punitive
directive of August 2013 by issuing an order to all SPLA units to ensure
compliance. Also, the Legal Adviser to the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs
proposed amendments to the SPLA Act (2009) to include punitive measures for
perpetrators of grave violations against children.
66. The United Nations provided capacity-building support to SPLA to facilitate
the implementation of the revised action plan. In 2011, prior to the signing of the
revised plan, an international child protection adviser had already been embedded
within the SPLA headquarters in Bilpham, Juba, to provide technical support to the
SPLA Child Protection Unit. In 2012, SPLA and the United Nations held a
workshop to develop a child protection training module to be incorporated and
institutionalized within the overall SPLA training curriculum. A total of 30 SPLA
officers participated in a training of trainers programme to facilitate further
dissemination of the module. To date, over 30,000 SPLA officers and
non-commissioned officers throughout South Sudan have been sensitized on the
provisions of the revised action plan, the SPLA Act (2009), the South Sudan Child
Act (2008) and international standards for the protection of children in armed
conflict.
67. However, with the escalation of violence in December 2013, those efforts were
not only suspended, but largely reversed, with a devastating impact on children.
Relations between the United Nations and the Government of South Sudan have
become difficult and access to SPLA severely diminished.
68. On 24 June 2014, during the visit of my Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict to South Sudan, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs
and SPLA signed a recommitment to the revised action plan agreement, which
contains explicit commitments to put an end to the recruitment, use, killing and
maiming of children and sexual violence against children; stop and prevent attacks
on schools and hospitals; vacate schools used by Government forces and reinstate

14/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

them as safe havens for learning; and investigate and hold accountable perpetrators
of these grave violations. In addition, in a meeting with my Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, President Kiir committed to issuing a decree to
criminalize the recruitment and use of children in SPLA issuing command orders to
stop the military use of schools and prevent violations perpetrated against children
by SPLA. On 10 September 2014, military orders were issued by the acting SPLA
Chief of General Staff to reinforce previous orders prohibiting the recruitment and
use of children and the occupation and military use of schools. At the end of
September 2014, 27 schools were still being used for military purposes by armed
actors.

C.

Advocacy
69. Throughout the reporting period, the United Nations systematically undertook
advocacy initiatives with parties to the conflict to end and prevent grave violations
against children.
70. The campaign “Children, Not Soldiers” was formally launched on 6 March
2014 by my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF
with the aim of ending and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
Government forces by 2016. South Sudan is one of the seven countries involved. In
September 2014, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Sudan attended a highlevel round table on the campaign hosted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland. The campaign was officially launched at the national level by
the Government of South Sudan on 29 October 2014.
71. On 10 May 2014, during her visit to Addis Ababa, my Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict signed a commitment agreement with Riek Machar
to end grave violations against children, provide assistance to children and appoint a
high-level focal point. Riek Machar acknowledged the presence of children among
the ranks of SPLA in Opposition, but stated that the main challenge was the strong
willingness among young people to pick up arms combined with the fact that
children are regarded as adults beginning at 15 years of age. Riek Machar later
stated publicly that he had issued two directives to his commanders not to allow
children to join SPLA in Opposition. In a meeting between the UNICEF Regional
Director and the South Sudan and Ethiopia UNICEF country office s, SPLA in
Opposition informed UNICEF that it had established a coordination structure to
improve humanitarian assistance to affected populations. However, it is yet to
provide a name and contact details for an in-country point of contact to take those
commitments forward.
72. During her visit to Addis Ababa, my Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict also met with the Deputy IGAD mediator to discuss concrete
measures to operationalize the release and reintegration of children in the context of
the cessation of hostilities agreement. In addition, she engaged with the African
Union commission of inquiry and the African Committee of Experts on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child, which visited South Sudan in August 2014.

14-66027

15/18

S/2014/884

D.

Programmatic response
73. In 2012, the South Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, supported by UNICEF, developed a comprehensive project document
for the release and reintegration of children associated with armed forces and groups
and other children affected by conflict based on the Commission’s policy of 2011.
From March 2011 to December 2013, 493 children (343 from SPLA, 9 from the
South Sudan National Police Service and 141 from non -State actors integrating into
SPLA) were released through formal disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes coordinated by the Commission and supported by UNICEF. An additional
210 children released in 2010 continued to receive reintegration assistance during
the reporting period. These children were assisted to return to their families and
communities and were provided with social and economic reintegration assistance.
74. Family separation has been a critical child protection concern since December
2013. Six thousand children have been registered as separated, unaccompanied or
missing. Many of them are girls, who are vulnerable to a wide range of violations
and abuses. The family tracing and reunification of these children is a challenge,
partly owing to limited or no access for child protection act ors to some areas.
Efforts to intensify family tracing in accessible locations are being undertaken in
coordination with child protection actors, using an innovative open source mobile
phone application and data storage system that are aimed at expediting the family
tracing and reunification process. Rapid response missions to the most hard -to-reach
areas are also conducted to provide basic lifesaving assistance to children.

E.

Legislative measures
75. The Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare and the Ministry of Justice,
with support from the United Nations, have persistently advocated for the
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the three Optional
Protocols thereto. In November 2013, the South Sudan Legislative Assembly
approved the ratification of the Convention and President Kiir has since given his
assent. Accession to the Convention is pending.

F.

Addressing impunity
76. With support from the United Nations, in 2012, SPLA trained 21 newly
graduated SPLA judge advocates (18 men and three women) on specific roles that
they could play in support of the military justice system to fight impunity. In March
2012, the SPLA Military Justice and Legal Affairs Directorate seconded a military
judge advocate to work directly with the SPLA Child Protection Unit at General
Headquarters and designated military judge advocates to the SPLA Child Protection
Units in divisions, brigades, battalions and companies. These advocates investigated
allegations of recruitment and use of children in which SPLA soldiers were
implicated. To date, four cases have been reviewed, three of which resulted in
arrests and the detention of three soldiers in Jonglei State; their status remains
unknown.
77. Notwithstanding the above, the perpetrators of grave violations against
children have largely benefited from impunity, including former leaders of armed

16/18

14-66027

S/2014/884

groups who were granted Presidential pardons and have integrated into SPLA.
Domestic laws that could hold them accountable have not been routinely enf orced,
partly owing to resource constraints or infrastructure challenges, but also largely to
a lack of political will. Furthermore, despite ongoing efforts and a deteriorated
security situation since December 2013, there has been no evidence of
accountability for the grave violations committed in connection with the current
conflict.
78. In February 2014, the Ministry of Justice informed UNMISS that it had begun
an ex officio investigation into atrocities committed in Juba, including grave
violations against children. No further information has been provided. The
Government also reported the arrest of approximately 100 individuals in connection
with targeted killings in Juba in December 2013. A small number of violations
committed during the crisis, including against children, are reportedly being
adjudicated through the criminal and military justice systems. Little or nothing is
known to the United Nations about the outcome of these investigations and
processes, if any.
79. There continues to be an absence of any serious initiative by other parties to
the conflict to hold perpetrators accountable for violations against children. Again,
this is the result of lack of political will compounded by a lack of clarity regarding
military command and control structures and a lack of effective military command
in SPLA in Opposition, the White Army and armed youth.

V. Observations and recommendations
80. I condemn all grave violations committed against children and urge all parties
to the conflict in South Sudan to lay down their arms and immediately stop the
recruitment, use, killing and maiming of children, the rape of children and other
forms of sexual violence, abduction and attacks on schools and hospitals, and to
immediately release all children within their ranks. I call upon all parties to the
conflict to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian and human
rights law.
81. I take note of the progress made by the Government of South Sudan in the
implementation of the action plan up to Dece mber 2013, but am deeply concerned at
the setbacks that have unfolded since then. I call upon the Government of South
Sudan to respect and fully implement the provisions of the recommitment agreement
signed in June 2014, including vacating schools occupied by SPLA.
82. I urge SPLA in Opposition to immediately stop all grave violations against
children and abide by the commitment that its Chairman signed with my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict in May 2014, to take concrete
measures to stop the ongoing violations against children and to abide by
international humanitarian and human rights law.
83. The persisting and widespread impunity benefiting perpetrators of grave
violations against children and, in particular, the grave violations c ommitted since
December 2013, are a matter of serious concern. I urge the Government of South
Sudan to take all the necessary measures to ensure accountability and to redouble
efforts to advance the investigations in progress and prosecute those responsibl e. I

14-66027

17/18

S/2014/884

also call upon the Security Council, the African Union and IGAD to ensure that
accountability is central to any political settlement.
84. I am concerned at the instances of denial of humanitarian access to the United
Nations and partners, which have increased during the current conflict. I call upon
all parties to ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access for the United Nations
and partners to all areas.
85. I urge the Government of South Sudan to develop a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for children separated from armed
forces and groups, ensuring that all children are afforded adequate support and
reintegration opportunities, with particular attention to the specific needs of girls.
86. I call upon the donor community to ensure adequate support to child protection
activities and programmes, with particular attention to children separated from their
families and child survivors of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
87. I call upon the Government of South Sudan to expedite its accession to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto.
88. Lastly, I call upon the Security Council to continue to take into account the
situation of children affected by armed conflict in its consideration of t he situation
in South Sudan.

18/18

14-66027
