A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/177
28 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.2)]
50/177.

United Nations Decade for Human Rights
Education

The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1/
Reaffirming article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
according to which "education shall be directed to the full development of the
human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms",
Recalling the provisions of other international human rights
instruments, such as those of article 13 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2/ and article 28 of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, 3/ that reflect the aims of the aforementioned
article,
Taking into account Commission on Human rights resolution 1993/56 of
9 March 1993, 4/ in which the Commission recommended that knowledge of human

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

4/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap. II, sect. A.
96-76963

/...

A/RES/50/177
Page 2

rights, both in its theoretical dimension and its practical application,
should be established as a priority in educational policies,
Convinced that human rights education should involve more than the
provision of information and should constitute a comprehensive life-long
process by which people at all levels in development and in all strata of
society learn respect for the dignity of others and the means and methods of
ensuring that respect in all societies,
Convinced also that human rights education contributes to a concept of
development consistent with the dignity of women and men of all ages that
takes into account the diverse segments of society such as children,
indigenous people, minorities and disabled persons,
Taking into account the efforts to promote human rights education made
by educators and non-governmental organizations in all parts of the world, as
well as by intergovernmental organizations, including the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Labour
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Convinced that each woman, man and child, to realize their full human
potential, must be made aware of all their human rights - civil, cultural,
economic, political and social,
Believing that human rights education constitutes an important vehicle
for the elimination of gender-based discrimination and ensuring equal
opportunities through the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women,
Aware of the experience in human rights education of United Nations
peace-building operations, including the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador and the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia,
Considering the World Plan of Action on Education for Human Rights and
Democracy, 5/ adopted by the International Congress on Education for Human
Rights and Democracy convened by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization at Montreal from 8 to 11 March 1993, according to
which education for human rights and democracy is itself a human right and a
prerequisite for the realization of human rights, democracy and social
justice,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted
by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 6/ in particular
section II, paragraphs 78 to 82 thereof,
Recalling that it is the responsibility of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to coordinate relevant United Nations education
and public information programmes in the field of human rights,
Recalling its resolution 49/184 of 23 December 1994, by which it
proclaimed the ten-year period beginning on 1 January 1995 the United Nations

5/

See A/CONF.157/PC/42/Add.6.

6/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/50/177
Page 3

Decade for Human Rights Education, welcomed the Plan of Action for the Decade, 7/
and requested the High Commissioner to coordinate the implementation of the
Plan of Action,
Taking note of the report of the High Commissioner to the General
Assembly, 8/ in which he stated that human rights education was essential
for the encouragement of harmonious intercommunity relations, for mutual
tolerance and understanding and, finally, for peace,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the implementation of the Plan of Action
for the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education, 9/ submitted in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/184;
2.
Appeals to all Governments to contribute to the implementation of
the Plan of Action, and in particular, in accordance with national conditions,
to establish a national focal point (national committee) for human rights
education and a resource and training centre for human rights education or,
where such a centre already exists, to work towards its strengthening, and to
develop and implement an action-oriented national plan for human rights
education, as foreseen in the Plan of Action;
3.
Requests the High Commissioner to coordinate the implementation of
the Plan of Action and to carry out the tasks enumerated therein;
4.
Requests the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat and the
Commission on Human Rights, in cooperation with the existing human rights
monitoring bodies, United Nations specialized agencies and programmes and
other competent intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to
support efforts by the High Commissioner in the implementation of the Plan of
Action;
5.
Requests the existing human rights monitoring bodies to place
emphasis on the implementation by Member States of their international
obligation to promote human rights education;
6.
Invites all relevant specialized agencies, in particular the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organization, United Nations bodies, especially the
United Nations Children’s Fund, and other intergovernmental organizations to
contribute, within their respective spheres of competence, to the
implementation of the Plan of Action and to cooperate with the High
Commissioner for that purpose;
7.
Calls upon international, regional and national non-governmental
organizations, in particular those concerned with women, labour, development
and the environment, as well as other social justice groups, human rights
advocates, educators, religious organizations and the media, to increase their

7/

A/49/261/Add.1-E/1994/110/Add.1, annex.

8/

A/50/36, para. 54.

9/

A/50/698, annex.
/...

A/RES/50/177
Page 4

involvement in formal and non-formal education in human rights and to
cooperate with the High Commissioner and the Centre for Human Rights in
implementing the Plan of Action;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider the possibility of
establishing a voluntary fund for human rights education, with special
provision for the support of the human rights education activities of
non-governmental organizations, to be administered by the Centre for Human
Rights;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to
the attention of all members of the international community and to
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with human
rights and education;
10.
Decides to consider this matter at its fifty-first session under
the item entitled "Human rights questions".
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
