S/PV.8064

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8064th meeting

Thursday, 5 October 2017, 3.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Strategic force generation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-31095 (E)
*1731095*

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Strategic force generation
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh
and Canada to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Lacroix and by the representatives of Bangladesh
and Canada.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

05/10/2017

we can continue and further deepen that productive
partnership.
(spoke in French)
In April, the Secretary-General presented an
outline of what peacekeeping should strive for — a
more adapted, agile and flexible instrument capable
of responding rapidly and aptly to requirements
on the ground, through being supported by strong
competencies and good equipment based on the mandate
provided by the Council. Strategic force generation is
a tool to implement that vision. It entails identifying
current and future operation needs and communicating
them in a targeted and sustained way to Member States
that may be able to satisfy those needs.
High level events, which began with the first
summit on peacekeeping in 2014 and the creation of a
Strategic Force Generation and Capabilities Planning
Cell in 2015, have played a crucial role in that effort.
The Cell worked closely with co-organizers and with
other Member States to organize the summit of Heads
of State and the Ministerial Meetings that took place in
London and Paris. Of course, we are eagerly awaiting
the Vancouver Meeting.

Mr. Lacroix: I would like to start by thanking
the Security Council for convening this briefing on
strategic force generation. This is the first time that the
Council dedicates a meeting to this topic, and today’s
discussion follows the adoption of resolution 2378
(2017), which showed the Council’s strong commitment
to strategic force generation as one of the core elements
of peacekeeping reform.

From the beginning, those events have brought
together the major troop- and police-contributing
countries from Asia, Africa and Latin America, and
have generated impetus. Various States representing
all regional groups have participated in those events,
including Member States of the Security Council.
The subsequent meetings between Heads of State and
police have allowed us to strengthen our commitment
to Member States.

Generating uniformed personnel and units for
United Nations peacekeeping is a tireless and enormous
task. It means generating and rotating more than 300
units, including 76 infantry battalions, with tens of
thousands of troops and police from over 120 countries,
while selecting and deploying several thousand
individual staff and police officers throughout the year.
That is done by a small team of dedicated officers, and
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to it.

It is no exaggeration to say that Heads of State,
Heads of Government, Defence Ministers, armedforces officials and police forces around the world have
never been so involved in supporting peacekeeping.
The commitments and subsequent pledges have made
it possible to fill capacity gaps in current missions,
strengthen certain missions and cope with any new
deployments that the Council has considered or might
consider in the future.

Dozens of Member States have made substantial
investments in their capabilities for United Nations
peacekeeping by improving their equipment, training
and levels of readiness. I am grateful to those Member
States and I look forward to hearing more today on how
2/25

In London, the system marked the first contribution
pledges for rapidly deployable units. The final
communiqué, which was endorsed by 63 Member States,
set our new objectives for 2017 and beyond. In Paris,
the specific needs were considered for peacekeeping in
French-speaking areas and commitments were made to
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8064

provide more French-speaking military troops and police
personnel. The creation of a Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System (PCRS) was a determining factor in
our new approach for strategic force generation. The
PCRS is constantly updated, thereby enabling us to
understand which units are available by conducting
evaluation and advisory visits, and to better understand
their readiness levels and ability for deployment.

pass from the issuance of the mandate until the mission
reaches a minimum operating capacity, lives can be
lost and our credibility undermined from the outset.
There are financial implications to long-deployment
timelines, as a peacekeeping operation deployed too
late will have a more intractable situation to address,
potentially requiring a larger footprint and prolonging
the life of that mission.

Since March 2016, we have conducted 39 evaluation
visits concerning 105 deployable units. Those visits
make it possible not only to identify which units are the
most suited to certain operations, but also to explain in
detail to contributing States the standards and technical
specificities that are expected. Such dialogue is also
essential as part of the general strategy to improve
the conduct and discipline of deployed personnel, in
particular as part of the strategy to prevent and combat
sexual abuse and exploitation.

With the support of Member States and thanks
to the concerted effort across the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, we have been making significant progress
towards more rapid deployment. Just to take a recent
example, we replaced a battalion in MINUSCA, in the
Central African Republic, that was facing conduct and
discipline issues with three different contingents in less
than 60 days, two of them had registered in the PCRS.
We are very grateful to the countries that contributed
those units. Members States also agreed earlier this
year that units accepted to the rapid deployment level
of the PCRS would receive financial compensation for
maintaining the readiness of their major equipment
during their time on the rapid deployment level.

Those visits also sometimes make generating
additional contributions possible, such as Jordanian
helicopters to be deployed in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) or to identify priority areas for
improvement with contributing States. Resolution
2378 (2017) calls on the Secretary-General to report on
mechanisms to address capability gaps, and we will take
the opportunity to outline how that is being done today
and present a few ways of improving the coordination
of efforts in the areas of training and capacity-building.
To date, 81 Member States have provided
contributions to the PCRS, which is an impressive
success only two years after its establishment. Twentynine PCRS units have already been deployed to
missions, including in MINUSMA, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
In recent weeks, we have received new pledges of
contributions, the most recent of which came on behalf
of China and Germany. I am very grateful to those two
countries.
(spoke in English)
One of the key aims of our strategic force generation
efforts is to facilitate more rapid deployment of
uniformed capabilities to the field. Rapid deployment
is a costly, complex and difficult process that requires
the commitment of the contributors as well as the host
country and neighbours. In the weeks and months that

I am pleased to say that we recently received
sufficient pledges to fulfil nearly all the requirements
for a vanguard brigade of roughly 4,000 troops and
police for the remainder of 2017 and the first half of next
year. We plan to conduct an exercise of key personnel
on the rapid deployment level and key United Nations
personnel to further strengthen our ability to respond
to future rapid deployments in the area. We are also
developing an overarching rapid development concept
and related training materials that bring together all
of the civilian military police and support elements
needed for rapid deployment.
Despite the success of the past two years, a number
of specialized capabilities remain in short supply,
particularly high-value enablers such as helicopters,
quick-reaction forces, explosive ordnance disposal
units with counter improvised explosive device training
and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
companies. Pledges to the PCRS of those kinds of
units are welcome, but it is precisely in our most
challenging missions that we need them the most. I am
also disappointed with the lack of progress towards our
targets for female peacekeepers, and very much hope
that Member States will attend the Vancouver Defence
Ministerial Meeting in mid-November with concrete
pledges and proposals.

17-310953/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

One thing we have learned is that strategic
force generation needs to be better linked to regular
force planning for each mission, which also needs
to be improved. The MINUSMA force generation
conference in May was an important milestone in that
regard. Member States discussed their plans for future
contributions to Mali and potential partnerships for
critical capabilities. We hope to build on that new effort
to find creative ways to fill the most stubborn gaps,
including by allowing troop-contributing countries
to rotate scarce capabilities. However, no matter how
creative we can be, we will need Member States to step
forward, contribute new capabilities and help share the
burden, particularly in Mali and especially in the most
volatile areas.
The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
defining and helping us meet the capability requirements
of our missions. A number of permanent and elected
Council members have stepped up to host high-level
meetings, pledge and prepare new capabilities, offer
training and capacity-building support and provide
direct financial and political support to our strategic
force generation efforts. That is fully consistent with
the call for a more active role of the Council itself in
force generation, and I strongly welcome it.
I also encourage Council members to come
forward with new, innovative contributions, including
through the provision of tailored and sustained training
and capacity-building efforts to address our mid- to
long-term capability gaps. The trilateral partnership
between Japan and several African troop-contributing
countries is a good example of that kind of initiative,
and we strongly encourage further partnerships of that
kind. There are a number of additional ways in which
the Council can assist in helping us meet our capability
requirements, and I will refer four of them.
First, the Council can take into account current or
potential capability gaps, such as those in MINUSMA,
when drafting or renewing mandates. That should be
done in close consultation with us and is critical to
managing expectations. Clear, prioritized mandates will
enable us to better guide and assess the performance of
uniformed capabilities.
Secondly, challenges relating to the timely
deployment of capabilities, particularly for missions
like UNMISS, are often associated with the consent
and capacity of the host Government. Council members
should engage collectively and individually to ensure
4/25

05/10/2017

that host Governments fully comply with the status-ofmission agreements and that the Council act accordingly
when host Governments fail to do so.
Thirdly, strategic force generation is intricately
linked with performance. The leadership of the Council
is critical in ensuring the full implementation of our
performance, training and conduct requirements.
In instances where action must be taken to address
underperformance or misconduct, the Secretariat relies
on the consistent support of Council members.
Finally, I ask for the support of the Council in our
efforts to foster a culture of continuous improvement
and adaptation through strategic force generation and
other reform efforts. We aim to create a virtuous cycle
of performance improvement through assessment
and advisory visits, regular in-field performance
assessments, better planned rotations and deployments
of new capabilities and training and capacity-building
improvements. We will do all that together, working
closely with troop- and police-contributing countries.
Strategic force generation is an important and still
relatively new initiative. I am confident that it will help
us to improve our uniformed capabilities significantly
over time. It should also be seen as only one part of
a broader, ongoing effort by the Secretariat to make
peacekeeping operations a more efficient, effective and
accountable tool for the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the members
of the Security Council most sincerely for inviting me
to provide a briefing on strategic force generation for
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Earlier this week, Bangladesh hosted a preparatory
meeting for the forthcoming Vancouver Defence
Ministerial Meeting in November, with a focus on the
innovative topic of smart pledges. The meeting was
an occasion to review the pledges previously made by
Member States to address the capability gaps faced by
United Nations peacekeeping missions, especially those
operating in certain difficult environments. I believe
my Canadian colleague will further elaborate on that.
Let me just say that the idea of smart pledges holds a lot
of promise, but will need further deliberations among
Member States to identify the right opportunities.
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The challenges concerning force generation and
rapid deployment have remained under discussion for
quite some time. It was appositely brought to the forefront
in the 2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446). The
Panel highlighted the struggle to get sufficient forces on
the ground quickly enough and the continued reliance
on underresourced uniformed capabilities with little
or no interoperability and weak command and control.
We would reiterate the importance of addressing
each aspect of those challenges. In our efforts to find
answers to force generation, we should not lose focus
on the related questions of adequate resources for
peacekeeping missions and effective command and
control structure within missions.
The high-level open debate organized by the
Ethiopian presidency last month (see S/PV.8051) and
resolution 2378 (2017), adopted by the Council on
the occasion, once again reaffirmed support for the
HIPPO observations and recommendations. The debate
furthermore stressed the importance of well-staffed
and well-equipped missions and the right skill sets in
order to respond to the increasingly robust complex
and multidimensional peacekeeping mandates. As
a leading troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh has remained particularly engaged in those
ongoing discussions. It is encouraging to note that the
issue of force generation and rapid deployment has
been identified as one of the areas where substantive
progress has been made in terms of implementing the
HIPPO recommendations.
We have repeatedly made a case for discussing
issues concerning strategic force generation under
the purview of triangular consultations among the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. The establishment of the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS),
which replaced the Standby Arrangements System, has
was aimed at instituting a comprehensive platform for
enhanced collaboration between Member States and
the Secretariat towards redeeming the pledges made by
Member States. On our part, we made efforts to readily
adapt to the new arrangement and were perhaps the
first Member State to have registered 13 contingents
and 50 observers and staff on the PCRS.
Just to illustrate, from our armed forces we
registered one infantry batallion, one engineering
company, one level 2 hospital, one signal company
and one transportation company. From our navy, we

S/PV. 8064

registered one riverine unit, two maritime units, made
up of frigate and offshore patrol vessels, and one port
operations unit, among others. From our air force, we
provided one utility aviation unit, made up of three
Bell-212 helicopters, and, lastly, two formed police
units.
In addition, thus far, we have made a number
of additional informal pledges. We look forward to
announcing further pledges during the Vancouver
Defence Ministerial Meeting. We also signalled that we
would be in a position to deploy some of our contingents
at rapid deployment level in fewer than 60 days. We
have taken a principled approach to train our potential
peacekeepers on the protection of civilians and on
combating sexual exploitation and abuse, among a host
of priority issues.
We have taken due note of the establishment of the
Strategic Force Generation and Capability Planning
Cell within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and underscored, in the context of last year’s
annual report (A/70/19) of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the need for enhanced prior
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries on such major initiatives. Our delegation has
developed a sound working relation with the Cell and
has so far worked in close partnership in facilitating
DPKO assessment missions to Bangladesh in order to
ascertain the deployment and training status of our
registered contingents.
The leaders’ summit on peacekeeping in 2015,
which we had the privilege of co-hosting, was a
milestone in the area of strategic force generation. It
helped generate pledges by Member States for over
40,000 police and military personnel, as well as critical
enablers including helicopters, engineering, logistics
and transport units. The momentum was sustained
through the London Defence Ministerial Meeting last
year, and now the Vacouver Meeting, scheduled for
next month.
We would encourage all troop- and police­
contributing countries, including Council members, to
consult the updated current and emerging uniformed
capability requirements for United Nations peacekeeping
and tailor their further pledges accordingly. There are
critical mission-specific gaps in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti

17-310955/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that need to be addressed in order to respond to the
challenging circumstances prevailing in the two former
and effectively manage the transition in the latter.
The realistic, sequenced and prioritized mandates
that we urge the Council to design and pursue in
response to evolving ground realities will be able to
deliver results only if the corresponding demands for
capabilities and resources are sufficiently met. It would
perhaps be advisable to review the current assessment
criteria, frequency and consistency for the PCRS in
order to make sure that the pledges registered indeed
remain deployable at any given point in time.
The mandated scope of the PCRS may
disproportionately affect potential troop- and
police-contributing countries with limited or niche
capabilities. It also merits further consideration if the
current reimbursement arrangements for contingents
and capabilities at rapid deployment level are viable
in the medium to long term. It will be important for
Council members to gain first-hand ideas about the
prevailing gaps and challenges on the ground during
their field missions.
The question of enhanced participation by
female peacekeepers is integral to strategic force
generation. The United Nations aims to increase female
participation by 15 per cent by the end of 2017 — an
initiative we support in principle — but, as we discern
in our national context, that is far easier said than
done. Bangladesh has made sustained contributions
in the form of all-female formed police units in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti.

05/10/2017

To conclude, I would like to assure the
Council of sustained commitments by troop- and
police-contributing countries to mobilize our strength
and capabilities to deliver on the mandates given for
peacekeeping missions. In turn, we would expect the
Council to remain sensitized and responsive to our
suggestions and concerns and ensure that the mandates
given are matched with adequate resources and support
by all concerned in order to pave the way for our
collective success.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Bin Momen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank France and the United Kingdom
for convening this important meeting on strategic force
generation and for inviting Canada to brief the Council
on the upcoming Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Meeting in the beautiful city of Vancouver.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank my colleague from
Bangladesh and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their very useful
presentations today.

However, despite a strong push from our political
leadership, we have not been able to reach our target
with individual staff officers and observers. Our armed
forces and police remain seized with this issue, not
least due to our traditional commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda. We look forward to
further discussions on that issue during the Council
open debate scheduled for later this month.

Canada is convinced that, when properly mandated,
resourced and supported, peacekeeping remains one
of the most flexible and effective tools available to
the international community in responding to crises.
But the nature of conflict is evolving, the operational
tempo of peacekeeping is increasing and the scale and
complexity of peacekeeping operations are growing. We
have no choice but to anticipate, adapt and respond to
the challenges. That requires reforming our collective
institutions, enhancing operational effectiveness and
making a sustained and collective effort to address
capability gaps.

The issue of language skills for peacekeepers was
discussed at the Paris Defence Ministerial Meeting
with a focus on francophone theatres. As a co-host
of the Meeting, Bangladesh made renewed pledges to
developing the language skills of our troops and police
in particular. This is perhaps an area where smart
pledges, including the in the form of South-South
cooperation, could come into play with tangible results.

However, addressing capability gaps requires more
than just supplying boots on the ground. It is about
providing troops with the right training, capabilities
and equipment, and doing so in a timely fashion.
Strategic force generation is fundamental to that effort.
And it is an area where we — Member States and the
Secretariat — need to work together, differently and
more effectively.

6/25

17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

(spoke in French)
Since 2014, a high-level series of conferences have
helped to bridge the gap between the operational needs
of United Nations peacekeeping and the tremendous
capabilities that Member States have to offer. From
New York to London to Paris, we have not only seen
an unprecedented number of pledges to United Nations
peacekeeping, but also steps by Member States and the
United Nations to introduce qualitative considerations
into the discussion on force generation. Those annual
events are now a key part of the institution of United
Nations peacekeeping, complementing the work of this
organ as well as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. United Nations peacekeeping has a renewed
sense of purpose thanks to the reforms proposed by the
Secretary-General.
With those considerations in mind, Canada
volunteered to host the 2017 United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting. We are
not alone in that endeavour. We are honoured to be
working in lockstep with 10 co-hosts — Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, Indonesia, Japan, the Netherlands, Pakistan,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and the United
States. The Ministerial Meeting will take place from
14 to 15 November in Vancouver. Participation is open
to Member States announcing new pledges to United
Nations peacekeeping. Much preparation has already
gone into organizing and planning the Ministerial
Meeting, including three substantive meetings, held
in Tokyo, Kigali and Dhaka, which involved the
participation of approximately 50 Member States. The
meetings help pave the way for a successful Meeting in
November. We are on track to reach the highest level
of participation seen yet, and we have set equally high
expectations for the outcome of the event.
(spoke in English)
Canada fully agrees with Secretary-General Guterres
that conflict prevention should be one of the key priorities
for the United Nations. Discussions in Vancouver will
accordingly highlight the importance of integrated
approaches to preventing violent conflict. Ministers
will advance those objectives through panel sessions
on the following themes.
First, participants will close capability gaps in
United Nations peacekeeping by announcing new
pledges and taking stock of pledges already in place.
In particular, those include strengthening capabilities

S/PV. 8064

related to gender, police peacekeepers, as well as to
peacekeeping in a francophone environment.
Secondly, we will identify concrete ways to
strengthen partnerships on training and capacitybuilding between the United Nations, troops, police and
other actors. We all have a common purpose in making
United Nations peacekeeping operations more effective,
and we have complementary skills and experiences
to offer. It is time that troop- and police-contributing
countries, along with the Secretariat, work closer
together before deployments to ensure that all of our
women and men in the field have the training they need
and are able to operate as one.
Thirdly, we will examine how we can better protect
those at risk by ensuring that our strategies align with
the realities on the ground. That includes looking
into what concrete measures can be taken to better
address sexual exploitation and abuse and prevent the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Fourthly, we will encourage greater coherence in
early warning and rapid deployment by identifying
innovative approaches, capacities and technologies to
improve early warning, rapid analysis and planning
capabilities. We will also look at ways to shorten new
mission start-up times and ensure that we have filled
the United Nations rapid-deployment requirements
for 2018.
Given the leadership of Prime Minister Trudeau and
Secretary-General Guterres, no one should be surprised
that the Vancouver Ministerial Meeting will include
the importance of integrating gender perspectives as
its principal cross-cutting theme. In addressing our
persistent failure to leverage the impact that women
can have in prevention efforts and in securing durable
peace, gender perspectives will be mainstreamed
across all discussions. That will include enhancing the
recruitment of female personnel, addressing barriers
to their participation, providing training opportunities
and combating conflict-related sexual violence, as
well as sexual exploitation and abuse. Indeed, gender
perspectives and the participation of women is directly
linked to operational effectiveness and it is vital to
prevention efforts and in securing a durable peace.
Most fundamentally, in the Canadian way, we
recognize that inclusive partnerships are central to
our shared success. The peer-to-peer nature of joint
training, leading to better prepared and interoperable
troops and police; the vital importance of working with

17-310957/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

key regional organizations, such as the African Union,
on a more equitable footing; the potential of joint smart
pledges, which can provide the predictability of supply
needed to enhance a mission’s chance of success — all
point to how we can do more to come together at a time
when United Nations peacekeeping needs us.
We look forward to welcoming everyone in Vancouver.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Canada for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Lacroix,
Ambassador Blanchard and Ambassador Bin Momen
for their briefings.
I would like to begin by paying tribute to the
bravery and sacrifice of the men and women of United
Nations peacekeeping. They represent the very best
of the Organization. We owe it to them and to those
they protect to ensure that peacekeeping operations
have the right capabilities for the mission at hand. That
means the right people, with the right equipment and
skills, carrying out the right mandate. How often do
we actually meet that standard? How often, instead, do
we hear of peacekeeping operations having to rely on
whichever forces are available, rather than on the forces
best suited to the mission?
Our ultimate goal must be to give the United Nations
the freedom to tailor the forces it deploys according to
the unique circumstances of each mission’s mandate.
We made a good start towards that goal, including at
the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Meeting in London last year. But as our Canadian
colleagues pick up the battle, it is clear that there is
more to do. Let me outline three steps that we need
to take.
First, we should not be afraid to innovate. We know
that there are persistent gaps in niche capabilities, such
as attack helicopters, specialist engineering skills and
medical skills. We should not accept those gaps as an
unavoidable reality, but instead look to countries to work
together to rotate the provision of that scarce capability.
That could mean one country providing those skills
while another supplies the supporting logistics, sharing
the burden and increasing the availability of that niche
asset. Such innovative smart pledges will be one of
the issues that the British Defence Secretary will raise
in Vancouver.
8/25

05/10/2017

Innovation also means incorporating modern
technology to make peacekeeping more responsive and
more effective. We have already made some progress
on using unmanned aerial vehicles, but there are more
technologies that we could be harnessing. To do so
effectively, we need to be able to anticipate the future
requirements of missions, which brings me to my
second point.
Put simply, United Nations peacekeeping missions
are not meant to stay the same. They are meant to evolve
as the conditions on the ground evolve. As the mission’s
objectives are achieved and as political processes
progress, force requirements will also change. We
should be able to anticipate those changes and be agile
enough to provide the capabilities required. That means
moving away from setting arbitrary troop ceilings
and instead moving towards a tailored approach that
relies on better information on what capabilities are
actually needed and when, so that we are more focused
on the effects that we want the peacekeeping mission
to deliver.
For example, next month we will be discussing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Many here will no doubt advocate for an
increase in the troop ceiling. But the United Kingdom
is more concerned that the Mission has the right troops.
For us, that means troops who are agile and mobile,
willing and capable of moving to where they are needed
at short notice. We know that this approach works; we
have seen it in action elsewhere. I would like to praise
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Pakistani contingent there for their agility in relocating
troops to hotspots where they are really needed for the
protection of civilians.
To help us anticipate future force requirements, we
need rich, real-time data from the United Nations to
inform Council decision-making. That analysis needs
to be used also to inform force-generation decisions.
We therefore welcome the call in resolution 2378 (2017)
for the collection and analysis of data on peacekeeping
performance. It is a really important step forward. Let
us all work with the United Nations to make it a reality.
My final point is that we cannot lose sight of longterm planning and strategic force generation. That
includes more partnerships, more training and more
capacity-building, so that we are moving beyond the
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

immediate force generation to future strategic force
generation, and so that we are preparing for future
needs, not just filling the current capability gaps.
As we do so, let us not forget that the military force
is just one of the three pillars of a mission. As missions
become more involved in political work, we will all need
to think about how we generate the civilian component
and the policing component so that missions can play a
role that has a significant impact, not just in keeping the
peace but in building and sustaining it too.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank this month’s French presidency for
having agreed, at the initiative of the United Kingdom
delegation, to hold this briefing on the important issue
of strategic force generation. My thanks also go to my
colleagues from Bangladesh and Canada, and of course
to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix. Their briefings
confirm that all peacekeeping operations continue
to face a shortfall related to a lack of capacities
and equipment.
The United Nations Standby Arrangements System
for peacekeeping, which in all its iterations, has been
used by the Secretary-General since 1948, to pool the
resources of countries’ forces and make them available
for peacekeeping operations, has shown its limitations,
especially with regard to settling current crises, which
have become more numerous, complex and deadly.
That serves to highlight the importance of today’s
meeting and shows our Organization’s determination
to confront the challenges in providing both standby
forces and the capacities and sufficient number
contingents with a view to contribute effectively to
peacekeeping on the ground where asymmetrical
threats are increasingly encountered.
It is encouraging that, following the leaders’
summit on peacekeeping organized on the sidelines
of the General Assembly in 2015 under the American
presidency, the Secretary-General established within
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations a Strategic
Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell
responsible for managing a new system for preparing
peacekeeping operations and the process of force
generation, known as the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System (PCRS). Despite those measures,
however, and the Ministerial Meetings held in London
and Paris, the shortfalls encountered in implementing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations remain glaring.

S/PV. 8064

In addition to a lack of capacities owing to the
insufficient number of contingents already deployed,
the missions are having a difficult time meeting their
own needs — for example, in terms of engineering,
health care and aerial transport — although, as the
representative of Canada pointed out, those capacities
are available in numerous developed member countries.
Those capacity shortfalls are even more salient for
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs),
whose contingents are deployed in multidimensional
missions and lacking the necessary means within a
complex and insecure environment characterized, in
particular by asymmetrical threats and hostile actions
aimed increasingly at our Blue Helmets who are
supposed to be protecting civilians.
That observation consequently led Senegal, in
November 2016, to convene a ministerial open debate
(see S/PV.7802) during its presidency of the Security
Council on United Nations peacekeeping operations
facing asymmetrical threats. The goal of that debate
was to stimulate strategic thinking on planning as
well as generation and the mandates of forces that
must deployed in asymmetrical contexts. In truth, the
capacities required for the full implementation of the
mandates fall short in many cases in which the missions
are carried out in the absence of a political process and
the means to exit the crises. Consequently, the missions
become protracted and their engagement becomes
prolonged and uncertain.
In addressing that situation, and while
maintaining constant cooperation with the troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council
must explore new options with Secretary-General.
One possibility is a framework for coalitions among
States from among the membership or the region
so as to generate forces within the structure of the
PCRS in order to fill gaps in the area of operational
capacity. In that regard, I recall that Senegal has
already experimented with the concept of joint
deployment — with Guinea within the framework of
African-led International Support Mission in Mali,
while waiting for the implementation of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which we discussed in this very Chamber this
morning (see S/PV.8062). Similarly, together with
Burkina Faso, Senegal proposed to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations the deployment of a unit of
utility helicopters in Côte d’Ivoire prior to the closing
of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.

17-310959/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Based on firm partnerships between TCCs and
PCCs in pooling capacities, the Security Council
must strongly encourage seeking partnerships and
defining the basic needs that will allow for the rapid
mobilization of sufficient forces to respond to the
increasing number of crises, especially when the latter
emerge unexpectedly. Such an approach could include
non-regional partnerships supervised by the United
Nations. Accordingly, we believe that the upcoming
Defence Ministerial Meeting in Vancouver, which
the Ambassador of Canada mentioned earlier, can
be included in that type of cooperation within the
framework of smart pledges through, for example,
intelligent advertising.
In the context of cooperation involving regional
and subregional organizations, standby arrangement
systems and the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises could also serve to fill the gaps. Our
experiences gleaned from the African Union Mission
in Somalia, the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic have
demonstrated that countries neighbouring those in
conflict were the most amenable to intervene in a timely
manner. Senegal therefore encourages strengthening
African systems through the deployment of Member
State contingents so as to contribute to overcoming the
difficulties observed, and, at the same time, draw on
the lessons learned from the transitions that have taken
place in Mali and the Central African Republic.
In that same regard, the Council and the Secretariat,
in tandem with TCCs and PCCs, could pursue and
further strengthen inter-mission cooperation, which
proved to be very constructive in sporadic or fixedperiod force generation to reinforce the operational
capacities of United Nations missions. In the same
vein, the Senegalese rapid reaction force, through its
deployment from Côte d’Ivoire to the Central African
Republic, was able to ensure the holding of the 2016
presidential elections in the Central African Republic,
thereby providing an inspiring example. That same
kind of operation is already envisioned, but this time
it will originate in Mali, where the Senegalese rapid
reaction force is already deployed, and take place in
Liberia, where general elections are to be held.
Henceforth, countries will be able to play the role
expected of them to fill the most glaring gaps, most
of which require enabling units or new technologies.
Fortunately, with the leaders’ summit on peacekeeping
10/25

05/10/2017

operations and the Ministerial Meetings in London and
Paris, the leaders of contributing countries have been
showcasing their firm belief, in and commitment to,
investing more in peacekeeping operations. In other
words, through strong political will, Governments
can show more commitment to the United Nations in
providing it with what is required.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the problems
often encountered in force generation by African
countries in general.
First, the Statement of Unit Requirements, which
defines the basis for generating and deploying United
Nations military units, poses non-conformity issues
with regard to how units from contributing countries
are structured. TCCs and PCCs should look for
solutions to the task of calibrating batallions, with a
view to completing the mandates and duties that they
must carry out.
Secondly, strategic force generation specifically
intended for peacekeeping can undermine the capacities
of contributing countries, whose scant security and
police personnel may already be facing significant
domestic undertakings.
Overall, we welcome the interest we are all
according to the effectiveness and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations in the wake of the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, the reform of the peace and
security pillar of the United Nations initiated by the
Secretary-General, the adoption of resolution 2377
(2017) and the meeting of the Council on this issue held
on 20 September (see S/PV.8051), where nearly every
Council was represented at the level of Head of State,
Head of Government or Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank you and the
French presidency, Sir, as well as the United Kingdom
for organizing today’s important meeting on force
generation for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It is indeed a very important matter that needs to be
considered seriously by the Security Council as part of
the efforts to reform United Nations peacekeeping. We
are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing. We also appreciate the remarks
by the Ambassadors of Bangladesh and Canada. We
value their contribution.
Obviously, the United Nations depends upon
Member States to generate forces for its peacekeeping
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

missions. In that regard, securing sufficient forces
with the necessary capabilities to be deployed on the
ground quickly has been a challenge. Mr. Lacroix was
right in highlighting the enormity of the challenge. The
bureaucratic arrangements in the Secretariat have also
been posing constraints on the speed, mobility and
flexibility of response in the field. That is why there is
a need for a new approach to strategic force generation,
as recommended by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (HIPPO). That certainly requires
undertaking important reform efforts to change the
way that the United Nations mobilizes and deploys
its uniformed personnel. We take note of the efforts
undertaken in that regard.
The establishment and operation of the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System in the Secretariat
represents a step in the right direction. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in December, which will be presented to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 2378 (2017), with
regard to a mechanism to fill the existing gaps in
force generation capabilities, including through more
effective and efficient training and capacity-building.
As the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446) correctly
put it, force generation is not only a technical and
operational issue to be left to the Secretariat. Achieving
progress on the issue requires the mobilization and
political support of Member States. That is why greater
consultation with current and potential contributors is
absolutely imperative for providing timely, adequate and
relevant information, so as to help them make informed
decisions regarding contributing personnel. Therefore,
as stressed by all previous speakers, there is a need to
enhance the triangular cooperation among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop/police-contributing
countries. The increase in the number of countries
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping, including
by some permanent members of the Council, is
encouraging. We support the high-level efforts that
have been over the past two years to ensure greater
participation by Member States and secure concrete
commitments and pledges to fill existing gaps with
respect to force generation and capabilities. In that
context, we look forward to the upcoming Defence
Ministerial Meeting, which is scheduled to take place
in Vancouver next month.
While continuing to increase the quantity and
quality of pledges by Member States remains significant,
equally important is the question of whether or not the

S/PV. 8064

pledges already made are being implemented. That
certainly requires continuous follow-up and regular
updates by the Secretariat on the issue, in line with
resolution 2378 (2017), which is very important.
Finally, the new approach to strategic force
generation should also support and encourage regional
capabilities, such as the African Standby Force. Those
regional forces play an important role as first responders
and have demonstrated their ability to serve as bridging
forces until the United Nations is ready to deploy its
own forces. Therefore, we very much hope that the
Secretariat will develop options for both regional and
global capacity to rapidly deploy capabilities, including
to serve as bridging forces, in accordance with the
HIPPO recommendations.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Momen of
Bangladesh and Ambassador Blanchard of Canada for
their briefings.
We are grateful to the French presidency for
convening today’s timely debate, which follows a
series of related discussions throughout the year
that demonstrate the Security Council’s seriousness
in strengthening peacekeeping as one of the most
important activities of the United Nations. I would like
to express special appreciation to Ambassador Fodé
Seck and Ambassador Nikki Haley for convening a
special meeting of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations at the Permanent Representative level
two days ago. It provided us with an excellent and
unique opportunity for Council members and troopcontributing countries to get together for an in-depth
discussion. I would like to focus today on two key
points: first, on the significance of force generation
and, secondly, on how effective and efficient training
and capacity-building can improve force generation.
Force generation is closely linked with the Council’s
responsibility for overseeing the success of mission
mandates. The gaps that we see today between actual
and desired capabilities of peacekeepers in some areas
are detrimental to achieving success. The report (see
S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations indicates that the capability issue is
one of the various challenges in force generation, while
resolution 2378 (2017), adopted in September, also
stresses the need to address the issue of capability gaps.
The role of the Secretariat, which oversees
the force generation process to implement Council

17-3109511/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mandates, is key in minimizing those gaps. Several
efforts have been made, including the establishment of
the Strategic Force Generation and Capability Planning
Cell and the Peacekeeping Capacity Readiness System
(PCRS). Japan welcomes those initiatives and urges the
Secretariat to continue to undertake realistic, crossmission efforts that help missions adapt to realities on
the ground.
Successful force generation is about deploying
peacekeepers with the right capabilities at the right
time. Japan emphasizes that effective and efficient
training and capacity-building are essential. Japan
underlines the call in resolution 2378 (2017) for the
Secretary-General to provide recommendations on a
mechanism to address training and capacity-building.
We note that, while force generation efforts by the
Secretariat are cross-cutting in nature, as demonstrated
by the PCRS, capacity-building has remained largely
the focus of troop-contributing countries (TCCs), with
occasional donor country support. Those efforts have
so far been bilateral and could benefit from a crosscutting and coordinated approach. The successful
force generation conference for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali earlier this year offers a positive model and could
be expanded to all other missions as a best practice.
Further involvement on the part of the Secretariat
could also be helpful. It could play a more active role
in matchmaking between potential troop-contributing
countries and supporters who can help TCCs prepare
for challenges on the ground. We should also explore
whether the potential exists for making further use of
the Strategic Force Generation Cell and the PCRS in
that regard.
Effective and efficient training and capacitybuilding measures can be achieved only through
cooperation among four actors — the Council,
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
potential donor countries. Japan has already launched
discussions in that regard, including with Canada and
Bangladesh. We co-hosted a preparatory meeting in
August with Bangladesh in advance of the 2017 United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting in
Vancouver. Effective and efficient training and capacitybuilding will enable better force generation efforts,
and ultimately a better performance by peacekeepers.
Given that the Secretary-General’s 90-day report, as
mandated by resolution 2378 (2017), is due by the end
12/25

05/10/2017

of the year, Japan is prepared to follow up on the topic
during its presidency in December.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this timely and important debate on strategic force
generation for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, and Ambassadors Momen and Blanchard, of
Bangladesh and Canada, for their briefings.
Conflict prevention and maintaining peace are
among the key founding objectives of the United
Nations, and an efficient peacekeeping system is a
primary requisite for achieving them. We therefore
fully endorse the Secretary-General’s initiatives aimed
at reforming United Nations peacekeeping, with a
focus on effectiveness, mission accountability and new
partnerships. While we want to emphasize the primacy
of politics in conflict prevention and resolution, our
peacekeeping forces remain a valuable tool for ensuring
the creation of conditions conducive to political
solutions. We have been witnessing significant changes
in the United Nations peacekeeping system, with
Member States making important new commitments at
the leaders’ summit on peacekeeping in New York and
subsequent ministerial meetings on the topic.
Kazakhstan has declared its unit and number of
individual officers in the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System (PCRS). We believe that the PCRS
has shown itself to be the right instrument for ensuring
adequate preparedness on the part of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs) to be deployed. It can also provide
the United Nations with a range of contingents for
filling operational gaps in field missions, if properly
facilitated by the Secretariat.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), with its unique database on the capabilities
and strengths of Member States, plays a key role in force
generation through its targeted outreach approach and by
facilitating partnerships between TCCs and PCCs that
can increase co-deployments. Enhancing cooperation
between regional and subregional organizations is
a vital contributing factor. We are certain that the
flexibility and partnerships that can enable the active
involvement and engagement of countries new to United
Nations peacekeeping will increase the effectiveness of
peace operations. We would like to note the DPKO’s
forward-looking approach to engaging the emergency17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

response capabilities of Member States that have solid
rapid-deployment capacities, something that will be
invaluable when we need to react immediately to crises
while peacekeeping forces are still being generated.
With the further improvement and development of the
PCRS, we believe that the problems the United Nations
has with critical gaps in missions will be dealt with.
At the same time, the hybrid United NationsAfrican Union missions have shown that the deployment
of regional forces can be effective. Such cooperation
should be strengthened on the political, humanitarian,
human rights and development fronts as well, as
indicated in the agreement on the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, signed on 19 April. Collaboration
with regional structures can also enable concerted
action in tackling security challenges. The Security
Council’s recent adoption of resolution 2378 (2017) is
a great step forward in the efforts to improve United
Nations peacekeeping. Kazakhstan would like to
emphasize the importance of strengthening triangular
consultations between the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat, which
will encourage shared responsibility for meaningful,
inclusive and dynamic consultations and enhance their
dialogue with host countries so that they can fully
implement their peacekeeping mandate.

S/PV. 8064

Mr. President. The briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and by the representatives of Bangladesh and Canada
on behalf of the troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
were helpful.
We believe firmly that it is essential for United
Nations peacekeeping activities to adapt to current
realities so that the Blue Helmets can effectively
implement their mandates and stand up to new
challenges. That applies equally to the training and
functioning of units involved in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. What is important in that
regard is not only the professional preparation and
competence of personnel but also missions’ ability to
deploy in a timely fashion and their mobility on the
ground within the framework of their mandate from
the Security Council. In that context, it is crucially
important to ensure that peacekeepers have all the
resources they need as soon as possible so that they can
provide security and accomplish their mandated tasks.
In that regard, both the Secretariat’s Department of
Field Support and to the troop-contributing countries
have an equally responsible part to play. We cannot
emphasize the importance of the TCCs’ contribution
enough. It is impossible to carry out the Security
Council’s mandated tasks without them.

Lastly, Kazakhstan stands ready to support
effective peacekeeping and thereby further the mandate
of the Council.

We firmly believe in the importance of close
cooperation and coordination of efforts between the
Security Council, the host Government, the troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat, not to
mention of direct, good-faith contact between United
Nations field missions and their host countries.
It is that kind of interaction, based above all on
transparency and accountability and thereby on trust,
that helps to improve effectiveness in dealing with
urgent problems. Obtaining host countries’ consent
and support would help missions in their operational
activities as well as their political ones, an essential
component of their ability to effectively fulfil their
mandates. It is also important to take into account the
views and concerns of troop-contributing countries in
developing and extending mission mandates. In that
regard, we appreciate the various existing tripartite
cooperation mechanisms, including regular meetings
and the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
We believe that there is potential there for increasing
their effectiveness.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We appreciate your organization of today’s meeting,

The most important platform for discussion and
decision-making on the full range of peacekeeping

Kazakhstan is committed to peacekeeping and will
continue sending well-qualified military observers
and increasing its contribution. Kazakhstan is
currently preparing an infantry unit for participation in
peacekeeping operation and exploring the possibilities
for co-deployment to one of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As an emerging troopcontributing country, we are constantly increasing
our preparedness levels, as the DPKO has confirmed.
Kazakhstan attaches great importance to achieving
high performance standards and has therefore
established its own peacekeeping training centre,
KAZCENT, which has already been recognized as
achieving international standards. We conduct courses
on a regional basis and will work to attain the status of
a regional training centre.

17-3109513/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

issues is the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. When the Secretariat makes
administrative decisions it should make sure that the
Special Committee’s conclusions are strictly observed.
Any arbitrary interpretation, such as occurred with the
issue of the collection and analysis of information, is
completely unacceptable. The same applies to the issue
of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. Any
reports of such dreadful crimes should be thoroughly
investigated and their perpetrators punished. However,
we are also convinced that it is counterproductive to
apply collective punishment to entire contingents for
egregious, yet individual, violations.
Russian peacekeepers — both men and
women — currently take part in 10 United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We also actively provide
aviation services to the United Nations. Both our own
peacekeepers and foreign peacekeepers — individual
and formed police units — undergo training in
Russian training institutions. Furthermore, we assist
in equipping foreign contingents. We have the relevant
experience and have developed a system of training
that ensures both general and specialized training,
which is provided directly before peacekeepers are
deployed to their relevant missions. Linguistic training
is also adapted to the needs of peacekeepers. We are
working on developing additional training centres
for peacekeepers. We are looking into the possibility
of swiftly deploying any peacekeepers requested
by the United Nations. We are ready to continue to
provide support in strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping capacity.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that,
regardless of how United Nations peacekeeping
evolves, what should remain unchanged is our
confidence in peacekeeping, which depends upon clear
adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic principles of peacekeeping — the consent of
the host State, impartiality and the non-use of force,
with the exception of self-defence and the protection of
the mandate.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his comprehensive briefing and the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to reform
and improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I also thank the Ambassador of Bangladesh and the
Ambassador of Canada for their insightful briefings, as
14/25

05/10/2017

well as the French presidency and the delegation of the
United Kingdom for holding this meeting, which is an
opportunity to harmonize United Nations peacekeeping
reform efforts.
Over the past two years, reform and review efforts
have focused on operational and technical aspects,
especially with regard to broadening the base of
troop- and police-contributing countries and force
generation. Those efforts have included developing
the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and
holding the 2015 and 2016 Ministerial Meetings in New
York, London and Paris. It is now time for the Council
to ensure that those efforts take shape and are in line
with mandates. In that regard, I would like to make the
following three points.
First, Egypt believes that force-generation and
capacity is contingent upon effective trilateral
consultations among the Security Council, troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat. Such
consultations contribute to a clear and comprehensive
vision for mandate design and review that takes
into account United Nations capabilities, political
developments and the situation on the ground at every
stage of conflicts, on a case-by-case basis. Such
consultations are particularly important when it comes
to adopting sequenced mandates — a welcome measure
that would ensure the effectiveness of missions, rather
than prolonging them for decades. That would allow
the Council to make realistic and actionable decisions
when renewing, reviewing and amending mandates.
In that regard, Egypt fully supports the efforts of the
United Kingdom and Pakistan.
Secondly, as part of peacekeeping reform,
significant efforts have been made to enhance training,
strengthen compliance with the command and control
chain and delegate authority to the field to make urgent
decisions, which, in many cases, directly impact the
effectiveness of missions and the reputation of the
United Nations. Force-generation and TCC expansion
must not come at the expense of performance
standards, equipment availability, training and strict
conduct and discipline standards, including combating
sexual exploitation and abuse. Performance assessment
must be based on clear parameters and peacekeeping
policies, in close consultation with TCCs.
The availability of training, capacity and equipment
and the protection and safety of civilians must go hand
in hand. Recent months have seen an increase in attacks
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

against contingents — for instance, in the Central
African Republic and Mali. Such incidents have served
to expose gaps in protection capabilities, including in
training, equipment, availability of information and risk
assessment. Those gaps must be urgently addressed to
enhance the credibility of peacekeeping operations and
protect personnel, who are the most important assets of
those operations.
Thirdly, with regard to capability gaps, I would like
to note that Egypt has provided specialized units to the
most difficult United Nations operations, as we pledged.
As part of our support to peacekeeping operations, we
have provided much-needed equipment to a number of
underequipped missions, including the provision of 100
armoured vehicles. In addition, we pledged an advanced
engineering unit as part of the rapid deployment force.
In addition, Egypt upholds the highest standards in the
training our military and police forces. We organize
specialized predeployment training, in particular on
sexual exploitation and abuse.
In line with United Nations training standards.
Egypt contributes to the training and capacity-building
of new TCCs. The Cairo Centre for Training in Conflict
Resolution and Peacekeeping in Africa hosts training
courses for candidates from African and other countries.
As part of our focus on training and readiness, Egypt
hosted the meeting of the International Association
of Peacekeeping Training Centres in September. The
meeting addressed future training needs holistically, in
the light of the latest developments in the peacekeeping
security field and the role of missions as part of an
approach that is based on a continuum of response.
In conclusion, in line with our continued support to
peacekeeping operations, we announced at the Security
Council, the General Assembly and in a formal letter
to the Secretariat, our willingness to host the 2018
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting. We hope
the Meeting will pave the way for a qualitative shift
in our joint efforts to promote the credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates France and the United Kingdom’s initiative
in convening today’s meeting, and we would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, and
Ambassadors Momen and Blanchard, of Bangladesh
and Canada, for their briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important component of the Organization’s efforts

S/PV. 8064

to maintain international peace and security. Since
peacekeeping forces operate on the ground under the
Council’s mandates, enhancing their ability to deploy
rapidly, strengthening peacekeepers’ capabilities and
improving their mandates are critical to their greater
efficiency and effectiveness. In that context, I would
like to make the following points.
First, we should consistently uphold the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations. The purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the three peacekeeping-operation principles — the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use
of force except in self-defence or defence of the
mandate — constitute their foundation and remain
irreplaceable in guiding operations in a new context.
The sovereignty of host countries should be fully
respected and their input and views taken seriously in
order to help them scale up their security capacities.
When a host country requires the withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation and the circumstances permit,
the Council should give the Secretariat guidance on
drawing up a clear exit timetable, to ensure that the
mission will not remain in the host country indefinitely.
Secondly, we must fully recognize the role of
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). Ultimately, it
is peacekeepers who ensure the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and the TCCs and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) are the main
actors in implementing those operations, carrying
out their mission on the front lines in support of the
Organization’s fulfilment of its responsibilities as
mandated under the Charter of the United Nations and
making great sacrifices through their contribution. The
long-term development of peacekeeping operations
also depends on the efforts of TCCs and PCCs, and they
must be acknowledged and respected. In that regard,
we should strengthen the triangular communication
between the Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations should
play its full role as a policy review body and give TCCs
more say on peacekeeping issues.
Thirdly, we should increase efforts to help TCCs
with capacity-building. For peacekeeping operations to
be able to implement their mandates, full and focused
predeployment training and reliable provision of all the
necessary resources, including equipment, are essential.
Operations must therefore be provided with the training
and resources they need. It is important to pay close
attention to the real needs of TCCs from developing

17-3109515/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

countries and the challenges they face, as well as to
encourage bilateral and multilateral cooperation in
strengthening their peacekeeping capacity-building.
We should also give particular attention and support to
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, so that they can play a bigger part in
maintaining peace and security in Africa and help the
continent improve its peacekeeping capacity-building.
Fourthly, it is essential to define a clear, actionable
and targeted mandate for every peacekeeping mission.
Mandates instruct and guide every mission in its
operations and are an important determinant of their
effectiveness. The priority needs and realities of host
countries, as well as the TCCs’ capacities, should be
considered together in order to keep operations focused
on the core task of peacekeeping. Priorities for the
different phases of an operation can be modified as
and when any change is needed, while keeping the host
country in the driving seat for the sake of effective
mandate implementation.
Fifthly, the Secretariat should provide better support
and assurances for peacekeeping forces in terms of
both efficiency and quality. Where its role in managing
peacekeeping operations is concerned, the Secretariat
should look at the big picture for peacekeeping
operations and their long-term development, as well as
working to make them more effective and better able to
address complex situations with concrete measures. The
Secretariat and missions should pay close attention to
peacekeepers’ security and medical service capabilities
and should guarantee them. Systems for tracking and
assessing the security situation on the ground must be
set up and early-warning capabilities for security threats
and intra-mission information-sharing improved. Every
mission should commit to strengthening its training
in the deployment phase, which should be tailored to
the realities of the mission’s area of operations. For
its part, the Secretariat should improve management
standards and efficiency, optimize logistics support
mechanisms and ensure that peacekeeping resources
are utilized effectively.
At the United Nations peacekeeping summit in
September 2015, China’s President made an important
commitment to supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and China is currently pressing ahead with
the implementation of that commitment across the
board. In the past two years, we have trained more
than 800 peacekeepers for the United Nations and
some countries concerned and have dispatched a first
16/25

05/10/2017

helicopter squadron to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Africa. We are now in the process of
delivering $100 million in free financial aid pledged
to the African Union and have made support for the
peacekeeping capacities of TCCs, especially those
from Africa, a priority of the United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund. In September, China
officially completed the registration of its 8,000-strong
standby peacekeeping force as a United Nations
standby mechanism. We had already generated two
standing peacekeeping police units and registered them
under the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System. Our first batch of personnel and
equipment has been certified by the United Nations
as rapid-deployment-ready. Those efforts demonstrate
China’s active support for the United Nations PKO
and its commitment to assuming more responsibility
internationally while meeting its obligations as a major
player, and we believe they will make a constructive
contribution to global peace and regional stability.
As the biggest TCC among the permanent members
of the Council and the second biggest donor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, China will continue
to make a firm and honest commitment to maintaining
world peace and joining the rest of the world in advancing
the noble cause of United Nations peacekeeping.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by expressing our gratitude to the briefers for their
valuable information.
It is obvious that any peacekeeping operation
relies on appropriate force generation to be able to
deliver on its Security Council mandate. My delegation
therefore considers the issue of ensuring strategic force
generation to be an integral part of the comprehensive
reform of United Nations that the Secretary-General
has outlined. The establishment of the Strategic
Force Generation and Capacity-Building Cell and the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System has been
a significant step forward in the implementation of
the recommendations of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/682).
The 2015 leaders’ summit got the registration of
pledges by troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) off to a good
start, and the subsequent Defence Ministerial Meetings
in London and Paris gave that initiative an important
additional impetus. Ukraine is proud to be among
those who joined the pledging process from the very
beginning. In addition, my country, as a participant
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of all of those meetings, will also take part in the
Vancouver Defence Ministerial Meeting next month.
The establishment of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System has provided peacekeeping
operations with force generation ability, flexibility and
predictability, three things they had been badly in need
of for a long time. As a result, where equipment and
expertise are concerned, peacekeeping operations are
becoming better adapted to carrying out their mandated
tasks. However, as the concept note points out, there are
still many opportunities for improving the efficiency of
mandate delivery on the ground. In that regard, I would
like to highlight several ways whereby the Council
could contribute to strengthening force generation for
peacekeeping operations.
The Council should take dialogue with TCCs and
PCCs to a new level, both through its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations and by continuing formal
and informal consultations during the establishment
and renewal of operation mandates. In that regard, we
were pleased to note the meeting of the Working Group
held just a few days ago with the participation of the
members of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, a good move, fully in line with revised
presidential note S/2017/507 and resolution 2378 (2017),
on peacekeeping reform, which we adopted just a few
weeks ago.
Missions should be provided with clear, coherent,
achievable, sequenced and, at the same time, resilient
mandates drafted in accordance with the core principles
of United Nations peacekeeping. To that end, the
Council should receive timely, frank and substantive
reports from the Secretariat as well as details of the
Secretary-General’s bold initiatives and options for a
reformed United Nations peacekeeping presence. In
that regard, Ukraine supports the Secretary-General’s
plans for restructuring the peace and security pillar of
the Secretariat, and we expect that this will also result
in improvements in the strategic advice given to the
Council. It is clear that we will have to closely monitor
and assess practical progress in every single mission’s
implementation of its mandate, identify those that
need restructuring and view every mandate through
the perspective of supporting a political solution to the
conflict in question.
With regard to capability gaps, due attention should
be paid to securing the proper funding and providing
sufficient aviation assets, both combat and cargo,

S/PV. 8064

as well as making use of advanced intelligence and
modern technologies. When the Council is considering
a mandate’s establishment or renewal, it should engage
more actively with the parties to a dispute and the
host country with a view to securing the operation’s
use of appropriate modern technologies. It should also
support and facilitate the strengthening of operations’
intelligence capabilities in order to improve their
situational awareness. All those aspects are critically
important to ensuring the security and mobility of
peacekeeping personnel.
Last but not least, United Nations peacekeeping
operations must be provided with properly trained and
equipped personnel, capable of taking robust action to
execute their mandate on the ground and ready to do
so. Impartiality should also continue to be a priority
principle when the composition of a peacekeeping
operation’s personnel is being considered. For its
part, the Security Council should closely monitor the
implementation of resolution 2272 (2016) and continue
to support the Secretary-General’s initiatives in the
area of peace and security, including on eradicating
sexual violence in United Nations peacekeeping.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Ukraine
will do its utmost to continue to be a reliable partner
of United Nations peacekeeping endeavours, even
at times when my country may itself require United
Nations peacekeeping assistance in the light of ongoing
foreign aggression.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and
the representative of Canada for his update on the
upcoming Defence Ministerial Meeting in Vancouver
and for hosting it. I would especially like to commend
and thank Bangladesh for its contribution today. The
input of Bangladesh, as a major troop-contributing
country (TCC), is very important. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express our condolences to
Bangladesh for its recent loss of peacekeepers in Mali
just a few days ago.
Let me begin by paying tribute to all the men
and women who have served in United Nations peace
operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved countless lives. Many have lost their lives in the
service of the United Nations and, as others have said,
we owe them a huge debt of gratitude.
For us, the Secretary-General’s proposal for reform
of the peace and security architecture aims to create

17-3109517/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

a better framework for more effective United Nations
peace and security efforts. It is vital that we give him
our full support and stand united behind him in that
endeavour. Among other things, his proposal seeks
to strengthen the link between political strategies
and operations. That is a prerequisite for success and
must remain our point of departure when we consider
how best to configure peace operations. It is essential
to ensure that peacekeeping operations have the
capabilities they need from the start.
We must also continue to explore concrete options
for more sustainable and predictable financing for all
Security Council-mandated peace operations, including
through assessed contributions. It is important to keep
in mind that reform and efficiency are not primarily
budgetary questions. They are about delivering better
with the resources available. Efficiency should be
measured in deliverables, the criteria for success and
the performance indicators on how well we keep the
peace and protect those who need protection.
Mandates that are more realistic, prioritized and
flexible, and better tailored to their context, will
increase the potential for a successful outcome. There
must be opportunities to make course corrections and
adjust when things are not working. That requires
frank input from across the system and from troop- and
police-contributing countries. Flexibility will ensure
that operations are tailored to the specific challenges
on the ground. To achieve that, we must empower those
on the ground and strengthen leadership capacity, as
the Secretary-General proposes.
Operational plans based on clear and measurable
objectives, accompanied by benchmarks for followup and reporting back to the Security Council, should
guide integrated mission planning and leadership. The
inclusion of operational criteria for success can help
to sequence the campaign plan and thereby mitigate
capability shortfalls.
All of the above require informed analysis from
the Secretariat, including sound, strategic military and
police advice, based on troop-to-task analysis. As many
colleagues have already said, improving the Council’s
ability to give dynamic and strategic mission mandates
will demand greater frankness in the manner in which
the Secretary-General reports to it and presents options
for its consideration.
A stronger common understanding of operational
needs, shared with troop- and police-contributing
18/25

05/10/2017

countries during the force generation process, will also
make it possible for smaller contributing countries to
join together to provide the United Nations with unique
capabilities. One example of that is the contribution by
my country, together with Norway, Portugal, Denmark
and Belgium, of C-130 air transportation for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Another is multinational
training teams with the ability to train personnel in
United Nations mission headquarters in the field so as
to improve cohesive command and control.
We welcome resolution 2378 (2017) and look
forward to the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on a mechanism to fill existing gaps in terms of force
generation, including through effective and efficient
training and capacity-building. Contributing countries
have a responsibility to ensure that peacekeepers are
properly prepared, trained and equipped to meet the
challenges they will face in the field.
Troop-contributing countries’ meetings related
to the mandates of peace operations are important.
However, we should do more to realize the full potential
for interaction between contributing countries and the
Secretariat, thereby enabling the Secretary-General
to provide the Council with in-depth and strategic
military and police advice. For that reason, we need
more predictable, uniform and coherent processes for
triangular cooperation and dialogue. The additional
TCC meeting on MINUSMA in January led to a more
open process, which has contributed to the Secretariat’s
new and welcome approach to mission-specific strategic
force generation. That resulted in the MINUSMA force
generation conference in May. We truly believe that
this format can strengthen the force generation process.
As we all agree, troop-and police-contributing
countries must fully adhere to the United Nations zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. We
commend the Secretary-General for his leadership
on the issue, including the event on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse held during the highlevel week. As requested in resolution 2272 (2016), we
must be prepared to replace military units and formed
police units when the appropriate steps to investigate
allegations have not been taken.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing risks
that our Blue Helmets face in difficult and complex
environments. The Council, together with the troopand police-contributing countries, has a responsibility
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to ensure that the commanders and troops that we send
into the field have all the tools they need to protect both
the communities they serve and themselves. We firmly
support new capabilities, such as the use of modern
technology, qualified air assets and peacekeeping
intelligence assets. They are key force multipliers
that can improve performance and reduce casualties.
Denying the development of that type of capability
hampers United Nations forces’ ability to protect
themselves and civilians. Those capabilities, together
with enhanced training and equipment, will enable us
to become more agile and do a better job with less risk.
In addition, reaching the goal of at least 15 per cent
female observers and staff officers in the field will
increase missions’ effectiveness.
To sum up, we believe that force generation can
benefit from greater openness and transparency in
the process, increased frankness and better strategic
military and police advice from the Secretary-General
to the Council, sequenced mandates with prioritized
tasks and the use of enhanced new capabilities that
reduce risks and improve performance.
My country has a long tradition of participating
in United Nations peace operations, with more than
80,000 Swedish women and men having taken part
in them to date. From our very first group of military
observers, who participated in the Golan Heights in
1948, to our current engagement in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, Sweden’s commitment has remained firm. We
will continue to contribute and do everything we can to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping can meet the
challenges of the twenty-first century.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you and your delegation for proposing this
briefing. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his remarks and the representatives
of Bangladesh and Canada for their contributions.
International stability is increasingly at risk.
Therefore all Member States, within their own
capabilities, should provide a qualified contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Italy is doing
its part as a global security provider. Besides being
one of the most generous financial contributors to the
peacekeeping budget, we are also the top contributor
of Blue Helmets from the Group of Western European
and other States. We are currently participating in the
United Nations peacekeeping missions in Lebanon,

S/PV. 8064

with more than 1000 units, Cyprus and Mali, and in the
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.
However, beyond United Nations peace operations,
our defence and police forces are also providing
assistance and protection in other areas around the
world — from Somalia to Afghanistan, from Iraq to
Libya, and in the Mediterranean, the Sahel, the Arab
Gulf, the Balkans and Eastern Europe. Wherever its
assistance is required, my country spares no effort to
build capacity across the board, from border security to
election security, from justice and correction practices
to the fight against organized crime and all types
of trafficking.
Peacekeeping operations have capability gaps.
There is an urgent need for air assets to improve the
mobility of troops, medical assets to provide assistance
and fast medical evacuation and to civilians if needed,
and units for explosive ordnance disposal to remove
mines and improvised explosive devices. Technology
is key to increasing the safety and security of
peacekeepers. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has effectively
and efficiently improved the gathering of information
and provided enhanced situational awareness that is
crucial to the safety and security of peacekeepers and
the protection of civilians.
Italy has provided many resources to the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System in terms of manoeuvre
units complemented by enablers. Since the System was
created in 2015, we have fully supported it, offering
units from the national basket of forces prepared
with dedicated training cycles. We will confirm our
commitment at the next Defence Ministerial Meeting
in Vancouver.
Another major gap in peacekeeping operations is
the role and presence of women. As stated in resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security — in particular resolution 2242
(2015) — we need to increase the number of women
in United Nations military and police contingents.
All Member States should do more to that end. The
recruitment of a growing number of women at the
national level today will result in a greater gender
balance in the medium term. The participation of women
at all levels is key to improving the effectiveness and
performance of missions. Their role is indispensable to
all peace and security efforts.

17-3109519/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Training is vital to improving capability and
ensuring that mandates can be effectively delivered
on the ground. Since 2005, the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units in Vicenza — which is run
by our Carabinieri, together with instructors from
the United States and other African and European
countries — has offered qualified training for United
Nations peacekeepers, based on high professional and
ethical standards, through specific training modules
on the rule of law, international humanitarian law, the
protection of civilians, the protection of historical and
cultural heritage, preventing sexual and gender-based
violence in conflicts, and the broader women and peace
and security agenda.
Those training programmes develop standards
and common operating approaches to be applied
during robust police activity. We are convinced that
future peace operations will be increasingly based on
specialized police units focused on stabilization, the
rule of law, justice and the protection of civilians, in line
with the reform of the peace and security, architecture
envisaged by the Secretary-General, which emphasizes
the need to focus more on prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding.
It is therefore crucial to train peacekeepers to
protect people, key values and principles so as to ensure
the credibility and reputation of the United Nations. In
that context, let me highlight that Italy has joined the
Circle of Leadership created by the Secretary-General
to prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuses,
signed the voluntary compact to eliminate the scourge
of sexual exploitation and abuses, and contributed
to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse.
In terms of strategic planning, we should not
forget logistics. The capacity of operations to deliver
and accomplish their mandates is closely related
to the swiftness of deployment and the operational
effectiveness of field missions. The United Nations
Global Service Centre, which has been located
in Brindisi since 1994, is a fundamental hub to
provide logistical support to peacekeeping missions
around the world. We should maximize efficiency in
delivering services. We should also pay attention to
the management of the environmental footprint of field
missions throughout their life cycles. A lighter footprint
would allow for cost efficiencies, improved safety and
security for troops and civilians in host countries, and
eventually better mandate delivery.
20/25

05/10/2017

Finally, we are fully committed to working together
for smarter, more effective and successful peace
missions. Therefore, we need to provide missions with
the capabilities they require to deliver their mandate,
keeping in mind the decisive importance of the human
factor. I therefore wish to thank all the women and men
who are serving, and have served, the United Nations
peacekeeping missions across the world. I also pay
tribute to those that have lost their lives over the years.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his very useful briefing, which enables us to understand
in greater detail one of the main activities designed to
consolidate international peace and security. We are
equally grateful to the representatives of Bangladesh
and Canada for their most relevant briefings.
To begin, we pay our most sincere and heartfelt
tributes to all personnel of United Nations peacekeeping
operations around the world, who spare no efforts
in fulfilling their missions. In the same vein, we are
grateful to the countries that contribute troops — be they
military, police, observers or civilian personnel — for
their generosity to, solidarity with and commitment
to the system of the United Nations and countries that
suffer the vagaries of conflicts.
Within the framework of peacekeeping operations,
the force generation process carried out by the United
Nations clearly entails a complex system that must be
developed and implemented in a timely and efficient
manner, in line with realities on the ground and in
consultation with host and troop-contributing countries.
Consequently, in order to effectively and adequately
provide the economic, human and material resources
necessary to the missions, a technical, logistical and,
above all, political analysis is required, in accordance
with the mandates designed by the Council, which must
be more realistic, accurate and better-focused.
Given the multidimensional nature and the varied
roles of peacekeeping missions, we believe that their
capabilities must be strengthened. Force generation
must not solely be the work and responsibility of the
Office of Military Affairs or the Force Generation
Service. Rather, it must be the result of synergies
among all members of the system, which must contain
elements that generate coherence in the planning and
evaluation in the aftermath of missions. In that sense,
responsibility must be shared.
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We consider it vital that the implementation of
analysis and planning processes for missions be less
bureaucratic. The concepts of operations must be the
priority and simultaneously linked with the political
decisions made by the Security Council when it designs
mandates. In that sense, we must test our Organization’s
ability to design and implement a mandate that is
appropriate to needs on the ground. We believe that
it is necessary to improve institutional agility for the
deployment of troops, and to choose the best-trained
troops and those with greater specialization to respond
in increasingly complex asymmetric contexts.
It is clear that the international scene is not static.
It is undergoing significant transformations. Constant
threats by terrorist groups and transnational crime
against international peace and security highlight
the need for peacekeeping missions to be subject to
structural changes that allow them to adapt more
efficiently to their respective contexts in order to repel
those threats.
We highlight the efforts of the United Nations
and Security Council to achieve the objectives of the
mandates in force, and we call for unity among all
actors to strengthen the financial, tactical, operational
and strategic areas on the ground, in strict adherence to
the Charter of the United Nations and in full respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of States. Moreover, the improvement
of the material and technological factors must make
peacekeeping missions more effective in carrying
out their missions. It should be noted that adequate
equipment and training of troops are the responsibilities
not only of troop-contributing countries, but also that
of our Organization as a whole.
To conclude, it is also worth mentioning that no
peacekeeping mission can be successful if it does not
enjoy the support and backing of the host country. In
that regard, the ongoing and smooth coordination and
exchange of information among missions and local
authorities are essential.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
the briefers, Under Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Ambassadors of Canada and Bangladesh, for their
contributions and updates.
The United States is pleased to have played a
central role in refocusing the United Nations and
Member States on the importance of force generation
at the leaders’ summit in 2015. In recognition of the

S/PV. 8064

critical importance of multinational peace operations
and the challenges they face, the international
community has rallied behind the series of ministerial
conferences to raise awareness about capacity shortfalls
in peacekeeping and expand the pool of available
resources to address them.
From the first summit here in New York, those
meetings have focused on deliverables. We are
pleased with what those conferences have achieved,
as over 40 delegations have made pledges aimed
at fundamentally improving peacekeeping. Those
pledges have since materialized into concrete assets
that address mission-critical needs on the ground,
such as the Nepalese engineering unit deployed to
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
the Senegalese tactical helicopters sent to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, and the
Croatian special forces unit deployed to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
Through our bilateral peace-operations capacitybuilding programmes, the United States is further
assisting partner countries to fully develop pledge
capabilities, particularly those that address chronic
capability gaps. For our part, in 2015 the United States
pledged to develop and deliver curriculum to address
policing in extremist environments and add specialized
training to increase police peacekeepers’ survivability
in mission. To date, we have delivered that training to
four Cameroonian formed police units deploying to the
Central African Republic and two Senegalese formed
police units deploying to Mali.
We look ahead to the Vancouver Defence Ministerial
Meeting as an opportunity to both analyse new pledges
and solidify existing pledges. Pledges alone, however,
will not address growing peacekeeping demands. The
United States encourages the registration of all pledges
to ensure that commitments can ultimately be converted
by the United Nations into actual deployments,
increased capacity and better peacekeeping.
As mission mandates and operating environments
grow increasingly complex, we need units that are fully
trained and equipped to deliver the desired effects on
the ground. That means peacekeeping units that are
trained in both core military or police skills, as well
as in mission-specific needs. The work of the Strategic
Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell has

17-3109521/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

been instrumental in the registration and assessment of
potential peacekeepers for deployment.
Since the establishment of the Cell and the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS),
we have seen improvement in how the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) manages force
generation and deployments. It is critical to the success
of United Nations peacekeeping that the Organization
identify the most appropriate forces for peacekeeping
missions and expand the available base of troop- and
police-contributing countries. We need to continue to
improve the speed and methods it uses to do that.
To match the progress we have seen on force
generation, the United Nations needs to better forecast
future requirements, including ground units, but also
leadership, sustainment, information and mobility
systems. Institutionalizing that kind of strategic
planning, improved early warning capacity and
structural changes at United Nations Headquarters
in New York would enable United Nations leaders to
respond quickly and decisively to new crises.
In addition to the Cell and PCRS, we support the
further development of the DPKO operational readiness
assurance and performance-improvement policy as
a vital tool for collecting data on troop and leader
performance. Peacekeepers are truly the international
community’s front lines. Because mission success
can be a matter of life or death for civilians who rely
on peacekeepers for protection, as well as for the
peacekeepers themselves, we urge the United Nations
to make force protection and deployment decisions
based on objective performance data.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) is an example of how performance-based
decisions can lead to marked improvements in how
peacekeeping missions deliver on their mandate. To
address the shortcomings that led to UNMISS troops’
failure on several occasions to intervene to protect
civilians under attack in and around United Nations
bases, the Secretary-General directed the Mission to
undertake a number of steps to improve performance.
UNMISS has subsequently better defended its bases
against attacks and effectively projected peacekeepers
to respond to emerging humanitarian crises, such as
protecting 50,000 new displaced civilians in May.
Transparent, objective analysis of field performance
through the performance-improvement policy and other
existing mechanisms will support the identification
22/25

05/10/2017

of capability gaps and help bilateral supporters of
peacekeeping better target contributions to meet the
requirements of troop- and police-contributors. It
will assist troop-contributing countries (TCCs) to
understand where improvement is needed and help
donors match training and equipment contributions to
existing needs.
As a donor, the United States has provided over a
quarter of a billion dollars-worth of capacity-building
support bilaterally to TCCs, and those systems can help
us target future assistance. To that end, we strongly
support the United Nations in working to strengthen how
it collects, manages and analyses data on peacekeeping
operational requirements and unit field performance.
Increasing the availability of objective information to
support performance-based decision-making will make
missions more effective on the ground and promote the
overall legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping.
We are committed to helping peacekeepers improve
training and capability, but if a mission’s forces are not
able to fulfil their mandate, we need to know and we
must be flexible enough to change our approach. We
owe that much to both our peacekeepers and the critical
missions they are sent to accomplish.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the delegations of
France and the United Kingdom for their joint initiative
to convene a briefing on the topic of strategic force
generation in peacekeeping operations. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the
Permanent Representatives of Bangladesh and Canada
for their briefings.
Uruguay believes that strengthening strategic force
generation is an essential component in increasing the
efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
The timely availability of uniformed and civilian
personnel who are sufficiently trained and equipped
is key to the success of peacekeeping operations.
Likewise, we cannot conceivably implement mission
mandates fully if they do not have the capabilities
commensurate to the challenges they must face.
It is important to acknowledge that in the reform
process — based on the recommendations of the report
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) — encouraging progress has been made
on the part of the Secretariat, mainly in its Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and Department of Field
Support, and Members States on the whole. By way
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of example, the establishment of the Strategic Force
Generation and Capability Planning Cell, together with
the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, has
significantly contributed to guaranteeing the increased
availability and timely deployment of peacekeeping
capabilities. In that regard, we encourage the Secretariat
to pursue its efforts in close coordination with troopand police-contributing countries.
The Security Council, as the organ that authorizes
mandates, has the direct responsibility to ensure
that peacekeeping deployed personnel have optimal
conditions in which to fulfil their duties. Today’s
concept aptly takes up the issue of the efforts the
Security Council could make in terms of strategic force
generation to contribute to the success of peacekeeping
operations. In the view of my delegation, the Council
could significantly contribute in the following ways.
First, with regard to the design and planning stages,
and even the reconfiguration phase, of a peacekeeping
operation, we believe that it is key for the Security
Council to attach greater importance to identifying
the needs and capabilities required to fulfil a mandate.
Planning should be based on clear, achievable and
prioritized objectives with benchmark criteria and an
exit strategy that permits a reduction of the mission and
an adequate transition to a successor entity when said
criteria is met. Trilateral cooperation among the Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) is fundamental in that regard.
The Secretariat, in particular the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support (DFS), plays a determining role in
terms of providing advisory support in decision-making
processes, including, inter alia, on specific equipment
and personnel needs. With regard to equipment, allow
me to add that obtaining it cannot depend upon the
financial capacity of a single country. New technologies
are expensive, and therefore it is essential to work on
alternatives to obtain it — for example, through the
development of greater cooperation TCCs and PCCs,
the Secretariat and donor countries.
Moreover, when it comes to decision-making, the
Security Council must fully take into account the views
of TCCs, as they are the ones serving on the ground.
That could greatly facilitate the planning of operations,
thereby ensuring that personnel have the capacity to
respond to new demands. Specifically, it is a matter of
working to minimize the gaps between those who draw

S/PV. 8064

up, plan, administer and implement operations, as well
as to underscore the enormous benefits of a productive
relationship among them.
Secondly, it is highly important that deployed
personnel be adequately trained, with a particular
emphasis on predeployment training. It is essential
that peacekeeping personnel are educated and trained
for the tasks to be conducted in the area of operations.
That requires a joint effort by TCCs to promote greater
training standards for their personnel, as well as the
Secretariat in carrying out the relevant evaluation and
monitoring programmes. We acknowledge the excellent
work of DPKO and DFS together in the development,
implementation and validation of regulations and
advice in peacekeeping training, especially in the areas
of human rights and the protection of civilians and
against sexual abuse and exploitation.
Thirdly, and finally, we should not focus solely
on force generation but also on the full functionality
of peacekeeping forces once deployed. That has been
a topic to which my delegation has constantly and
specifically referred throughout its nearly two years as
a member of the Security Council. Unfortunately, as a
frequent issue within several peacekeeping operations,
this a matter on which the Council should assume
greater responsibility. We are talking about obstacles
on the ground that also have a negative impact on the
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
On the one hand, particular attention should be given
to national restrictions — so-called caveats — whether
they are declared or, even worse, non-declared, given
that they can undermine the fulfilment of mandates. On
the other hand, the Council should demand full respect,
and compliance by host countries, with the terms agreed
in status of forces agreements, which constitute the
guarantees that protect the personnel whom a country
voluntarily contributes to peacekeeping operations.
We are also concerned to have witnessed an
increase in the frequency of deliberate attacks against
United Nations personnel and facilities, which have led
to significant loss of human life and equipment. On this
issue we believe that we should, inter alia, provide our
troops with a greater number of tools to confront the
new realities — for example, passive defence measures
and strengthening the rules of engagement — as well
as exhausting all possible avenues to ensure that those
responsible for such crimes are held accountable.

17-3109523/25

S/PV.8064

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In conclusion, politically as well as on the ground,
my country reiterates its commitment to strengthening
capacity in force generation in peacekeeping operations.
On the political level, Uruguay is honoured to co-host
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Meeting in November. Among other things, the goal of
the meeting is to continue efforts in force generation
and follow-up on the promises and pledges made by
various Member States at various multilateral meetings
held between 2015 and 2017. On the ground, Uruguay
continues to contribute peacekeeping personnel
to various missions, having recently concluded its
contribution to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti following its successful closure. We
reiterate our constant and long-standing commitment
to peacekeeping operations, while we also continue
evaluating the possibility of further pledges in line with
our capabilities.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I would like to thank each and every one of those
present for their statements, which highlight one of
the essential dimensions upon which the effectiveness
of peacekeeping depends: strategic force generation.
France is glad to have been able to organize this
briefing during its presidency, in partnership with the
United Kingdom. I am also pleased that Bangladesh
and Canada were able to share their experiences and
their vision. I thank the Secretariat for its investment in
this major area of work, and Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his particularly enlightening briefing.
The problem discussed at this meeting arises from
the obvious fact that peacekeeping operations can
succeed only if their forces are appropriately trained,
equipped and led. In that context, strategic force
generation should respond to three requirements at the
very least: clarity, innovation and globality.
First of all, we must be clear-minded and practical
about the needs of peackeeping operations. Force
generation should be based on the identification of
current gaps and elements obstructing the carrying
out of operations. This is, of course, a short-term
requirement, and we must constantly adapt the capacity
of peacekeeping operations currently deployed and
mobilize their critical capacity, making it possible to
quickly respond to changing situations on the ground.
24/25

05/10/2017

But force generation is also a long-term project.
It is the tool with which we must lay the foundations
for the peacekeeping operations of tomorrow, as well
as the instrument that the United Nations must employ
to anticipate personnel, equipment and technology
capacities that will make it possible to respond to
conflicts in five, 10 or even 20 years. Trilateral dialogue
between the Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat contributes significantly
to this process. Such an approach should bring about
a vision of peacekeeping possibilities that the Council
should nurture in order to establish mandates that are
both ambitious and realistic and that can respond to
challenges on the ground. We welcome the work already
done to achieve these goal, particularly in New York,
London and Paris in 2015 and 2016, as well as next
month at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting
in Vancouver. I commend Canada’s commitment to the
full success of that important ministerial conference.
In addition to peacekeeping needs in terms
of medical, aerial, technological and engineering
requirements, the Paris Meeting, on peacekeeping in
a French-speaking environment, recalled to us another
requirement, namely, that peacekeeping operations
must have sufficient language skills in the national
language of the country in question if they are to be
able to effectively counter threats, gain the confidence
of people and lay the foundations for lasting peace.
In order to respond to this requirement, France, in
partnership with the International Organization of La
Francophonie and its member States, has established
language programmes for non-French-speaking
troop- and police-contributing countries. Through the
Boutros-Ghali Observatory for Peacekeeping, launched
in October 2016, it supports the efforts of Frenchspeaking troop-contributing countries to develop
their participation in peacekeeping operations. As I
indicated yesterday at a round table organized at the
Headquarters of the Permanent Representation of the
OIF, I wish to renew my invitation to all Member States
willing to do so to join this initiative and get involved
with steering it.
On the strength of this clear-mindedness, force
generation must be guided by ambition and innovation.
The establishment of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System within peacekeeping operations was
a historic step forward. It helps to identify a reserve
force of trained, equipped and operational troops
endowed with a use doctrine that can be deployed in less
17-31095

05/10/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

than 60 days. We welcome the commitment of troopcontributing countries such as Bangladesh, which have
committed themselves to this mechanism. We support
the efforts of these countries and of the Secretariat to
continue developing and refining it.
Many other innovations have followed that one.
The force-generation conference for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, held last May, was a major milestone for
the predictability in peacekeeping capabilities. We
therefore welcome the initiative of several Member
States, including the Netherlands, Germany, Jordan and
Belgium, and also Norway and Portugal, to coordinate
the provision of air transport on a multi-year basis.
This approach has given solid operational prospects
for the Mission. However, we must continue our
efforts because, 18 months after the Security Council
authorized the raising of the troop-ceiling, the Mission
still suffers from a deficit of nearly 2,500 troops — a gap
that needs to filled in the current security environment.
The development of such joint commitments,
associating several Member States to generate critical
capacities, must be encouraged. These arrangements
derive from the capabilities and complementarities of
each contributor country in terms of providing troops,
training, financing or equipment. France is fully
committed to this and is providing both predeployment
training and operational training to over 25,000 African
military personnel a year, across numerous deployed
peacekeeping operations. We must collectively
encourage the development of triangular partnerships,
including by making the most of regional initiatives.
I come now to my last point. In order to bear fruit,
force generation must be part of a global approach.

S/PV. 8064

The issue of deployment and support for capacitygeneration is a key element. Efforts to modernize
strategic deployment must be extended so that these
units can deploy quickly, as soon as the need is
identified. Operational and strategic support must also
be adapted so that these units can make a difference
over the long term having been endowed with the
appropriate resources.
Issues of sustainability and medical support must
also be at the core of our concerns. Modernizing
management processes, in particular through delegation
and accountability closest to the ground, must also
contribute to the performance of peacekeeping. The
global approach also requires looking beyond the
military contingents; adequate capacity mobilization is
also necessary in the police and civilian spheres. In many
theatres of operation, the increase in the proportion of
women deployed in United Nations police units should
make it possible to better respond in the missions these
units are called upon to complete. Civilian components
must acquire the expertise needed to carry out their
tasks. In any case, linguistic competence remains
essential to the success of peacekeeping.
On the strength of a lucid, innovative and global
vision of peacekeeping, we can ensure together that the
United Nations through its peacekeeping operations will
continue to meet everybody’s hopes and expectations.
The Council can rest assured of France’s resolute
commitment to this end.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

17-3109525/25
