Reaolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

tories and at the creation by the adrninistering Powers
of military bases and installations in contravention of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assernbly,
Deploring the refusal of sorne adrninistering Powers
to allow visiting rnissions of the United Nations to
visit these Territories,
Conscious that these situations require the continued
attention and the assistance of the United Nations in
the achievernent by the peoples of these Territories of
their objectives, as ernbodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Awarc of the special circurnstances of geographical
location and econornic conditions concerning sorne of
these Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Comrnittee on the Situation with regard to the Irnplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-deterrnination and independence;
3. Calls upon the adrninistering Powers to irnplement
without delay the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
4. Reiterates its declaration that any atternpt airned
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principies of the Charter of the United Nations and of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Urges the administering Powers to allow United
Nations visiting. missions to visit the Territories, and
to extend to them full co-operation and assistance ;
6. Decides that the United Nations should render all
help to the peoples of these Territories in their efforts
freely to decide their future status;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to pay
special attention to these Territories and to report on
the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide ali possible assistance in the irnplernentation of the
present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2233 (XXI). lnformation from Non-Self-Govern•
ing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Cornrnittee
on the Situation with regard to the Irnplernentation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
C;olonial C~untries and Peoples to study the informatí<?n tran~mltted to the Secretary-General in accordance
w1th Article 73 e of the Charter of the- United Nations
ª?d ~o tak~ it fully into account in examining the
s1tuahon with regard to the irnplementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2109 (XX) of 21 Decernber 1965, in which it approved the procedures adopted
by the Special Cornmittee for the discharge of the func-

75

tions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII) 81
and requested the Comrnittee to continue to discharge
those functions in accordance with the said procedures,
H aving studied the chapter of the report or the Special Cornrnittee dealing with the transmittal of inforrnation under Article 73 e of the Charter and the action
taken by it in respect of that information, 82
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this information,33
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Comrnittee on the Situation with regard to the lmplernentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from N on-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Expresses its profound regret that, despite the
repeated recomrnendations of the General Assembly, including the rnost recent recomrnendation contained in
resolution 2109 (XX), sorne Mernber States having responsibilities for the adrninistration of Non-SelfGoverning Territories have not seen fit to transmit inforrnation under Article 73 e of the Charter or have
done so insufficiently or too late;
3. Once again urges ali Mernber States which have
or which assume responsibilities for the administration
of Territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full
rneasure of self-government to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information
prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the
fullest possible inforrnation on political and constitutional development;
4. Requests the Special Cornmittee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII) in accordance with
the procedures referred to above.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2234 (XXI). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitanta of
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2110 (XX) of 21 December
1965,
H aving examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Mernber States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of N on-Self-Governing Territories
under General Assernbly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 Novernber 1954,34
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Urges Member States to continue to offer scholarships to the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
3. Requests Member States to facilitate the travel of
student_s from Non-Se!f-Governing Territories seeking
to ava1l themselves of the educational opportunities
which are offered to thern;
4. Re9uests the Member States offering scholarships
to take mto account the necessity of furnishing com81 lbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter II, appendix I.
• 82 ]bid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
1tem 23 (A/6300/Rev.1), chapter XXIII.
83 /bid., agenda items 64 and 71 document A/645S
84 Jbid., document A/6503.
'
•
