S/PV.9003

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9003rd meeting

Thursday, 24 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Oye
Mr. Anyanah
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29866 (E)
*2229866*

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

and deliberations — as one might suspect — have not
been easy.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and His Excellency Mr. Hossam
Zaki, Assistant Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I brief the Security Council today
from Geneva at the end of the fourth day of the seventh
session of the Small Body of the Syrian Constitutional
Committee. The Committee has been meeting since
Monday and concludes this session with its fifth and
final day of meetings tomorrow, on Friday.
Before the Committee began to work this week,
I recalled that Syria remains one of the gravest crises
in the world and that there is a clear need for progress
towards a political solution, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). Having this month passed the grim milestone
of 11 years of conflict, and with the needs of the longsuffering Syrian people increasing, I appealed to the
Committee’s members to work this week with a sense
of seriousness and the spirit of compromise that the
situation demands.
This week, the Committee members have discussed
draft constitutional texts on four titles of constitutional
principles. Let me mention them here — basics of
governance, State identity, State symbols and regulation
and functions of public authorities. Today they are
discussing the last title. These are important subjects,
2/22

24/03/2022

We are now at an important moment in the week’s
deliberations. In accordance with the co-Chairs’
agreement that led to the convening of this session, the
delegations are expected to submit revisions to reflect
the content of the discussions, which are then to be
discussed by the Committee members tomorrow.
We will therefore see if the next 24 hours help to
move us forward. There are significant differences, but
it is possible to find and build on common points if the
will exists to do so. Serious attempts should be made by
all delegations in order to begin to narrow differences.
That requires taking on board aspects of points made
by other delegations and entertaining compromise
formulations that could, in time, attract support within
the Committee, in accordance with its decision-making
procedures. A constitution-making effort that actually
starts to explore compromises could help build trust
and confidence in this process — something sorely
lacking at present among the Syrians.
Turning to the situation on the ground, Martin
Griffiths will brief the Council on the growing
humanitarian needs and the continued effects on
the Syrian people of the destruction of so much of
the country and the collapse of Syria’s economy. I
urge all concerned to take measures to reverse those
negative trends, to expand cross-line and cross-border
assistance, and to enhance efforts for early recovery to
build resilience.
Beyond the humanitarian sphere, there is much
else that could be done to build trust and confidence,
something that I continue to explore with all actors.
After all, it is clear that no one actor or existing group
of actors in Syria can determine the outcome of this
conflict. A military solution is an illusion. That was
always the case, but it is now plain for all to see.
There have been no shifts in the front lines for
two years now. Yet this past month, violence has
continued between the various Syrian actors, two listed
terrorist groups and involving five foreign armies, too.
With front lines frozen, there is every reason to try
to de-escalate militarily and build a true nationwide
ceasefire. Likewise, with listed terrorist groups still
a threat, the parties share an interest and a duty to
cooperate among themselves.
22-29866

24/03/2022

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

Syrians on all sides continue to be affected by the
plight of the detained, the abducted and the missing.
Any credible attempt to build trust and confidence
must include serious steps forward on this issue — an
issue that has been a priority of mine from day one and
continues to be.
There is also much more that could be done by the
Syrian Government on the one hand and by outside
actors on the other to address the very real concerns
that Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons
express — the very concerns that prevent most from
returning: safety and security; lack of livelihoods
and work opportunities; lack of adequate housing
as well as concerns over housing, land and property
rights; military service requirements; and inadequate
basic services.
I believe that in areas such as those, and potentially
others, too, it should be possible to identify concrete,
reciprocal, verifiable measures that could be taken in
parallel and that could begin to shift conflict dynamics,
and, in the process, to explore how a broader political
process could be constructed to tackle all the issues
mentioned in resolution 2254 (2015).
I have already received some ideas, and I continue
to develop others. There is now a need to deepen
the discussion, and I will be carrying forward the
consultations with that objective. The constructive
international diplomacy needed to support that
effort has not been made easier by recent heightened
international tensions, but I will keep working on this.
Let us also remember the impact of the Syrian
conflict on the region. I am pleased that the Council
is hearing a briefing today from Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hossam Zaki of the League of Arab States.
Regional input and support for the United Nations-led
effort to facilitate a political settlement will be critical,
as will contributions from many other international
stakeholders. That is why I continue to consult widely.
This past month I held consultations in Geneva with
the envoys of several States, travelled to Washington,
D.C., to brief officials of a number of States who met
there under United Nations auspices, and travelled to
Antalya, Turkey, where I was able to meet the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Turkey and Russia, among
other interlocutors.
I also continue to consult widely with the Syrians
as I pursue my mandate and to value the insights and
inputs I receive. The Women’s Advisory Board met this

past week and a half outside Geneva, and they continue
to provide me with their perspective and ideas on the
political process. Offering a gendered perspective,
members of the Board underlined ways to ensure that
the aspirations of all Syrians are considered as the
political process continues. I welcome their willingness
to engage on tough questions.
Earlier this month, we also convened in Geneva
the Thematic Working Groups of the Civil Society
Support Room on the topics of civic space and values,
as well as on the economy, recovery and development
perspectives. Participants were keen to support our
efforts to promote a functioning political process to
implement resolution 2254 (2015). Many are involved
in local peacebuilding projects to promote a society
based on the common civic values of participation,
plurality, equality, non-violence and respect for rights
and freedoms. They expressed their distress at the
economic situation, which nourishes the war economy,
and called on donors not to forget Syria and to invest in
early-recovery efforts.
In concluding, I wish to emphasize once again that I
continue to rely on all members of the Security Council
to support my efforts, in accordance with my mandate,
to bring about the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015), to restore the sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria, and to enable the
Syrian people to realize their legitimate aspirations.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: This month marks 11 years of war,
destruction and humanitarian crisis for the people
of Syria. Such devastation finds few parallels in
recent history.
More than 350,000 people have been killed and
nearly 14 million displaced from their homes. Basic
services have been destroyed. Five million children
born since the start of the conflict have known nothing
but hardship, nothing but war. Those are terrible,
sobering figures.
Civilians continue to be killed or injured along frontline areas of north-west and north-east Syria, despite,
as Geir has been saying, no significant movement in the
front lines. In February alone, 18 civilians were killed
in north-west Syria, according to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

22-298663/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

We continue to be concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Al-Hol, where some 56,000 people
live. Incidents resulting in death and injury, including
of children, continue, as we have discussed in this
Chamber before. The protection of camp residents, most
of them women and children, must be front and centre.
At the same time, we need to maintain the civilian
character of the camp. I take this opportunity once
more to call for the full repatriation of third-country
nationals from camps in north-east Syria.
Each month the situation for Syrians becomes
bleaker, as Geir has also mentioned. This month
is no different. As we reported here last month
(see S/PV.8978), 14.6 million people are in need of
humanitarian aid, more than at any time since the start
of the conflict. The graph keeps getting worse.
Today’s crippling economic crisis continues to push
humanitarian needs to new heights. Very high levels of
food insecurity, with 12 million people considered foodinsecure, are at risk of rising further. The Syrian pound
is reaching record lows, reducing purchasing power.
The war in Ukraine is leading to soaring food
and energy prices globally. That is expected to have a
particularly negative impact on the region, including in
Syria. Already food prices have hit record highs each
month over the last five months; they have gone up and
up and up. Basic commodities are expected to become
not only less affordable but also less available. Families
are increasingly unable to cover basic expenses with
their incomes, as we have discussed here before, and
the situation is only worse now. All that exacerbates an
already problematic humanitarian situation. Already, as
many as one in four children in some areas are stunted,
resulting in irreversible physical and cognitive harm.
Sadly, that also aggravates existing protection concerns.
As in every crisis, the vulnerable suffer the most.
For example — and I find this to be an extraordinary
report — 71 per cent of communities have reported
instances of child marriage and 84 per cent of those
communities report the use of child labour. Against that
backdrop, while we focus on life-saving interventions,
as Mr. Pedersen mentioned, we must also intensify our
early recovery efforts. People must be allowed to lead
dignified lives and see a better life for themselves and
their children. We have seen positive work in early
recovery across all sectors, from health to education to
water and sanitation, including from your authorities,
Madam President.
4/22

24/03/2022

Our 2022 humanitarian response plan is nearing
finalization. It includes $1.1 billion of projects, which is
a little more than 25 per cent of the overall requests for
humanitarian aid to Syria, that will contribute to early
recovery and resilience — much more than was the case
last year. There are 570 projects in the plan are focused
on early recovery and resilience. That includes, for
example, 66 per cent of education requirements, 45 per
cent of water, sanitation and hygiene requirements, and
22 per cent of health requirements. I am very pleased
that the programming has increased on early recovery
and resilience. We hope that this will also lead to
generous funding.
One important component of early recovery
programmes that needs to be expanded is mine
clearance. Mines and explosive ordnance killed
approximately 805 people in Syria in 2021 and injured
nearly 3,000 more. Around half of the population in
Syria is estimated to live in areas contaminated with
explosive ordnance. That, too, is a shocking statistic.
Access to electricity is also critical to enabling early
recovery. At present, one-third of Syrian households
receive fewer than two hours of electricity a day. Public
services, of course, are similarly underserved. The
United Nations continues to engage with all parties on
how to ensure that the situation of ordinary Syrians,
which I have been describing, is not further exacerbated
by the unintended impact of sanctions.
We cannot fail the Syrian people, yet that is exactly
the risk we face. There are two areas I would highlight
that may protect us from those risks.
First, as I already mentioned, we need funding,
including for those early recovery programmes, in
particular. Last year, our humanitarian response
plan received 46 per cent of funding, which in itself
is a relatively good statistic, but in a very grim
environment. We are acutely aware of the rapidly
rising humanitarian needs across the world, some due
to man-made conflicts, others due to climate shocks
and extreme weather conditions. With needs on the
rise, the requirements for funding have skyrocketed.
The funding environment is challenging but we cannot
allow insufficient funding to be the cause of further
hardship for Syrians, in particular their children.
Secondly, we must ensure full humanitarian access
to people in need, wherever they are. I echo the call
of the Secretary-General to maintain the consensus on
renewing resolution 2585 (2021), authorizing cross22-29866

The situation in the Middle East

24/03/2022

border access for the United Nations and its partners.
The Council has acted in unison on that issue since last
July, and it is my sincere hope and that of the SecretaryGeneral that the same spirit of cooperation will remain
on that issue.
We continue to work with the parties concerned
to reinvigorate cross-line access to the north-west. It
is not an easy task. I am hopeful that before the end of
the month of March, we will see another inter-agency
convoy delivering aid to people in need in that area.
In the north-east, the United Nations must be able to
coordinate the humanitarian response from within the
country through its hub in Qamishli.
Ultimately, now more than ever before, we need
action to show the people of Syria that they have not
been forgotten, as they fear they have been. We also
need to deliver aid that is so urgently needed by those
communities, families and statistics.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Zaki.
Mr. Zaki (spoke in Arabic): The eleventh
anniversary of the Syrian crisis coincides with serious
global upheavals, which add to the challenges facing the
international community and its plans for responding
to the humanitarian crises. The Syrian crisis is not
expected to be immune to this grim situation, which
poses a threat to international peace and security.
We continue to hope that diplomacy will prevail
over weapons and war. However, our concerns are
growing every day, given the increasing number of
people displaced by the war in Ukraine, which adds
to the significant responsibilities of the international
community. These include the need to address
humanitarian challenges and crises that continue to
grow in tandem with the armed conflicts escalating
across the world.
The Syrian conflict has created a humanitarian
catastrophe that has affected all Syrians, regardless
of their location. The crisis has had intergenerational
impacts. It has led to an increasing number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees, along with a
deteriorated economic and humanitarian situation,
rising poverty, worsening public health care caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the destruction
of health-care institutions and the impact of sanctions,

S/PV.9003

which prevent them from discharging their basic
humanitarian tasks.
It is regrettable that 90 per cent of Syrians now live
below the poverty line and that some 12.5 million suffer
from food insecurity. The conflict has displaced more
than 12 million Syrians — approximately 50 per cent of
the population. It is unfortunately a unique situation in
our modern history. More than 14 million Syrians now
require humanitarian assistance, in addition to the tens
of thousands who are missing or have been detained.
The League of Arab States is aware of the grave
consequences of this crisis on the stability of the
Middle East and the Arab world in general. We have
followed its repercussions and painful effects on
Syria’s neighbours, in particular those hosting Syrian
refugees, notably Lebanon and Jordan. They have been
overwhelmed by the need to provide aid and basic
services to Syrians who have been displaced, despite the
significant burden on infrastructure and vital sectors,
in particular education and health care. Lebanon hosts
the largest number of refugees per capita. Jordan has
hosted more than 1 million Syrians since the start of
the conflict, which adds to the burdens of a country that
already lacks resources.
The League of Arab States hopes that the sixth
Brussels Conference on supporting the future of Syria
and the region, scheduled for May, will alleviate the
protracted humanitarian crisis and mobilize the
necessary support for host countries of Syrian refugees.
Support for refugees and IDPs is a responsibility
shared between the international community and host
countries, without discrimination on the basis of colour,
race or religion, as we regrettably have seen recently.
Refugees and IDPs of an armed conflict are humans,
first and foremost, whose normal lives have collapsed
through no fault of their own. Supporting, showing
solidarity with and extending aid to them are core
responsibilities of the entire international community.
We hope that all stakeholders will play their role in
that regard.
The Council of the League of Arab States, meeting
at the level of Foreign Ministers, adopted a decision
on the Syrian crisis on 9 March. The most important
elements of that decision, which forms the basis for the
Arab position on the humanitarian crisis in Syria, are
as follows.

22-298665/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

First, there is growing concern in the Arab region
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
possible catastrophic impact of ongoing violence across
Syria, despite the lack of change on the front lines in
the north-west and north-east of the country over the
past 20 months.
There is a need for stability and for addressing
insecurity, as well as assassinations and drug
smuggling, especially in the south of Syria, to allow
refugees to return voluntarily to their homes and to
cease the deteriorating situation in the south.
Secondly, there is a legitimate concern about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Al-Hol and
Rukban camps. International and Syrian stakeholders
are called upon to assume their responsibilities and
allow for the safe passage of humanitarian assistance
into Syria, while stressing the need for the return of
all Rukban residents to their homes and completely
evacuating and dismantling the camp.
Thirdly, there is genuine and justified concern
about any new arrangements on the ground that may
threaten Syria’s territorial integrity. All attempts to
impose demographic changes and create a new reality
on the ground in Syria are categorically rejected, as is
the continued violation by Israel of Syria’s air space.
Fourthly, the Council of the League of Arab States
welcomed resolution 2585 (2021), on renewing the
humanitarian assistance mechanism. We call on donor
countries to disburse their pledges expeditiously, as
announced in previous pledging conferences.
We express our genuine concern about the
consequences of the war in Ukraine on the Syrian
crisis, both on the ground and in terms of the way in
which the Council deals with the situation in Syria.
Given the grave challenges that the world order is
facing as a result of the war in Ukraine, we stress once
again that addressing urgent humanitarian needs by the
international community should not be waning and that
addressing the humanitarian situation by the Council
should not cease due to political considerations.
Therefore, the League of Arab States hopes that the
humanitarian aid mechanism will continue to function
across borders to Syria and that it will be renewed
in July free from any politicization of the issue. We
believe that renewing resolution 2585 (2021) is vital for
the fate of millions of Syrians in need.
6/22

24/03/2022

In conclusion, I emphasize that the humanitarian
crisis in Syria will be resolved only through a
comprehensive political settlement based on the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) in a manner
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people towards deciding on their future freely. A
political solution is the only means to end the conflict
and create a safe and neutral environment that ensures
the safe, dignified and voluntary return of millions of
IDPs and refugees.
In that context, the League of Arab States reiterates
its support to the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and we
pledge to continue cooperating with him.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Zaki
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I deliver this statement is on
behalf of Norway and Ireland, co-penholders on the
Syrian humanitarian file.
We thank the briefers — Special Envoy Pedersen,
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Assistant
Secretary-General Zaki — for their sobering accounts
on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Marking 11 years of conflict, death and despair in
Syria is a tragic milestone that sees the humanitarian
situation continuing to deteriorate. The coronavirus
disease, economic crisis and drought are fuelling the
misery, with increasing food prices on top of that.
Twelve million people in Syria are food insecure.
Families face an unthinkable choice between buying
food or buying fuel for heating in the cold winter.
The number of refugees, internally displaced
people and those in need of life-saving aid remains
shockingly high. Those behind the figures include
fathers, mothers and millions of innocent children who
have never experienced anything other than conflict.
Negative coping mechanisms, such as child, early and
forced marriages, are increasing. Instead of going to
school, many children are forced to work. A staggering
3 million children are out of school this month. Children
are paying the highest price for this conflict.
While millions of Syrians have found refuge
in neighbouring countries — and we thank those
countries for their generous hospitality over all these
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

years — over 14.6 million of those who remain in Syria
need humanitarian assistance and protection. They
need food, water, health services, electricity, shelter,
education and jobs.
We must use all modalities to ensure that we reach
out to everyone with humanitarian needs across Syria.
For millions in the north-west, the humanitarian crossborder mechanism remains the critical lifeline for
the provision of food, medical assistance and shelter.
The humanitarian cross-border mechanism is an
irreplaceable tool for the reliable delivery of large-scale
humanitarian aid, month after month. It is also the
modality that best ensures monitoring and transparency.
The needs are massive and the humanitarian
imperative must be at the core of the response. That
is why we have been supportive of the six-month
plan of the United Nations to deliver humanitarian
aid across the conflict line to the north-west. We
urge all parties to facilitate access and contribute to
progress in those cross-line deliveries. We also want
to use this occasion to commend the humanitarian
organizations — international and local — that are
staying and delivering across Syria, despite the
extremely difficult circumstances. We call on all
parties to allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need.
Violence continues, including air strikes, shelling
and the killing and maiming of civilians. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure must be protected in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Yet, since the start
of the conflict, there have reportedly been 751 attacks
on educational facilities and personnel. Those attacks
are clearly contrary to resolution 2601 (2021), on the
protection of education in armed conflict, which was
adopted unanimously by the Council.
Finally, 11 years on, we must continue to stand
together with the Syrian people in overcoming
the desperate situation. Our key objective must be
protecting and assisting the Syrian people. We welcome
and support the increased focus on early recovery in
humanitarian programming. While continuing to
address immediate humanitarian needs, we reiterate
that only a credible political process can give the
Syrian people back their future. We call on all Council
members to do their part to that end. The Syrian people
have suffered enough.
I will now make a statement in my national capacity
on the political situation.

S/PV.9003

Eleven years is 11 years too long for the Syrian
people to have experienced upended lives and delayed
futures. We urge all parties — both Syrian and
external — to do all they can to reach a lasting political
solution to end the war. Resolution 2254 (2015) must be
implemented fully.
Norway will continue supporting the Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process, and we are encouraged
that the Constitutional Committee is meeting for its
seventh round of negotiations this week. We call on all
participants to contribute constructively, in good faith
and with flexibility towards concrete outcomes and
progress on a reformed Constitution as an important
part of the political process.
We also welcome the United Nations Special
Envoy’s consultations with the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board and Civil Society Support Room,
and we would like to emphasize their important roles.
Further, we reiterate our support for the Special Envoy’s
step-for-step approach, as a way of engaging all sides in
identifying and carrying out reciprocal steps towards a
political solution.
Let me also highlight the issue of persons who are
missing or have been unlawfully deprived of their liberty.
In Syria, they are inextricably linked, and arbitrary
detention is widespread. So many Syrians — not
knowing what happened to their family members — are
personally affected by the countless numbers of missing
and detained persons. Progress on this issue is critical.
We call on all parties to allow humanitarian actors,
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross,
to visit detention centres and carry out their important
work, providing information to the families of victims.
Before concluding, let me reiterate Norway’s
commitment to the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). As we have seen the last few
months, the group is still active and represents a real
threat. The continued lack of a political solution allows
them to operate. We must not let ISIL take advantage of
the situation to further strengthen its position.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Head of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Assistant
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Hossam Zaki, for sharing their views.

22-298667/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the commencement of the work of
the seventh round of the drafting commission of the
Constitutional Committee on 21 March in Geneva.
We continue to see no alternative to advancing the
political settlement process led and carried out by
Syrians themselves with the mediation of the United
Nations and without external interference or imposing
artificial deadlines and strictly within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015). In this regard, we hope
that methodological reservations will not interfere
with the successful completion of this round of the
Constitutional Committee and that the work will
be based mainly on a dialogue between the Syrian
delegations and their readiness to reach an agreement
on constitutional reform. We call on Geir Pedersen to
focus on this particular area without being distracted
by other initiatives.
Progress on the political track is also particularly
needed now because the situation on the ground
remains tense and potentially explosive. The main
security threats in Syria and for the entire region
are associated with the mobilization of terrorists
who have taken refuge in territories not controlled
by Damascus — in Idlib, east of the Euphrates and
in Al-Tanf. The solution to this problem lies in
continuing to wage an uncompromising fight against
internationally recognized terrorist groups, primarily
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, as well as ending the illegal
foreign military presence that violates the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
and in the cessation of arbitrary Israeli air strikes.
The root causes of the general volatile situation lie
in the West’s continued policy of pandering to terrorists
in an attempt use them for their own aims. The latest
manifestation of the dangerous consequences of this
approach was a large-scale terrorist attack on Al-Sina’a
prison in Al-Hasakah. During the operation to clear
that prison and its urban environment of ISIL militants,
United States aircraft and armoured vehicles were used,
and measures to protect civilians were disregarded. The
massive exodus of civilians from the combat zone is
eloquent evidence of this: more than 45,000 people left
the area, according to OCHA.
Despite the fact that Washington presents its
military presence as a counter-terrorist operation, we
fail to see any active measures to combat terrorists
there. Moreover, according to available information,
ISIL and other extremists from east of the Euphrates
8/22

24/03/2022

are being transferred to other hot spots where it is
beneficial for the United States to sow chaos. We
also believe it is important to recall that the United
States and its allies have repeatedly used the farfetched pretext of destroying chemical weapons to, in
violation of international law and the United Nations
Charter, launch massive missile and bomb strikes on
the military and industrial infrastructure of the Syrian
Arab Republic. It would seem that this is what the rulesbased order promoted by Western colleagues looks like.
Given the foregoing, and also in view of the fact
that the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
the context of the situation in Ukraine, has abandoned
the customary neutral language that is appropriate for
an international official, we ask Mr. Guterres to be
consistent and finally provide his assessment of the
compliance of the presence of United States and other
forces in Syria with the United Nations Charter. We
expect him to publicly name those who are illegally
occupying Syrian territory, primarily in Al-Tanf,
and indicate who is responsible for the situation
in internally displaced persons camps outside the
control of Damascus. Otherwise, we will regard the
silence of the Secretary-General as a vivid example of
double standards.
Further, we would also like to remind the
Secretary-General that we never heard his assessments
of the United States bombings in Raqqa, Hajin and
Baghouz. According to the United Nations itself, there
is not a single medical facility left in Raqqa that was
not damaged as a result of the hostilities. The bombing
of Baghouz killed at least 80 people, mostly women and
children. Following the emotional assessments of what
is happening in Ukraine — assessments that have been
made on the basis of unverified or even unconfirmed
information no less — the Head of the United Nations
is simply obligated to call a spade a spade in the
context of the ongoing United States occupation of
Syrian territory, based on information confirmed by
international agencies.
On the humanitarian track, we share Martin
Griffiths’ assessment that every year the international
community is letting Syrians down more and more.
The implementation of resolution 2585 (2021), which
was meant to mobilize comprehensive humanitarian
assistance to Syria, is stalling. The planned cross-line
convoys from Aleppo to Sarmada have been blocked
by militants in Idlib. At the same time, according to
information we are receiving, the Al-Nusra Front is
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

openly saying that until the next extension of the crossborder mechanism in July, which it is, for some reason,
convinced will happen, it will not let domestic convoys
through to deliver assistance to approximately 43,000
people in need.
There is also no access to the other three Turkish
operation zones. Even coronavirus disease vaccines
cannot be delivered. All of this is being accompanied by
an attempt on the part of our Western colleagues to link
the obligations of Member States under unanimously
adopted resolution 2585 (2021) to political preconditions.
In parallel with the politicization of humanitarian
assistance, Europe and the United States continue
to suffocate Syria with unilateral sanctions, which
are having a detrimental effect on the humanitarian
situation and are significantly hampering the efforts of
relevant organizations, including through the chilling
effect and overcompliance by banks, insurers and
economic actors. Again, have we not decided that using
starvation as a method of warfare is unacceptable and
contrary to international humanitarian law?
We should not lose sight of the task of assisting
Syrian internally displaced persons and the return of
refugees, which remains on the agenda. The receiving
countries, Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, are openly
saying that their ability to host further refugees is
limited. For our part, we consider it necessary to ensure
the fundamental right of refugees to return, as provided
for by resolution 2254 (2015), under the strict condition
of coordinating such efforts with Damascus.
As we are all aware, the mandate of the crossborder mechanism expires this summer. Only one
of the provisions of resolution 2585 (2021) is being
implemented today: the cross-border humanitarian
shipments. It seems no one intends to implement any of
the other provisions. Yet, at the same time, Damascus
has proven that deliveries to Idlib across the contact
lines are quite possible, so humanitarian aid can reach
the civilian population directly from the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic. We urge Council members not
to forget this point and not expect us to turn a blind eye
to failures to comply with resolution 2585 (2021), which
are becoming more and more egregious.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-General Zaki for
their briefings.

S/PV.9003

Eleven years after the beginning of the Syrian
uprising and the start of the Al-Assad regime’s brutal
war on the people of Syria, some in the Security Council
want to move on, arguing that the Council spends
too much time discussing this issue. That would be a
terrible mistake. Syria remains one of the largest and
most complex humanitarian crises globally. We are still
seeing active conflict and forced displacement. Some
countries want to pretend that the conflict is over, but
the Syrian people, sadly, know better than anyone else
that this is not possible.
So, let me be clear — the United States will not
normalize relations with the Al-Assad regime and
we urge States considering engagement or already
engaging with the regime to weigh carefully the horrific
atrocities visited by Al-Assad on Syrians over the past
decade, as well as the regime’s continuing efforts to
deny much of the country access to humanitarian aid
and security.
I would like to focus today on three aspects of
the conflict in Syria: the need for concerted political
engagement by all sides, the importance of a nationwide
ceasefire and the need to reauthorize and expand the
cross-border humanitarian mechanism to address the
dire humanitarian situation.
First, as we heard, we meet as the Constitutional
Committee is convening its seventh round in Geneva. We
urge all parties to engage meaningfully, constructively
and in good faith. We expect all sides to offer revised
draft texts tomorrow in an effort to find common
ground, rather than arrive intending to provoke the
other side. It is time for all sides to comment on one
another’s proposed texts. We fully support the work of
Special Envoy Pedersen to advance progress towards a
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015).
We also recognize and commend the role of Syrian
civil society organizations, including civil society
members of the Constitutional Committee, in forging
a political solution. And in the spirit of the ongoing
Commission on the Status of Women, we want to
welcome again the work of women-led groups to end
the violence in their country, and we appreciate their
attention to the disproportionate impact of conflict on
women and children.
Secondly, we remain concerned about ongoing
violence in Syria and reiterate the call for a nationwide
ceasefire. Russia has fuelled and perpetrated the conflict

22-298669/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

in Syria with reckless attacks impacting civilians and
infrastructure. We are watching with horror as Russia
uses some of the same barbaric tactics in Ukraine.
Russia’s relentless disinformation, including debasing
the work of the Security Council and falsely alleging
that other forces are responsible for these cruel
attacks — whether in Syria or Ukraine — defies all
credibility. It is disgraceful.
We are also deeply troubled by reports that Russia
has recruited Syrians to fight on its behalf in Ukraine.
This would demonstrate Russia’s true disdain for
the Syrian people. Russia has hundreds of thousands
of troops, but would instead send Syrians to die in
President Putin’s war of choice.
Thirdly, we remain focused on the humanitarian
situation. As we heard from Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths, an estimated 14.6 million people in Syria
need humanitarian assistance — a 9 per cent increase
since 2021. This humanitarian crisis is the consequence
of a conflict initiated by the Syrian regime and made
tragically worse by that regime’s continued interference
with the international humanitarian response. This
interference includes the rampant corruption of
regime officials, endemic schemes to siphon aid, the
regime’s practice of favouring preferred communities
and connected procurement companies, and its
manipulation of exchange rates.
Given the vast needs, our collective efforts must
be focused on expanding aid access so it can reach
all Syrians. This includes north-eastern Syria, where
the availability of essential goods, including medical
supplies, has decreased markedly since the closure
of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. The United Nations
is facilitating the robust transparent delivery of
humanitarian aid into north-western Syria through
its cross-border mechanism, which follows one of the
most comprehensive risk-management frameworks
globally. It is essential that the Security Council renew
and expand the cross-border mechanism authorized in
resolution 2585 (2021) in July 2021.
We continue to support efforts to facilitate
cross-line aid, including by Turkey, but cross-line
aid deliveries simply cannot match the volume of
humanitarian assistance that is delivered cross-border.
Moreover, cross-line aid remains a risky endeavour, as
the regime and its backers continue to attack civilians
and civilian infrastructure in north-western Syria and
other parts of the country. We recommend that any
10/22

24/03/2022

remaining sceptics of the cross-border mechanism visit
Bab Al-Hawa to witness for themselves the incredible
volume of life-saving work made possible through
cross-border assistance.
Lastly, I would just like to respond to my Russian
colleague’s comments regarding United States-caused
civilian casualties. Russia’s allegations of United
States-caused civilian casualties through our counterterrorism efforts are brazenly hypocritical, given
Russia’s well-documented history of deliberately
attacking Syrian civilians, with utter disregard for
human life. Russia itself has also supported regime
attacks on critical infrastructure, including the Arshani
water station in January. I think Russia’s criticism is
just a means to deflect attention from its own crimes in
Syria and elsewhere.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Pedersen, Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Zaki for
their briefings.
The war in Syria has been going on for 11 years.
The date 15 March marked a sad anniversary — the
eleventh anniversary of the peaceful uprising of the
Syrian people, who demonstrated for freedom, political
reforms and a Government that respected human rights.
The regime responded with staggering brutality and
repressed the protests with bloodshed.
Yesterday, the Syrian women’s movement
organized a meeting on justice, on the sidelines of the
sixty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women. These women collected the testimonies of
victims of sexual violence in Syria. These testimonies
complement the studies conducted by the United
Nations. Their conclusions are clear — sexual violence
is a systemic practice of the regime.
Bashar Al-Assad is guilty of war crimes. To ignore
these crimes is to jeopardize the possibility of a lasting
peace. That is why we oppose efforts to normalize the
situation. The reintegration of Syria into the League of
Arab States will not put an end to foreign interference
or to regional instability. France will continue its fight
against impunity. Those responsible for all crimes must
be held accountable for their actions.
The Syrian people continue to pay the highest
price for this conflict. Since 2001, more than 350,000
civilians have lost their lives. Nearly 14 million people
have been forced to flee. They are still unable to return
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

to their homes without fear of violence, arbitrary arrest
and torture.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate;
14.6 million people are now in need of assistance.
Europeans have always answered calls for help and
have been by far the largest providers of aid in Syria
since 2011. Food insecurity is increasing and the loss
of supplies from Ukraine will exacerbate this situation.
International humanitarian law is not an option; it
is an obligation upon us all. The protection of civilians
remains an absolute priority. It is also essential to
guarantee full humanitarian access. The cross-border
mechanism continues to save lives. It will be needed
so long as assistance does not reach all people in need.
The Secretary-General has been clear that preserving
this mechanism is a moral and operational imperative.
Progress on cross-line access must continue, but
let us be clear — it cannot replace the cross-border
mechanism. Only a political solution will make it
possible to establish a lasting peace.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015). It remains the only way for
the Security Council to reach a political solution to
the conflict together. No single actor holds the key to
ending this conflict.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy to advance the implementation of the road map.
Progress must finally be made in political process and
every actor must assume its responsibilities, first and
foremost the Syrian regime and its Russian ally.
The Constitutional Committee was created in
September 2019. After more than two years, it must
produce concrete results. Without a political solution,
the French — and European — position on the lifting
of sanctions, normalization and reconstruction
remain unchanged.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths and the Assistant Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, His Excellency Mr. Hossam
Zaki, for their briefings.
The small body of the Syrian Constitutional
Committee is holding its seventh round of meetings
in Geneva, which China welcomes. Eleven years of
war have shown that a Syrian-led and -owned political
process is the only way out of the Syrian crisis.

S/PV.9003

China calls on all parties in Syria to make good
use of this hard-won opportunity to candidly and
constructively exchange views, enhance mutual trust
and build consensus. Ahead of the session, the co-Chairs
had reached an agreement on improving the working
methods of the Body’s meetings. China looks forward
to the Constitutional Committee proceeding smoothly,
independently and without external interference in
order to achieve positive outcomes.
The Syrian political process cannot justify the
imposition of unilateral coercive measures. China
commends the Syrian Government for its active
governance efforts and for carrying out national
reconstruction in multiple areas in order to address the
negative impact of unilateral sanctions on its economy
and people’s livelihoods.
Over the past period, the Syrian Government
has vigorously promoted reconciliation, ensured
agricultural production, supported the development
of small and medium-sized enterprises, completed a
number of housing projects and expanded vocational
education for youth, with positive results. Recently,
the Syrian Foreign Minister discussed with the head
of the United Nations Mine Action Service the issue
of clearing landmines left over from the war. It is our
hope that the two sides will strengthen cooperation,
continuously improve Syria’s security environment,
create conditions for national reconstruction and
promote the early restoration of the normal order in
the country.
China has followed closely the humanitarian sit in
Syria. As Under-Secretary-General Griffiths stressed,
the current humanitarian relief efforts should focus
on supporting early recovery and reconstruction
projects, ensuring the continuous operation of water,
electricity, education and medical facilities and the
provision of basic services, which are also required by
resolution 2585 (2021).
China opposes attaching political preconditions
to reconstruction and humanitarian assistance. We
welcome the efforts of the Syrian Government,
United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners to
continuously increase the scale and frequency of crossline humanitarian relief operations and call on relevant
parties to give timely approval for such operations
and to support and ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian relief teams.

22-2986611/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

24/03/2022

I would also like to stress that Syria’s oil resources
belong to the Syrian people and that troops illegally in
Syria should immediately stop stealing and smuggling
oil out of the country.

their homes. But we agree with the United Nations
judgment — conditions do not currently allow this. It
is essential that international law is respected and that
any refugee returns are voluntary, safe and dignified.

China commends the United Arab Emirates for
inviting Assistant Secretary-General Zaki to give a
briefing, which embodies enhanced communication
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. Syria is a founding member of
the Arab League and an important member of the Arab
world. Syria’s return to the big family of the League
of Arab States will help forge synergy for promoting
regional peace and facilitating the early settlement of
the Syrian issue. It is China’s hope that more and more
Arab countries will resume dialogue, engagement and
cooperation with Syria. China will continue to support
Arab countries in seeking strength through unity within
the framework of the League of Arab States.

It is a sad fact that as long as the conflict continues,
humanitarian aid will continue to be vital for millions
of vulnerable Syrians. That is why the United Kingdom
is clear in its position and commitment to the crossborder mandate, under resolution 2585 (2021). The
Council must be prepared to act and support the renewal
of the resolution in July. In the meantime, we call on
all parties to fulfil their international obligations and
ensure access to humanitarian aid.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
and Assistant Secretary-General Zaki for their briefings.
Last week marked the eleventh anniversary of
the Syrian conflict. We commend the Syrian people,
who courageously and peacefully took to the streets to
demand freedom, political reform and a Government
that respects and upholds human rights. The Al-Assad
regime met those demands with a brutal assault against
them that continues today. This year’s anniversary
coincides with the appalling Russian aggression against
Ukraine. Russia’s inhumane and destructive behaviour
in both conflicts is deplorable.
As we have said many times, there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict. We continue
to support the United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-led
political process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).
We urge Council members to continue to call for a
nationwide ceasefire, unhindered access to aid and
conditions for the safe return of refugees. We commend
Geir Pedersen for his continued efforts to facilitate
a sustainable resolution to the conflict. He has our
full support.
After more than a decade of conflict, the Syrian
humanitarian situation remains bleak, with 14.6 million
Syrians requiring humanitarian assistance — more than
80 per cent of the population. In addition, 6.8 million
Syrians are registered as refugees and 6.7 million are
displaced within their own country. Our hope is that
Syrian refugees will eventually be able to return to
12/22

The United Kingdom continues to oppose
engagement with the Al-Assad regime in the absence of
behavioural change. Ceding legitimacy to Al-Assad’s
unreformed, unrepentant and unreliable regime for
nothing in return, will undermine efforts to end the
conflict and, instead, prolong the suffering in Syria.
Finally, on the Syrian Constitutional Committee
talks taking place in Geneva this week, we encourage all
parties, especially the Syrian regime, to meaningfully
participate. Urgent progress is needed, and we urge
the regime’s backers to redouble their efforts to find a
way forward.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to join others
in thanking Special Envoy Pedersen, Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and the Assistant Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, Mr. Hossam Zaki, for
their insightful briefings.
It is now 11 long years since the conflict started,
and it is still profoundly disturbing to see how Syria
continues to sink. Eleven years ago, the Syrian people
took to the streets to call for an end to the kleptocratic
repressive Al-Assad regime, and the regime responded
by killing them. Today, there is no space for aspiration
or hope in Syria. The Al-Assad regime has disfigured
Syria. It is disturbing to listen to the data shared by the
briefers on the humanitarian situation.
We express our concern about the continuing
suffering of the Syrian people and the dramatic
and worsening humanitarian situation. We stress
the importance of unhindered access to life-saving
humanitarian assistance through all modalities,
including the reauthorization of cross-border
humanitarian aid delivery, to which there is no
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9003

alternative, as well as cross-line aid and early recovery
projects consistent with resolution 2585 (2021).

pressure on the Al-Assad regime to advance with the
political process.

We continue to call for a nationwide ceasefire
and respect for international humanitarian law. We
underline the need for the Council to act on expanding
cross-border access to alleviate the suffering of
Syrian people.

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.

All parties to the conflict must uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, including ending attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, and facilitate unimpeded
humanitarian access to civilians trapped or displaced
by fighting.
We urge continued support to Syrian refugees and
host countries until Syrians can voluntarily return home
in safety and dignity, in line with Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees standards.
All returns of refugees and other displaced
Syrians must be in accordance with the principle of
non-refoulement. The Syrian authorities must ensure
the protection of all returnees.
Resolution 2254 (2015) provides the basis for
a real, inclusive political transition, with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women. The
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) must
therefore be an absolute priority for the Council, a
priority that the Syrian regime has disregarded in the
past and continues to disregard as we speak.
The Constitutional Committee is the only existing
platform to envisage and pursue a political transition,
but so far it has produced mainly disappointment.
That is primarily due to a lack of genuine involvement
and investment on the part of the Syrian regime. The
Constitutional Committee is meeting in Geneva for its
seventh session, which we hope yields concrete results,
but we do not anticipate any tangible progress.
We reiterate that absent constant pressure from
the Council and in the absence of any timetable or
deadlines, the Constitutional Committee risks becoming
a smokescreen for inaction and for maintaining the
current status quo.
In conclusion, we support the tireless work
of Special Envoy Pedersen in consulting with key
stakeholders to move the political process forward. He
also deserves the full backing of the Council to put

We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and His Excellency
Mr. Hossam Zaki, Assistant Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, for their briefings. We also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey.
Our statement will focus on the political, security
and humanitarian situation in Syria.
Eleven years after the armed conflict in Syria, the
situation remains grim and deeply concerning. We are
reminded that unnecessary violent conflict has claimed
thousands of lives; generated millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons; ignited a humanitarian
crisis of historic proportions; and impoverished the
entire population of a country that once knew peace
and progress.
Today Syria is struggling to regain its footing
under the most difficult of circumstances. Its people
need our support, particularly in their quest for a
political solution that takes into consideration their
peace and security.
The A3 is pleased to note that the Special Envoy
convened the seventh round of the Constitutional
Committee meeting, which is ongoing this week in
Geneva. We commend the parties on the resumption of
those crucial discussions and encourage a constructive
engagement on the revisions of the draft text, which
will, hopefully, yield tangible progress.
We hope that the parties can make commitments
to hold more regular meetings in the coming weeks to
create momentum in the quest for a lasting solution.
The A3 is in support of other innovative efforts
aimed at moving the political process forward. Those
include addressing the situation of detainees, including
facilitating the release of the detained vulnerable,
particularly the elderly, women and children, as well as
clarifying the status of missing persons, which would
be a significant confidence-building measure.
We take note of the Special Envoy’s ongoing
consultations on a step-for-step approach. It is important

22-2986613/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

24/03/2022

that that approach be implemented in accordance with
international law and international humanitarian law.

safe and dignified manner, in line with the standards of
international humanitarian law.

The A3 encourages the role and support of regional
actors and reaffirms the need to bear in mind that
resolution 2254 (2015) remains the foremost road
map to achieving the desired political solution to the
Syrian crisis.

The A3 is concerned by the increase in global food
prices as a result of the conflict in Ukraine, which is
plunging already fragile and food-insecure countries,
particularly those in conflict situations, deeper into
vulnerability. It is essential to undertake measures to
mitigate the humanitarian impact of the situation in
Ukraine, including by ensuring that the international
community’s
humanitarian
response
remains
adequately funded.

We must emphasize that all political initiatives
should be inclusive and take into account the voices
of the widest spectrum of Syrian society, including
women, youth, minority groups and civil society.
On the security situation, the A3 condemns the
unrelenting violence that continues in the front lines
in north-west Syria. Despite the temporary pause in
attacks in recent weeks, we are deeply concerned by
the frequent shelling and air strikes as well as mines
and unexploded ordnance.
We underscore the imperative for decisive collective
actions to combat Security Council-listed groups such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham. That is the foremost way to ensure that
the victims who have endured suffering for far too long
get justice.
As we have stated before, there is no military option
to ending the Syrian crisis. We therefore reiterate our
call on all parties to adhere to the nationwide ceasefire.
We also stress the imperative for the protection
of civilians, humanitarian workers and civilian
infrastructure, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
That leads me to the humanitarian situation. The
A3 remains gravely concerned by the millions of
people in dire need. To reach those people, the crossborder aid mechanism, complemented by cross-line
deliveries, should be sustained. In particular, we look
forward to more frequent cross-line deliveries in a
predictable manner.
We call for urgent and special attention to be
accorded to the people residing in Rukban, in southwest Syria. Their humanitarian situation is worsening,
and assistance to them must not be impeded. To ease
the colossal humanitarian burden in camps, we call on
States to repatriate their citizens, especially women
and children in camps, including the Al-Hol camp, in a
14/22

Furthermore, and given the dire economic situation
marked by vast food insecurity, we urge all actors
to support economic recovery measures as a key
component of the longer-term peace that Syria and the
region need.
The A3 also encourages support for the early
recovery and livelihoods activities under the United
Nations humanitarian response, which is fundamental
to assisting Syrians in getting back to their normal lives.
To conclude, the A3 underscores that consensus
on both the political and humanitarian tracks is more
crucial now than ever before. All concerned parties,
including foreign Powers, must put their multiple
competing interests to the side and demonstrate that the
multilateral system can still be relied on as an effective
mediator of global peace and security.
Once again, we reaffirm our respect for Syria’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. The A3 stands in solidarity with the
people of Syria in their quest for peace, which can
be delivered only by a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process, with international support.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and Assistant
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States Hossam
Zaki for their briefings. I also welcome the delegations
of Syria, Iran and Turkey.
There can be no doubt that the highest price for
these 11 years of conflict has been paid by the civilian
population. Approximately 14 million people have been
forced to leave their homes, and more than 350,000
have lost their lives. With every day that passes, the
international community’s debt to the Syrian people
grows as a result of not having been able to put an end
to the suffering of millions of people.
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

These 11 years have torn deep rents in the social
fabric. The role of civil society is key in rebuilding
social cohesion in the country. We therefore commend
the efforts of the Special Envoy to maintain regular
contact with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, as
well as with other Syrian social organizations.
We will never tire of emphasizing that there is
no military solution to the conflict in Syria. The only
path is that of political dialogue to which all parties
are committed. It is for that reason that we welcome
the convening of the seventh session of the small body
of the Constitutional Committee, which is currently
under way. We reiterate our call on the parties to be
serious and committed as they participate in the work
facilitated by Special Envoy Pedersen.
The Constitutional Committee is one of the paths to
progress in the political transition, social reconciliation
and, eventually, in the building of lasting peace. It is
one of the components of resolution 2254 (2015) — the
road map to lasting peace in Syria.
We take note of the most recent report of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 (see A/76/690). We
call on all Member States to cooperate with it. We also
emphasize the efforts of national courts to investigate
and bring to justice those responsible for atrocities.
On the humanitarian front, it is alarming that
the needs of the population are at their highest level
since the beginning of the conflict. The rising cost of
the basic food basket causes families to be faced with
difficult decisions that no one should have to make.
Furthermore, we note other factors that could have
negative repercussions on the food supply, such as the
increase in oil prices and the impact that the conflict in
Ukraine might have on the basic grain supply.
In the light of this situation, the Bab Al-Hawa border
crossing remains vital for the survival of millions of
people in the north-west. Mexico also acknowledges
the value of cross-line operations. It is for that reason
that my country agrees with the Secretary-General that
both mechanisms are necessary and complement each
other. With that in mind, the least we can do is preserve
the consensus that was reached last year with resolution
2585 (2021). As Secretary-General Guterres said, it is a
moral and humanitarian imperative.

S/PV.9003

There is no doubt that other elements, such as
early-recovery projects, are also key in mitigating the
effects of more than a decade of conflict and contribute
to building resilience in the country.
I conclude once again by reiterating the importance
of a national ceasefire. Streets, hospitals and schools
in Syria are not battlefields, and those spaces must be
respected and protected.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I, too, would like to thank
our three briefers today for their informative briefings.
I will confine myself to speaking on the political
situation, as the Ambassador of Norway already spoke
on behalf of Norway and Ireland as co-penholders on
the humanitarian file.
This month marked 11 years of conflict in
Syria — 11 years and more than 350,000 people
dead; 11 years and, at least, 100,000 disappeared; 11
years and a country devastated. Syrian children have
paid — and continue to pay — the heaviest price.
Almost 13,000 children in Syria have been killed or
injured since 2011, and a generation of Syrian children
has grown up knowing nothing but war. If we continue
on the current trajectory, the multitude of worst-case
consequences for Syria will be an inevitable reality. It
is critical now more than ever before that the parties
adhere to a permanent nationwide ceasefire, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Ireland fully supports the efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen on the political track. We welcome the
convening of a seventh round of talks of the small body
of the Constitutional Committee this week in Geneva.
We wish Mr. Pedersen well with tomorrow’s concluding
meeting. However, unless there are genuine attempts to
narrow differences, especially by the Syrian authorities,
progress will not be possible.
I also thank Mr. Pedersen for the update on his
ongoing contact with all parties towards a lasting
political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
I repeat Ireland’s call on all parties, particularly
the Syrian authorities, to cease all indiscriminate
attacks and direct attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Furthermore, I reiterate our call for the
release of those arbitrarily detained, for the fate and
whereabouts of all those forcibly disappeared to be
revealed and for independent monitors to be ensured
access to all places of detention.

22-2986615/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

This month we marked International Women’s Day.
I would like to pay special tribute to the women of Syria,
who have shown incredible resilience and leadership,
including in their local communities. Syrian women
have an indispensable role to play in shaping the future
of their country. They must be fully and meaningfully
included in all aspects of the political process. Their
participation is key to securing sustainable long-term
peace. I thank Mr. Pedersen for his ongoing engagement
with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
Grave
violations
of
fundamental
human
rights and humanitarian law, including torture
and sexual and gender-based violence, continue
to be documented across Syria. The Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 play a role
in documenting those crimes, which is essential for the
pursuit of justice and accountability.
I would like to underscore Ireland’s unwavering
commitment to fighting impunity and ensuring that
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Syria be held to account. Truth, justice and
accountability are the right of the Syrian people. They
are essential for any political solution to be sustainable,
build trust and ensure that violations never occur again.
In conclusion, the international community, and
in particular the Council, has a duty to ensure that the
victims and survivors in Syria are never forgotten and
to send an important message that justice will prevail
and war crimes, wherever they have been committed in
the world, will not go unpunished.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their informative updates.

24/03/2022

the Constitutional Committee, convened this week in
Geneva. We very much hope that a spirit of cooperation
and commitment to progress will prevail during the
talks, in line with its drafting mandate established by
resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, Brazil restates
its conviction that only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
United Nations-facilitated political process, with due
regard for the preservation of Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, will bring about lasting peace and
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian population. We
thank Mr. Pedersen for his tireless efforts to engage key
international actors and for his genuine efforts to foster
trust among the parties in order to move us away from
the current stalemate.
The enduring worsening of the situation on the
ground serves as a clear reminder that it is high time for
the political dialogue to show practical results to relieve
the suffering of the Syrian people. As the conflict in
Syria enters its twelfth year, the protection of civilians
remains a significant concern. Food insecurity has
reached its highest level on record, and electricity
provision is severely compromised, affecting basic
services. Brazil echoes the calls for an immediate
nationwide ceasefire and for early recovery initiatives
that can rebuild civilian infrastructure essential for the
provision of basic services, such as health, education,
electricity, water and sanitation.
We support assessments of the impact of sanctions
on the daily lives of the civilian population, particularly
on vulnerable groups. Humanitarian exemptions for
any sanctions must be strictly observed so as to ensure
that they do not undermine access to food, shelter or
essential health supplies for those most in need.
Countering terrorist activity in Syria should
continue to be a priority, and we must not forget that
poverty and political instability constitute fertile
ground for extremist forces.

I welcome the delegations of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran to
the Council.

Life-saving international aid to the Syrian
people, especially those living in camps and informal
settlements, is still paramount, both in cross-line
and cross-border modalities. Brazil underlines the
importance of keeping cross-border humanitarian
operations under close monitoring, as well as of
collaboration between all parties for the expansion of
cross-line operations, so that they can be conducted in
a safe, regular and predictable manner.

Brazil looks forward to hearing the outcomes of the
discussions of the seventh session of the small body of

To conclude, I reiterate that Brazil fully agrees with
the Special Envoy in his understanding that a military

I also welcome the Assistant Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States to the Security Council and
thank him for sharing the League’s insights into the
Syrian crisis.

16/22

22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

solution is an illusion, evidenced in practice by frozen
front lines and a persistent stalemate on the ground. All
parties must accept that reality and start working to put
an end to the gruesome conflict.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-General Zaki of the
League of Arab States for their updates.
A few days ago, we marked another tragic
anniversary in the Syrian conflict. India has been
consistent in its stand since the beginning of the
conflict that imposing external solutions cannot help
in the resolution of the conflict. It is for the Syrians
themselves to determine and decide what is best for
Syria and their own future.
The Special Envoy has been making efforts to
bring all sides together and facilitate the political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We support
his proactive diplomacy, especially his recent efforts to
reinvigorate the United Nations-led process. To that end,
we welcome the convening of the seventh session of the
small body of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva
earlier this week. We hope that the three sides will come
to a preliminary understanding on the four principles,
namely, the basics of governance, State identity, State
symbols and the regulation and functions of public
authorities. India has also been consistent in calling for
support for regional efforts to find a long-term solution
to the conflict. The progressive normalization of Syria’s
relations with its Arab neighbours in recent months is
an encouraging development.
On the security front, we remain concerned by the
overall situation in Syria. While the front lines remain
unshifted, violence has continued in several places,
particularly in the north-western and north-eastern
parts of Syria. There have been reports of shelling,
skirmishes and security incidents across front lines,
including increasing incidents of ceasefire violations.
There is an urgent need for serious efforts towards a
comprehensive ceasefire in Syria. We believe that the
withdrawal of foreign forces is essential to realize
that objective.
India has also been repeatedly calling for attention
to be paid to the looming threat posed by resurgence
of terrorist groups in Syria. United Nations-designated
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, are gaining
in strength not just in Syria, but in Iraq as well.

S/PV.9003

We reiterate that the global fight against terrorism
cannot — and should not — be compromised for narrow
political gains.
As the conflict in Syria enters its twelfth year, the
basic needs of the Syrian people continue to be unmet.
While the focus of the international community is
shifting to the humanitarian crisis arising due to the
conflict in Ukraine, it is important that we not lose
sight of Syria and the suffering of the Syrian people.
There is considerable scope for expanding cross-line
operations in the north-west. We continue to encourage
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other United Nations agencies to expend
efforts to enhance cross-line operations. We also
continue to believe that it is critical to achieve progress
on the implementation of resolution 2585 (2021),
concerning early recovery and infrastructure, not
only on humanitarian grounds but also in the context
of building trust and confidence. The support of the
international community to address the economic and
humanitarian challenges remains integral to the success
of the political process.
In conclusion, for its part, India has continued to
extend developmental assistance and human resource
development support to Syria. We welcome the fact
that Syria joined the International Solar Alliance
last month. India will continue to support the people
of Syria in their endeavour for peace, stability and
economic recovery.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I would like to thank both Mr. Pedersen and
Mr. Griffiths for their important briefings. I also
welcome the participation of Mr. Zaki, Assistant
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, and
thank him for his briefing, which highlighted the impact
of the Syrian crisis on neighbouring Arab countries.
We would like to note that the previous briefing by
the League of Arab States to the Council on Syria
was in 2012 (S/PV.6710). It is important to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and the League to
find Arab solutions to Arab crises, including in Syria,
since its stability is an essential pillar of Arab security.
To address the political situation, the United Arab
Emirates believes that there is an urgent need to find
practical and effective solutions to end the Syrian crisis,

22-2986617/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

especially considering that the war in Syria has entered
its twelfth year, resulting in more than 6.5 million
refugees worldwide. That can be done by adopting a
practical and logical approach. We seek diplomatic
solutions to crises and call for an effective Arab role
to discuss ways to solve the Syrian crisis, instead of
merely managing it. The Syrian President’s recent visit
to the United Arab Emirates is a result of that approach.
We continue to support the efforts of the United
Nations to reach a political solution in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), including the efforts of
Mr. Pedersen to converge regional and international
political views on addressing the effects of the Syrian
crisis. We also welcome the convening of the seventh
session of the Constitutional Committee, as well as
the positive developments regarding the agreement
to discuss the constitutional principles, in the past
few days.
Further progress requires all parties to continue
engaging in dialogue in good faith and to take tangible
steps in that direction. As we call for strengthening the
Arab role in Syria as part of efforts to end the crisis,
we also renew our rejection of foreign interference in
Syria, the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of which must be respected.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we again
emphasize that it is unacceptable to leave the Syrian
people — including those who are displaced — to face
horrendous conditions in which they lack the most basic
needs, such as electricity, food and drinking water.
Syrian children have been particularly affected by
those conditions, as most of them have lived through the
atrocities of war and its consequences. The worsening
of the economic situation affects every Syrian citizen.
The World Food Programme reports that food prices
in Syria have risen to unprecedented levels over the
past few months, causing the humanitarian situation to
deteriorate further.
With regard to the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) across Syria, providing medical supplies
to the Syrian people remains a priority. Approximately
6 per cent of the people have been fully vaccinated,
which requires greater attention from the international
community. In this regard, the United Arab Emirates
has completed the construction of two field hospitals
in Damascus and Aleppo to treat those infected with
COVID-19. Additionally, we have also supported a
vaccination programme for Syrian refugees in Jordan,
18/22

24/03/2022

which sought to vaccinate 12,000 refugees in the
Emirati Jordanian camp in Mrajeeb Al-Fhood. as well
as in the camps at Zaatari, Azraq and AlHadiqa.
We also underscore the importance of providing
support to Arab countries affected by the Syrian crisis,
especially by assisting them in the provision of basic
services to refugees. These are the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, the Republic of Iraq, the Lebanese Republic
and the Arab Republic of Egypt.
My country emphasizes the importance of
continuing the delivery of humanitarian aid across
the border into Syria in accordance with resolution
2585 (2021). All concerned parties on the ground must
cooperate to ensure that humanitarian aid across the
conflict lines reaches all those in need.
In conclusion, a political solution to the Syrian
crisis is still possible, especially when we combine
efforts to overcome current obstacles. We must move
away from merely managing the crisis towards solving
it, in order to meet the aspirations and basic needs of
the brotherly Syrian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): This month, multiple countries hostile to
Syria have rushed to issue statements commemorating
what they falsely called the eleventh anniversary of the
Syrian revolution. In reality, however, it is the eleventh
anniversary of the aggression by the United States,
Britain, France and their allies against Syria, through
their terrorist proxies, secessionist organizations
and economic sanctions, coupled with an immense
propaganda campaign that spreads lies, disinformation
and fabrications.
Syria, against which they waged this war, is the
epitome of history and civilization, coexistence and
tolerance, resistance and heroism, as well as progress
and development. It has been targeted by the forces of
evil, hatred, destructive obscurantism, and by forces of
ignorance, underdevelopment, treason and disloyalty,
in order to obstruct the Syrian renaissance, destroy its
development gains, shed the blood of its people who
have defended Syria’s dignity, sovereignty and unity,
and undermine its regional and international role.
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Yes, the Syrian people did start a revolution, not
11 but 100 years ago, when they rebelled against the
Ottoman occupier, then against the French colonist,
until they gained their full independence through
their bravery and heroism. After that, they launched
a revolution against injustice and obscurantist ideas,
ushering in a phase of comprehensive transformation
leading to decades of stability and laying the foundation
for development and modernization in Syria.
“Expressing concern” is a phrase often used by these
countries in their statements. What we really should
be concerned about are the practices of United States
occupation forces, their support for secessionist militias
in the north-east of Syria, and their collaboration with
those who would violate Syrian sovereignty and steal
national resources. We should be concerned about the
practices of the Turkish occupation forces, their support
for terrorist groups in the north-west of Syria and their
audacious interference in the internal affairs of Syria.
The grave concern we must all be expressing should be
over the continued and repeated hostile Israeli practices
against Syrian sovereignty, the casualties and damage
they leave in their wake, and the direct threat they pose
to the security and stability of the region.
Do their statements contain any expression of
concern over such practices that violate the Charter
of the United Nations and relevant Security Council
resolutions? Of course not.
“Stop the violence” is another phrase that makes
regular appearances in these countries’ statements.
Not only do they incite violence every day through
pressure, intimidation and manipulation of societal
values, but they also fuel violence with their hostile
practices by recycling terrorist operatives and foreign
thugs whom they bring in from all over the world. Now
these countries refuse to bring them and their families
back to their countries of origin to prosecute them.
Over the past 11 years, they have shed tears over the
suffering of the Syrian people, but they deny that this
suffering is a result of their failed policies, aggressive
actions, inflammatory statements and hypocrisy. The
humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people started
when those countries undermined the security and
stability enjoyed by Syrian citizens; when they used
criminal and terrorist operatives to wreak havoc and
spread fear and terror to destroy our infrastructure and
development gains; and when they imposed unilateral

S/PV.9003

coercive measures while they repeatedly threatened to
impose more.
These aggressive practices are the reason for
the waves of displaced persons and refugees. They
obstruct the efforts of the Syrian Government to
create the conditions necessary for the safe, dignified
and voluntary return of these displaced persons and
refugees to their homes, which would put an end to their
suffering and to the deals and blackmail of the Turkish
regime. Today, these countries are obstructing all local,
regional or international efforts to rebuild what their
dirty war has destroyed and to launch early recovery
projects that would allow Syrians to be more resilient
and to stay in their country rather than migrate or seek
refuge, and that would encourage those who have left
to come back.
Those countries are calling for a political solution
in Syria, but this is hypocrisy and political bidding.
They are pushing for a solution in accordance with
their own perspective — one that does not respect the
will of the Syrian people and their national choices and
that would perpetuate the Syrian crisis and obstruct
the achievement of a genuine solution. These countries
are interfering in what is within the exclusive purview
of the Syrian people. They are imposing military and
political frameworks that are inconsistent with the
historical, societal and cultural values of the Syrian
people, as well as the challenges they are facing. And
when they speak of accountability and impunity, they
do not in any way mean accountability for their own
crimes, their own aggression, their own violations
and their own support for terrorism. From the point of
view of those countries, justice is a selective concept
to be achieved by inadequate politicized mechanisms
imposed through pressure to serve their own interests
and agendas or by manipulating the fundamentals
of international law and resorting to distorted
interpretations and other immoral concepts. To those
countries we say that shedding the blood of the Syrian
people, destroying their achievements and stealing
their resources are crimes for which they must be held
accountable. Those crimes will not go unpunished.
My delegation has had to give a comprehensive
overview of what Syria had been subjected to over
the past 11 years. At the same time, we are committed
to making every effort to improve the humanitarian
situation and to provide basic health and education
services for improving the living conditions of Syrians.
We are also committed to working with the United

22-2986619/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

Nations and international partners, including by
enhancing the delivery of humanitarian aid from within
Syrian territories, implementing early recovery projects
and creating conditions conducive to a dignified and
voluntary return of displaced persons to their homes.
The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to achieving
a political solution that is based on an inter-Syrian
national dialogue and a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process, free of any foreign interference, that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people and fully
respects the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.
The Syrian Government has made commendable
efforts to achieve reconciliation and peace, including
through local reconciliation in a number of cities and
areas in Syria. The amnesty decrees issued by the
President of the Republic have allowed thousands of
Syrians, both within and outside Syria, to return to
their normal lives.
My delegation welcomes the convening of the
seventh session of the Constitutional Committee. We
commend the positive and constructive engagement
of the Syrian delegation and its commitment to
fulfilling the aspirations of the Syrian people. We
reject any foreign interference in the work of the
Committee and any attempt to obstruct its work. We
also reject the imposition of predetermined outcomes
or artificial timelines.
In conclusion, peace, security and stability will
be restored in the Syrian Arab Republic only if these
Western countries abandon their hostile policies
against my country, if they stop sponsoring terrorism,
if they take back the foreign terrorist fighters and their
families who are nationals of these countries, if they
end their occupation and illegal foreign presence on
Syrian territories, if they lift the stifling and immoral
economic blockade imposed against us, and if they
support the efforts of the Syrian Government to achieve
development and reconstruction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We too thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings. We also thank Hossam Zaki, Assistant
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for
his remarks.
20/22

24/03/2022

Last week was the eleventh anniversary of the
beginning of the Syrian war — 11 years of war that
inflicted irreparable damages throughout the country,
a horrific war that the Al-Assad regime started against
its own people, who wanted to live in a democratic and
free society; 11 years of war that inflicted irreparable
damage throughout the country; a man-made disaster
which has left no single Syrian family untouched and
which has taken a tremendous human toll and has
caused immense suffering to this day, as civilians
continue to be the daily victims of brutal violence and
indiscriminate attacks by the regime and its backers.
The only way to end this bloodshed in Syria is an
inclusive political settlement on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015). The Constitutional Committee is the only
mechanism put in place to advance the political track,
yet it has been subject to the regime’s delaying tactics
and obstructions while the Syrian opposition has
displayed strong commitment throughout the process.
The seventh round of the Constitutional Committee
is being held this week and must produce tangible
results this time. These meetings should also be held
more frequently and in a results-oriented manner. We
will continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen for a political solution.
It is critical that additional initiatives align with the
letter and spirit of resolution 2254 (2015) and support
its implementation. Let us also underline that there can
be no place for illegitimate formations and terrorist
elements in the political process. It is absolutely clear
that this would be rejected by the Syrian people.
Ceasefire violations in Idlib and an interruption of the
delivery of international humanitarian aid to this region
would unleash a new humanitarian crisis and obstruct
any efforts for a durable settlement of this crisis. Let us
reiterate that the search for a military solution is a futile
adventure and will have severe consequences, first and
foremost, for the regime itself.
Turkey will continue its fight against terrorism and
separatism in Syria with utmost determination. Owing
to its persistent wrongdoings and ill-advised strategies,
Da’esh remains a greater threat to neighbouring
countries than anyone else. We have on countless
occasions highlighted the mistake of subcontracting the
fight against Da’esh to another terrorist organization,
namely, the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF),
dominated by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG). We invite countries
that support the PKK/YPG-led SDF to see the ethnic
22-29866

24/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

cleansing and the war crimes committed by that
terrorist organization in northern Syria. Ignoring these
facts is incompatible with any humanitarian value. It is
also a flagrant contradiction and inconsistency in the
fight against terrorism. This approach will in no way
bring stability to the east of the Euphrates.
We would like to take this opportunity to once
again put on record that our request for a United Nations
investigation into the attack on Al-Shifa hospital by the
PKK/YPG terrorist organization remains unanswered
to this day.
We cannot allow the humanitarian situation in
Syria to be overshadowed by other new or protracted
humanitarian crises. The international community has
an obligation to compensate for the recent decrease
in humanitarian financing for the Syrian crisis. This
is necessary in order to improve the conditions of the
millions of displaced people living under difficult
circumstances, especially in Idlib, and to avoid a new
humanitarian catastrophe.
The burden on the shoulders of the neighbouring
countries should also not be forgotten. Turkey has been
doing more than its share for years now, providing
temporary protection to close to 4 million Syrians
and serving as the single transit point for United
Nations cross-border humanitarian aid to Syria. We
will continue to facilitate cross-line aid deliveries as
well. Yet, given the extremely precarious humanitarian
situation growing worse every day, there is no
alternative to cross-border aid in scope and size.
Above all, we need the international community to
act in a principled and responsive manner to alleviate
the humanitarian crisis in Syria and to produce
lasting solutions.
As usual, will not be answering the lies that we just
had to hear from the representative of the Syrian regime.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Syria’s humanitarian situation remains alarming. The
United Nations estimates that 14.6 million Syrians
need humanitarian aid. This represents a 9 per cent
increase over 2021. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has exacerbated the country’s already fragile
humanitarian situation.

S/PV.9003

Given this dire humanitarian situation and the fact
that significant parts of Syrian civilian infrastructure
have been destroyed, the imposition of unilateral
coercive measures on the Syrian people has had
disastrous consequences on all aspects of their lives
and runs counter to certain aspects of resolution
2585 (2021) relating to early recovery projects, which
are critical to strengthening Syrians’ resilience and
allowing displaced people to return home. Those
measures have also impacted the efforts of national and
international organizations in Syria. Those illegal and
disruptive measures must end immediately.
Claiming to care about the difficult humanitarian
situation in Syria while backing unilateral sanctions
against the Syrian people is extremely hypocritical.
The Security Council must work diligently to ensure
that resolution 2585 (2021) is properly implemented in
a balanced and effective manner, particularly in terms
of early recovery projects and the lifting of unilateral
sanctions. We once again condemn the robbery of the
Syrian people’s natural resources, particularly oil and
agricultural products, in areas occupied by foreign
forces. That criminal act is an obvious violation of
Syrian territorial sovereignty, relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. The
Syrian crisis cannot be resolved without ending the
occupation and uprooting the terrorist threats.
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity cannot
be jeopardized in the name of fighting terrorism. All
occupying and uninvited foreign forces, including those
of the United States, must therefore leave the country
immediately and without any conditions.
We strongly condemn the Israeli regime’s repeated
violations of Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Israeli attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
in Syria on 7 March constitute clear violations of
international humanitarian law. We call on the Security
Council to hold this regime accountable for such acts of
aggression and malice, as well as for its blatant threats
to use force against other countries of the region, thus
endangering regional peace and security. We support
the continuation of intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva,
which are now taking place under the auspices of the
Syrian Constitutional Committee.
In that context, we welcome Mr. Pedersen’s
continued efforts to bring the negotiations to a
successful conclusion. There is no alternative to
pursuing a Syrian-led and-owned settlement, with

22-2986621/22

S/PV.9003

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations assistance, one that is free from outside
influence and pressure and has no artificial deadlines.
We maintain contacts with the Syrian Government, the
United Nations Special Envoy and our partners in the
Astana format in order to end the crisis and alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people as soon as possible.

22/22

24/03/2022

The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I shall now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue
its discussion in informal consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-29866
