Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

every encouragement. \Yi thin this eff orl Governments would
organize conferences of universities am! otll<'r institutions of
higher learning within their territories and invite them to
consider how the curricula a11rl their tl'a,·hing prognimmcs
might be utilized to improve the awareness in the student
population of the fundamental questions of human rights, how
their research programmes might be directed to this end, anrl
how they might co-operate with other interested organizations,
through extra-mural am! other programmes, in furthering
the aims of ;ulult crl11crtion in lrnma11 righ!s. In this context.
studies of local customs and traditions cfJt1ld be undertaken
by national authorities with a view to examining to what
extent they might be fostering and encouraging attitudes or
values contrary to lhlC principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and how· these customs and traditions can
eventually be elimina--cd. Charitable and philanthropic foundations might be invited to consider making grants for programmes of research and study in this field and to make
bursaries and fellowships available for research in human
rights. Responsible authorities of colleges, and of elementary
and secondary schools, could be invited to review their curricula and textbooks in order to eradicate bias, intentional
and unintentional, towards the preservation of ideas and concepts contrary to the principles of the Universal Declarati011
of Human Rights, and to introduce courses of study which
positively promote respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It has bel'n noticed with appreciation that certain
universities have alrl'arly inclmk<l i11 tlwir curricula courses
in the international protection nf human rights; other universities could be guided by such programmes and benefit by
those experiences. Attention is also called to the Associated
Schools Project in Education for I 11ternational Understanding
and Co-operation, sponsored by the Unit<'d Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Governments· might also convene, or give encouragement to
the convening of, conferences among the radio and television
broadcasting services within their territories, inviting them
to consider how their facilities might most usefully co-operate
with other organizations within the country, and with international agencies, in advancing the effort to educate the people
to have greater respect for individual rights and fundamental
freedoms.
The specialized agencies of the United Nations, especially
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi
zation all([ the Int<"rnatillnal I ,abo11r Org:rnisation, can make
a particularly valuable contribution towards the intensification
of the educational effort with the co-operation of United
Nations regional institutes, bearing in mind Economic and
Social Council resolution 958 D I (XXXVI) of 12 July 1963.
1t is recommended tl1at they should he invited to do so.

2106 (XX). International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is appropriate to conclude under
the auspices of tli<' l ·nited Nations an International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,
C onvincrrl that the Convention will be an important
step towards the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and that it should be signed and ratified
as soon as possible by States and its provisions implemented without delay,
Considering further that the text of the Convention
should be made known throughout the world,
I. Adopts and opens for signature and ratification
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, annexrd to the
present resolution ;

47

2. Invites States referred to in article 17 of the
Convention to sign and ratify the Convention without
any delay;
J. Requests the Governments of States and nongov, ·rnmental organizations to publicize the text of the
Con\"rntion as widely as possible, using every means
at their disposal, including all the appropriate media
of information ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and wide circulation of the Convention and, to
that end, to publish and distribute its text;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly reports concerning the state of ratificatinns of the Conv~ntion. which will be considered
by the General Assembly at future sessions as a separate
:tgcnda item.
1406th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
ANNEX
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination

The States Partirs to this Convention,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations is based
,m the principles of the dignity and equality inherent in all
human heings, and that all ;\,[ember States have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action, in co-operation with
the Organization, for the achievement of one of the purposes
,f the Unite,! "I at ions ,vhich is to promote and encourage
universal respect for and observance of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all thr
rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of
any kiml, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Considering that all human beings are equal before the law
:111d are entitled to equal protect ion of the law against any
discrimination and against any incitement to discrimination,
( ·on.rid,.,-i11.a that the United "\Jations has condemned colonial:sm and all practices of segregation and discrimination associated
therewith, in whatever form and wherever they exist, and
that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colrmial Countries and Peoples of 14 December 1960 (General
\"emhly resolution 1514 (XV)) has affirmed arnl solemnly
proclaimed the necessity of bringing them to a speedy ancl
1111conditional end,
Considering that the United Nations Declaration on the
l•]imination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 20 November 1963 (General Assembly resolution 1904 (XVIII))
solemnly affirms the necessity of speedily eliminating racial
discrimination throughout the world in all its forms and
manifestations and of securing understanding of and respect
for 1he dignity of the human person,
Com.inced that any doctrine of superiority based on racial
differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially .mjust and dangerous, and that there is no justification
for racial discrimination. in theory or in practice, anywhere,
Reaffirming that discrimination between human beings on
the grounds of rac<", colour or ethnic origin is an obstacle
to friendly and peaceful relations among nations and is capable
of disturbing peace and security among peoples and the
harmony of persons living side by side even within one and
the same State,
( ·am•inced that the existence of racial barriers is repugnant
lo the ideals of any human society,
Alarmed by manifestations of racial discrimination still in
n·i<lence in some areas of the world and by governmental
policies based on racial superiority or hatred. such as policies
of .1.'nr!hcid, '-.('(!rt_'!~at!r-n or <cp·:L1ti(in,

General Assembly-Twentieth Se■sion

48

Resolved to adopt all necessary measures for speedily eliminating racial discrimination ,in all its forms and manifestations,
and to prevent and combat racist doctrines and practices in
order to promote understanding between races and to build
an international community free from all forms of racial
segregation and racial discrimination,
Bearing in mind the Convention concerning Discrimination
in respect of Employment and Occupation adopted by the International Labour Organisation in 1958, and the Convention
against Discrimination in Education adopted by the Unitecl
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in

1960,
Desiring to implement the principles embodied in the United
Nations Declaration oh the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and to secure the earliest adoption of practical
measures to that end,
I I ai,e agreed as follows :
PART

I

Article 1

1. In this Convention, the term "racial d·iscrimination" shall
mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based
on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin which
has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic,
social, cultural or any other field of public life.
2. This Convention shall not apply to distinctions, exclusions,
restrictions or preferences made by a State Party to this
Convention between citizens and non-citizens.
3. Nothing in this Convention may be interpreted as affecting in any way the legal provisions of States Parties concerning nationality, citizenship or naturalization, provided tha1
such provisions do not discriminate against any particular
nationality.
4. Special measures taken for the sole purpose of securing
adequate advancement of certain racial or ethnic groups or
individuals requiring such protection as may be necessary
in order to ensure such groups or individuals equal enjoyment
or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms shall not
be deemed racial discrimination, provided, however, that such
measures do not, as a consequence, lead to the maintenance
of separate rights for different racial groups and that they
shall not be continued after the objectives for which they were
taken have been achieved.
Article 2

1. States Parties condemn racial discrimination and undertake to pursue by all appropriate means and without delay a
policy of eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms and
promoting understanding among all races, and, to this end :
(a) Each State Party undertakes to engage in no act or
practice of racial discrimination against persons, groups of
persons or institutions and to ensure that all public authorities
and public institutions, national and local, shall act in conformity with this obligation;
( b) Each State Party undertakes not to sponsor, defend er
snpport racial discrimination by any persons or organizations :
( c) Each State Party shall take effective measures to review
governmental, national and local policies, and to amend, rescind
or nullify any laws and regulations which have the effect of
creating or perpetuating racial discrimination wherever it
exists;
(d) Each State Party shall prohibit and bring to an end,
hy all appropriate means, including legislation as required
by circumstances, racial discrimination by any persons, group
or organization;
(e) Each State Party undertakes to encourage, where
appropriate, integrationist multi-racial organizations and movements and other means of eliminating barriers between races,
and to discourage anything which tends to streng1hen racial
division,

2. States Partirs shall, when the circmnstanrcs sn warrant.
take, in the social, economic, rnltnral and other fidds, special
and concrete measures to ensure the adequate development and
protection of certain racial groups or individuals belonging
to them, for the purpose of guaranteeing them the full and
equal enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
These measures shall in no case entail as a consequence the
maintenance of unequal or separate rights for different racial
groups after, the objectives for which they were taken have
heen achieved.

Article 3
States Parties particularly condemn racial segregation an,l
apartheid and undertake to prevent, prohibit and eradicate all
prartires of this natme in territories under their jurisdiction.

Article 4
States Parties condemn all propaganda and all organizations
which are based on ideas or theories of superiority of one
race or group of persons of one colour or ethnic origin, or
which attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and undertake to adopt immediate ancl
r-ositive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or
acts of, such discrimination and, to this end, with due regard
lo the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the rights exprPssly sl't forth i11 article .'i
of this Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, incitemen1
to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or
incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons
of annther colonr or rthnk origin, aml also the provision of
any assistance to racist activities, includini; the financing
thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, aml
also organized and all other propaganda activities, which
promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall r,cognize
participation in such organization or activities as an offence
punishable by law;
( r) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions.
national or local, to promote or incite racial discrimination.

Article 5
In compliance with the fundamental obligations laid down
in article 2 of this Convention, States Parties undertake to
prohibit and to eliminate racial discrimination in all its .forms
and to guarantee the right of everyone, without distinction as
to ·race, colour, or national or ethnic origin, to equality before
the law, notably in the enjoyment of the following rights:
(a) The right to equal treatment before the tribunals and all
other organs administering justice;
(b) The right to security of person and protection by the
State against violence or bodily harm, whether inflicted by
government officials or by any individual, group or institution:
( c) Political rights, in particular the rights to participate
in elections-to vote and to stand for election-on the basis of
universal and equal suffrage, to take part in the Government
as well as in the conduct of public affairs at any level and 1o
have equal access to public service;
(d) Other civil rights, in particular:
(i) The right to freedom of movement and resi,lenre within
the border of the State;
(ii) The right to leave any country, inclurling nne's own.
and to return to one's country:
( iii) The right to nationality;
(iv) The right to marriage and choice of spouse;
Iv) The •right to own properly alone as well as in association with others ;
( vi) The right to inherit;
( vii) The right to freedom of tho11ght, rnn,cienre and
religion;
(viii) The right to freedom of opinion and expr,·s,inn:

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(ix) The right to freedom of pcaccf11l ;issemhly anrl association;
(e) Economic, social and cultural rights, in particular:
(i) The rights to work, to free choice of employment, to
just and favourable conditbns of work, to protection
against unemployment, to equal pay for eqml work, to
just and favourable remuneration;
(ii) The right to form and join trarle unions;
(iii) The right to housing;
( iY) The right to public health, medical care, social security
and social services ;
(v) The right to education and training;
( vi) The right to equal participation in cultural activities:
( f) The right of access to any place or service intended for
11se by the general public, such as transport, hotels, restaurant;;,
,afes, theatres and parks.

Article 6
States Parties shall assure to everyone within their jurisdiction effective protection and remedies, tbro11gh the competent
national tribunals and other State institutions, against any acts
of racial discrimination which violate his human rights and
fundamental freedoms contrary to tl>is Convention, as well as
the right to seek from such tribunals just and adel1uate reparation or satisfaction for any clamage snfferecl as a result of such
rliscrimination.

Article 7
States Pa·rties undertake to adopt immediate and effective
measures, particularly in the fields of teaching, education,
culture and information, with a view to combating prejudices
which lead to racial discrimi~.1tion and to promoting understanding, tolerance and friendship among nations and racial
or ethnical groups, as well as to propagating the purposes and
principles of the Ch;uter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of .Human Rights, the United Nations Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
arnl this Convention.
1-'ART

TT

Article 8

1. There shall be established a Committee on the Elimination
of _Racial Discrimination (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) consisting of eighteen experts of high moral standing
and acknowledged impartiality elected by States Parties from
among their nationals, who shall serve in their personal capacity,
consideration being given to equitable geographical distribution and to the representation of the different forms of civilization as well as of the principal legal systems.
2. The members of the Committee shall be elected by secret
ballot from a list of persons nominated by the States Parties.
Each State Party may nominate one prr,on fnnn among its
own nationals.
3. The initial election shall be held six months after the date
of the entry into force of this Convention. At lea5t three
months before the date of each election the Secretary-General
of the United Nations shall address a letter to the States
Parties inviting them to submit their nominations within two
months. The Secretary-General shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of all persons thus nominated, indicating the
States Parties which have nominated them, and shall sub~it it
to the States Parties.
4. Elections of the members of the Committee shall be
held at a meeting of States Parties convened by the Secretary1,eneral at United Nations Headquarters. At that meeting.
for which two thirds of the States Parties shall constitute a
quorum, the persons elected to the CommittP~ shall be those
nominees who obtain the largest number of votes and an absolute majority of the votes of the representatives of States
Parties present and voting.
5. (a) The members of the Committee shall be elected for
a term of four years. However, the terms of nine of the
,>

49

n1emhers elected at the first election shall expire at the enrl
of two years; immediately after the first election the names
,if these nine members shall be chosen by lot by the Chairman
of the Committee.
(b) For the filling of casual vacancies, the State Party
whose expert has ceased to function as a member of the
Committee shall appoint another expert from among its nationals, subject to the approval of the Committee.
6. States Parties shall be responsible for the expenses of
the members of the Committee while they are in performancr
of Committee duties.

Article 9

I. States Parties undertake to submit to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, for consideration by the Committee, a report on the legislative, judicial, administrative or
other measures which they have adopted and which gi\'e effect
to the provisions of this Convention: (a) within one year after
the entry into force of the Convention for the State concerned:
and (b) thereafter every two years and whenever the Committee so requests. The Committee may request further information from the States Parties.
2. The Committee shalJ report annually, through the Secn.·tary-General, to the General Assembly of the United Nations
on its activities and may make suggestions and general recommendations based on the examination of the reports and information received from the States Parties. Such suggestion.;
and general ·recommendations shall be reported to the General
Assemhly together with comments, if any, from States Parties.

Articlr 10
1. The Committee shall adopt its own rnles of procedure.
2. The Committee shall elect its .officers for a term of two
yt'ars.
3. The secretariat of the Committee shall he provided hy
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
4. The meetings of the Committee shall normally he helcl
o.t l 'nited Nations Headquarters.

Article 11

I. If a State Party considers that another State Party is
not giving effect to the provisions of this Convention, it may
bring the matter to the attention of the Committee. The Committee shall then transmit the communication to the State Party
concerned. \Vithin three months, the receiving State shall submit
to the Committee written explanations or statements clarifying
the matter and the remedy, if any, that may have heen taken
bv that State.
2. If the matter is not adjusted to the satisfaction of both
parties, either by bilateral negotiations or by any other pro•t"dnre open to them. within six months after the receipt by
the receiving State of the initial communication, either State
shall have the right to refer the matter again to the Committee by notifying the Committee and also the other State.
J. The Committee shall deal with a matter referred to it
in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article after it has
ascertained that all available domestic remedies have been
invoked and exhausted in the case, in conformity with the
generally recognized principles of international law. This shall
not be the rule where the application of the remedies is
unreasonably prolonged.
4. In any matter referred to it, the Committee may call
upon the States Parties concerned to supply any other relevant
information.
S. When any matter arising out of this article is being
considered hy the Committee, the States Parties concerntd
s ball be entitled to send a representative to take part in the
proceedings of the Committee, without voting rights, while
the matter is under consideration.

Article 12
1. (a) After the Committee has obtained and collated alJ
the in formation it deems necessary, the Chairman shalJ appoint

50

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

an ad hoe Conciliation Commission (hereinafter referred to
as the Commission) comprising five persons who may or may
not be members of the Committee. The members of the Commission shall be appointed with the unanimous consent of
the parties to the dispute, and its good offices shall be made
available to the States concerned with a view to an amicable
solution of the matter on the basis of respect for this
Convention.
(b) If the States parties to the dispute fail to reach agreement within three months on all or part of the composition
of the Commission, the members of the Commission not agreed
upon by the States parties to the dispute shall be elected by
secret ballot by a two-thirds majority vote of the Committel'
from.___among its own members.
2. The members of the Commission shall serve in their
personal capacity. They shall not be nationals of the State,
parties to the dispute or of a State not Party to this Convention.
·3. The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and adopt
its own rules of procedure.
4. The meetings of the Commission shall normally be held
at United Nations Headquarters or at any other convenient
place as determined by the Commission.
5. The secretariat provided in accordance with article 10,
paragraph 3, of this Convention shall also service the Commission whenever a dispute among States Parties brings the
Commission into being.
6. The States parties to the dispute shall share equally all
the expenses of the members of the Commission in accordance
with estim1tes to be proyirkd by the Secrrtary-Grneral of
the· United N atio11s.
7. The Secretary-General shall be empowered to pay the
expenses of the members of the Commission, if necessary, before reimbursement by the States parties to the dispute in
accordance with paragraph 6 of this article.
8. The information obtained and collated by the Committee
shall be made available to the Commission, and the Commission
may call upon the States concerned to supply any oth~r relevant
information.

Article 13
1. \Vhen the Commission has fully considered the matter, it
shall prepare and st1bmit to the Chairm;m of the Committee a
report embodying its findings on all qt1estin11s of fact relevant
to the issue between thC' parties am! containing snch recommendations as it may think proper for the amicable solution
of the dispute.
2. The Chairman of the Committee shall communicate the
report of the Commission to each of the States parties to the
dispute. These States shall, within three months, inform the
Chairman of the Committee whether or not they accept the
recommendations contained in the report of the Commission.
3. After the period provided for in paragraph 2 of this
article, the Chairman of the Committee shall communicate
the report of the Commission and the declarations of the States
Parties concerned to the other States Parties to this ConYention.

Article 14

1. A State Party may at any time declare that it recognizes
the competence of the Committee to receive and consider communications from individuals or groups of individuals within its
jurisdiction claiming to be victims of a violation by that State
Party of any of the rights set forth in this Convention. No
communication shall be received by the Committee if it concerns
a State Party which has not mark snch a declaration.
2. Any State Party which makes a declaration as provided
for in paragraph 1 of this article may establish or indicate a
body within its national legal order which shall he competent
to receive and consider petitions from inclividuals and groups
of individuals within its jurisdiction who claim to be victims
of a violation of any of the rights set forth in this Convention
and who have exhausted other available local remedies.
3. A declaration made in accordance with paragraph 1 of this
article and the name of any body established or indicated in

accord:rnce with paragraph 2 of this article shall be cleposited
by the State Party concernccl with the SC'crrtary-GmC'ral of
the United Nations, who shall transmit copies thereof to the
other States Parties. A declaration may be withdrawn at any
time hv notification to the Secretary-General, but such :t withdrawai shall not ::tffect cnmnrnnications pending before the
Committee.
4 A register of petitions shall be kept by the body established
or indicated in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article,
ant! certified copies of the register shall be filed annually
thrnngh appropriate channels with the Secretary-General on the
un<l,•rstanding that the contents shall not be publicly disclosed.
5. Jn the evml of failure to oblain satisfaction from the body
established or indicated in accordance with [}aragraph 2 of
this article, the petitioner shall have the right to commnnicattthe matter to the Committee within six months.
b. (a) The Committee shall confidentially bring any communication rdcrred to it to the attention of the State Party
alleged to be violating any provision of this Convention, hut
the identity of the individual or groups of individuals concerned
shall not be revealed without his or their express consent. The
Committee shall not receive anonymous communications.
(/1) Within three months, the receiving State shall submit
to the Committee written explanations or statements clarifying
the matter arn! the remedy, if any, that may haw been taken
by that State.
7. (a) The Committee shall consider communications in the
light of all information made available to it by the State Party
concerned and by the petitioner. The Committee shall not consider any communication from a petitioner unless it has ascertained that the petitioner has exhausted all arnibble domestic
remedies. However, this shall not he the rule where the application of the remedies is unreasonably prolonged.
(b) The Committee shall forward its suggestions and recommendations, if any, to the State Party concerned and to the
petitioner.
8. The Committee shall include in its annual re[}ort a
summary of such commnnications and, where appropriate, a
summarv of the explanations and statements of the States
Parties · concerned and of its own suggestions and recommendations.
9. The Committee shall be competent tu exercise the functions provided for in this article only when at least ten States
l 'arties to this Convention are' bound by declarations in accurdance with paragraph 1 of this article.

Article 15
1. Pending the achievement of the objectives of the Declaratirm on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960, the provisions of this Convention
shall in no way limit the right of petition granted to these
peoples by other international instruments or by the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.
2. (a) The Committee established under article 8, paragraph
1, of this Convention shall receive copies of the petitions
frcm, and submit expressions of opinion and recommendations
on these petitions to, the bodies of the United Nations which
deal with matters directly related to the principles and objectives of this Convention in their consideration of petitions
from the inhabitants of Trust and :\' on-Self-Governing Territories and all other territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) applies, relating lo matters covered
by this Convention which are before these bodies.
( b) The Committee shall recC'i ve from the competent bodies
of the United Nations copies of the reports concerning the
legislative, judicial, administrative or other measures directly
related to the principles and objectives of this Convention
applied by the administering Powers within the Territories
mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, and sha'l
express opinious and make recommendations to these bodies.
3. The Committee shall include in its report to the General
!\,,.;embly a summary of the petitions and reports it has received

51

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
from United Nations bodies, and the expressions of opinion and
recommendations of the Committee relating to the said petitions
and reports.
4. The Committee shall request from the Secretary-General
of the United Nations all information relevant to the objectives
of this Convention and available to him regarding the Territories mentioned in paragraph 2 (a) of this article.

Article 16
The provisions of this Convention concerning the settlement
of disputes or complaints shall be applied without prejudice
to other procedures fo1· settling disputes or complaints in th,"
field of discrimination laid flown in the constituent instruments
of, or in conventions adopted by, the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, ~ml shall not prevent the States Parties
from having recourse to other procedures for settling a dispute
in accordance with general or special international agreements
in force between them.

Denu11cia[i(ln shall tak,, effect one year after the cbtc of receipt
.,f the notification hy the Secretary-General.

Article 22
di,;putc betwc•.'11 two or more Sta1cs P:irtics with respect
to the interpretati0n or application ,,f this Convention, which
is not settled by negotiation or hy the proccclures expressly
provided for in this Convention, shall, at the re4ucst of any
of the' parties to the dispute, be rekrre<l to the International
l 'onrt of Just ice for decision, unless the disputants agree to
:mother mode of settlement.
\nj

Article 23
1. ;\ rcqurst for the revision of this Convention may be made

any time by any State I 'arty by means of a notification in
writing- addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
N al i,ms.

:it

2. The General \"cmhly uf tl1c United Nations shall decide
11;,011

PART

the steps, if any, to he taken in respect of such a request.

11[

Article 17
I. This Convention is open for signature by any State
Member of the United Nations or member of any of its specialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute of the
lnterriational Court of Justice, and hy any other State which
has been invited hy the General .'\ssembly of the United
Nations to become a Party to this Convention.
2. This Com·ention is suhject to ratification. Instruments
of ratification shall be deposited with the Secrctary-Ceneral of
the United Nations.

Article 18
l. This Convention shall be open to accession by any State
referred to in article 17, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
2. Accession shall he effected hy the deposit of an instrument
of accession with the Secret:iry-General of the United Natiom.

Article 19
1. This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth
day after the <late of the deposit with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of the twenty-se,·enth ;nstrumcnt of
ratification or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying this Convention or acceding to
it after the deposit of the twenty-seventh instrument of
ratification or instrument of accession, the Convention shall
enter into force on the thirtieth rL1y after the date of the
deposit of its own instrument of ratification or instrument
of accession.

Article 20
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall receive
and circulate to all States which arc or may become Parties
to this Convention reservations made by States at the time
of ratification or accession. Any State which objects to the
reservation shall, within a period of ninety days from the date
of the said communication, notify the Secretary-General that
it does not accept it.
2. A reservation incompatible with the object and purpose
of this Convention shall not be permitted, nor shall a reservation the effect of which would inhibit the operation of any
of the bodies established by this Convention be allowed. A
reservation shall be considered incompatible or inhibitive if at
least two thirds of the States Parties to this Convention object
to it.
3. Reservations may be withdrawn at any time by notification to this effect addressed to the Secretary-General. Such
notification shall take effect on the date on which it is received.

Article 21
A State Party may denounce this Convention l:iy written
notification to the Secrl:'tary-General of the United :\f ations.

Article 24
The Secretary-General of the lh1ited Nat ions shall inform
.tll States referred to in article 17, paragraph 1, of this Conven-

ti<•n of the following partirn!a:·s:
(a)

Signatures, rat; ficatirn1s
17 and 18:

and accessiuns

under articles

( /,) The date of rntry into force of this Convention under
article 19;
( c)

Comnrnnication,, and rlcclarat iolls received under articles
14, 20 and 23;

(d) Denunciations under article 21.

Article 25
1. This Conventi,111, of which the Chinese, English, French,
l\ussian am! Spanish texts arc equally authentic, shall be
deposited in the archives of the United Nations.

2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit cert.ified copies of this Convention to all States belonging to any of the categories mentioned in article 17, paragraph
1, of the Cnnvention.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0,
Bearing in mind its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27
November 1961, which established the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to examine the application of the Declaration and to carry out its provisions by all means at its disposal,
B caring in mind also the provisions of article 1S of
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination contained in the
annex to resolution A above,
Recalling that the General Assembly has established
other bodies to receive and examine petitions from
the peoples of colonial countries,
Convinced that close co-operation between the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
established by the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, and
the bodies of the United Nations charged with receiving
and examining petitions from the peoples of colonial

52

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

countries will facilitate the achievement of the objectives of both the Convention and the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recognizing that the elimination of racial discrimination in all its forms is vital to the achievement of
fundamental human rights and to the assurance of the
dignity and worth of the human person, and thus
constitutes a pre-emptory obligation under the Charter
of the United Nations,
I. Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, periodically or at its request, all information in his possession relevant to article 15 of
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination;

2. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, and all other bodies of the United Nations
authorized to receive and examine petitions from the
peoples of the colonial countries, to transmit to the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
periodically or at its request, copies of petitions from
those peoples relevant to the Convention, for the comments and recommendations of the said Committee;
3. Requests the bodies referred to in paragraph 2
above to include in their ;mnual reports to the General
Assembly a summary of the action taken by them
nncler the terms of the present resolution.
1106th plenary 111crti11y,
21 December 1965.
