United Nations

S/PV.4788

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4788

th meeting
Thursday, 17 July 2003, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Menéndez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Spain)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Akram
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-43075 (E)
*0343075*

S/PV.4788

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Roed-Larsen to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Roed-Larsen: Since the last briefing to the
Security Council, on 13 June, the revived peace
process based on the Quartet’s road map has made
encouraging progress. Hope is beginning to supplant
despair after more than 1,000 days of violence and
3,500 deaths. Israelis and Palestinians are meeting
regularly and working together at all levels. Those
tentative steps are leading to more mobility for
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and Bethlehem and to
more security for Israelis.
As agreed between the parties, the Israel Defence
Forces (IDF) have withdrawn from parts of the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank town of Bethlehem. That has
enabled the Palestinian Authority to begin to reestablish control over those areas.
A ceasefire that suspends attacks on Israelis has
been reached among Palestinian groups and is largely
being honoured. Regular meetings are occurring

2

between the Palestinian and Israeli Prime Ministers,
and Palestinians and Israelis meet frequently at the
ministerial level to discuss such issues as security,
prisoners,
incitement,
economic
development,
investment and health. Credit for this progress should
go first to the leaders of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. They deserve to be commended for their
courageous pursuit of the peace process. We urge them
to continue meeting and to maintain the positive
momentum they have developed.
The Quartet members, particularly the United
States, have assisted the parties to reach that point. The
United States has continued to demonstrate its
commitment to this process by the recent visits to the
region of Secretary of State Powell and National
Security Adviser Rice, as well as by placing a full-time
senior monitoring coordinator, Ambassador John Wolf,
on the ground to work with the parties to fulfil their
commitments. Quartet members stay in close touch
with Ambassador Wolf’s team. My Office, together
with other United Nations agencies, is monitoring the
situation on the ground, as we have for several years.
We will continue to keep the Council informed of
progress in implementing the road map.
The ceasefire announced on 30 June was achieved
through the efforts of the Palestinian leadership and
with the particular support of President Mubarak of
Egypt. We urge all Palestinian groups to adhere strictly
to the ceasefire. We call on the parties to stay the
course in the face of possible future violations of the
ceasefire. The peace process is too important to allow
spoilers to dictate its pace or to set its agenda.
The Quartet — represented by Secretary-General
Annan, United States Secretary of State Powell,
Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov and, for the European
Union, High Representative Solana, Foreign Minister
Papandreou and External Affairs Commissioner
Patten — met on 22 June at the Dead Sea in Jordan.
This first meeting after the presentation of the road
map to the parties and the Aqaba summit reaffirmed
the role of the Quartet. The members took the
opportunity to assess the status of the road map. They
reviewed the steps that should be taken by both sides in
order to move ahead, as well as the support we in the
international community need to give to the renewed
peace process. In the statement read out by the
Secretary-General, the Quartet commended Palestinian
Prime Minister Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister
Sharon for their statements of commitment to peace,

S/PV.4788

and pledged support to the parties to carry out those
commitments. The Quartet in turn reaffirmed its
commitment to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).
The Quartet also stated that it looked forward to
continuing to work together in close consultation with
the parties.
I would also like to take this opportunity to say
clearly that the commitment to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace requires that progress also be
made on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks of the peace
process.
The challenges to the peace process remain
numerous. Since the last briefing to the Security
Council 49 people have lost their lives to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, namely, 40 Palestinians and
nine Israelis. That raises the total death toll since
September 2000 to 2,755 Palestinians and 787 Israelis.
There has been a sharp decrease in violent attacks and
incitement during this reporting period. Any fatality is
tragic and needless. We are therefore pleased that the
progress in the peace process has saved lives and
lessened violence.
A peace process is now under way. Terrorist
attacks are damaging to that process. The Palestinian
Authority has a specific duty to assume security
responsibility, first in those areas from which the
Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) has withdrawn and later
in all the areas under its control. Israel and the
international community should take steps and provide
needed assistance to enable the Palestinian Authority to
fulfil its responsibilities. Israel should continue its
withdrawals and refrain from any provocative acts that
could make the task of Prime Minister Abbas and
Minister of State for Internal Security Dahlan more
difficult.
The IDF has largely ceased security activities in
those areas in which the Palestinian Authority has
retaken authority. This is an encouraging development.
Since the Israeli withdrawal from parts of the Gaza
Strip and the announcement of the ceasefire, the IDF
has refrained from extrajudicial killings. We strongly
urge the Government of Israel to continue to refrain
from targeted assassinations and to fulfil its right to
defend its people within the boundaries of international
humanitarian law.

Before I move on to the humanitarian situation, I
would like to take this opportunity to emphasize the
pressing need to create and build momentum. Both
sides need to take steps that build trust and confidence.
Each needs to demonstrate to the other that progress
brings real and tangible benefits. Each needs to
strengthen the capacity of the other to move forward
through bold and courageous steps. To this end, we
would strongly urge the Government of Israel to do
more in terms of prisoner releases and in easing the
daily living conditions of the Palestinians. I can think
of few actions that would do more to build real trust
and confidence. Prisoner releases in Northern Ireland
set an encouraging precedent in this respect.
Unfortunately, since the last briefing to the
Security Council, the humanitarian situation has seen
little concrete improvement, despite the sharp decrease
in violent clashes following the declaration of a
ceasefire by Palestinian groups. The withdrawal of
Israeli forces from parts of the Gaza Strip has been
accompanied by some easing of restrictions on the
movement of Palestinian workers and commodities.
But closures, curfews and checkpoints have not been
relaxed significantly in the West Bank. As a result, the
economic deterioration in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the human suffering of the Palestinian
people have not yet reflected the progress achieved in
these early stages of the road map process. Even with a
full Israeli withdrawal, improvements in living
conditions will take time to manifest themselves. My
Office, the World Bank and United Nations agencies
continue to monitor the socio-economic situation. We
hope that steps will be agreed to by the parties in the
near future that will pave the way for necessary
improvements in the humanitarian situation.
The construction of the separation barrier, or
wall, on which we have regularly briefed the Council,
is continuing. Construction has been particularly
intensive in the Tulkarem-Qalqilya governorates and
around Jerusalem. We again call on the Government of
Israel to halt construction of the Wall. Its construction
is a unilateral act not in keeping with the road map,
because it makes more difficult the creation of a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State. We understand that Israel
has security concerns, but it is important that those
concerns be addressed in a manner that does not create
unfortunate facts on the ground. Israel must act in
accordance with its international humanitarian law
obligations and the road map.

3

S/PV.4788

We have reported to the Council the difficulties
experienced by humanitarian agencies in entering and
leaving the Gaza Strip. We have described the effects
of the movement restrictions on the abilities of United
Nations and other agencies to fulfil humanitarian needs
and their mandates. I am pleased to report that
movement through the Erez checkpoint has improved
since the previous briefing. The all-donor Task Force
on Project Implementation, currently chaired by my
Office, which addressed these questions, continued to
discuss questions of access with the Israeli authorities.
While access has recently improved, it continues to be
difficult to determine which part of the Israeli
Government is the best address for access concerns. We
call on the Israeli Government to provide the
international humanitarian community with an
empowered interlocutor to address donor concerns.
Aspects of the parties’ progress in implementing
their commitments under the road map deserve to be
enumerated. First, since the previous briefing to the
Council, the Israelis and Palestinians have agreed to,
and implemented, an Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip and Bethlehem in the West Bank. The Palestinian
Authority has re-established security responsibility in
those places.
Secondly, Palestinian groups have agreed to a
ceasefire that prohibits attacks on Israelis everywhere.
The ceasefire is largely holding, but regrettable
violations have led to the deaths of Israelis. During this
period, Palestinians, too, have, regrettably, lost their
lives. Overall, however, violence has dramatically
lessened since the withdrawals and the ceasefire. We
hope that the ceasefire will lead to the disarming by the
Palestinian Authority of all armed groups, so that, as
envisioned by Prime Minister Abbas and called for by
the road map, weapons are held only by members of
the Palestinian security services.
Thirdly, the parties have begun a regular series of
ministerial meetings, including meetings between the
two Prime Ministers, that provide for further
agreements on issues that include prisoner release and
security cooperation.
Prime Ministers Abbas and Sharon deserve and
need our support for the bold steps they are taking. We
must recognize that their actions are unpopular in some
quarters of their domestic constituencies. However, it is
encouraging that recent opinion polling has shown that
clear majorities in both communities embrace the road

4

map, reject terror and violence and endorse the
establishment of a Palestinian State on the West Bank
and Gaza Strip. The international community should
work actively to show its support in these early days of
this still-fragile process. But as in any peace process,
the parties must help themselves and each other. Each
of the Prime Ministers must show results to his people,
lest support for the peace process weaken. Each must
assist the other in order to move the process forward.
Prime Minister Sharon must demonstrate to the
Israeli people that participation in the road map process
will lead to an end to violence and terror. Prime
Minister Abbas can directly assist the process by
continuing the reform and consolidation of Palestinian
security forces. In order to do so, Prime Minister
Abbas needs the active support of Mr. Yasser Arafat,
who is the democratically elected President of the
Palestinian Authority and Chairman of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. For his part, Prime Minister
Abbas should also fulfil his commitment to take up
security responsibility in those areas from which Israeli
troops have withdrawn.
Finally, the Palestinians are beginning to work to
end incitement in the Palestinian media.
Prime Minister Abbas must demonstrate to his
people that the current efforts will improve the quality
of their lives, that prisoners will be released and that
progress is being made towards the realization of their
long-held aspiration for a sovereign, viable and
contiguous State. Popular support from ordinary
Palestinians for the road map is essential to its success.
It follows that the key to whether the Palestinians see
the peace process as meaningful, and to whether Prime
Minister Abbas’s Government succeeds, lies largely in
the hands of Prime Minister Sharon. By his actions, he
can support or he can undermine.
Let me be clear where we stand. The Government
of Israel should further ease and eventually lift the
closure regime in the West Bank as a follow-up to the
steps it has taken in the Gaza Strip. The peace process
will seem real to Palestinians only when they are able
to move freely, go to work and school, seek medical
care and attend to other aspects of normal life without
confronting checkpoints and humiliating procedures.
We are pleased that some steps in this direction
have been taken by the Israelis. We are also pleased
that there appear to be ongoing discussions aimed at
the release of a significant number of prisoners. The

S/PV.4788

continued presence of settlement outposts established
since March 2001 causes many Palestinians to question
Israel’s intent regarding this process. We urge the
Government of Israel to continue its efforts to remove
settlement outposts from the West Bank and prevent
the erection of new ones.
The international community has a responsibility
to take steps to assist the Palestinian Authority at the
inception of the road map process. The all-donor
grouping, the Local Aid Coordination Committee,
which the Office of the Special Coordinator — my
Office — co-chairs with the World Bank and Norway,
is working with the Palestinian Authority to identify
priorities for assistance. Quick-impact projects and
longer-term development initiatives in those areas in
which the Authority has taken up responsibility should
be funded by the donor community. These projects
could help the Palestinian people to see tangible
benefits from the peace process. I should point out that
the emergency appeal of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
remains under-funded.
Turning to the situation along the Blue Line, I am
pleased to report that the overall relative calm that I
mentioned in the previous briefing continues.
Unfortunately, however, we remain worried about the
continuation of certain actions that carry escalatory
potential.
During my recent visit to Beirut, just two weeks
ago, one unanimous concern animated all my
interlocutors, namely, Israeli overflights in Lebanese
airspace. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) has reported recent increases in such air
violations. We have repeatedly called on the
Government of Israel to respect Lebanon’s sovereignty
over its airspace and abstain from overflights. Other
members of the Security Council have informed us that
they have also called for a suspension of the
overflights. Unfortunately, our calls have not been
heeded.
We also believe also that the anti-aircraft fire
from the Lebanese side, which has increased, is
worrying. According to UNIFIL reports, anti-aircraft
fire has at times been unrelated to overflights. In
addition, some rounds have landed in Israel,
constituting a violation of the Blue Line with
escalatory potential. A graphic example of this
occurred on 5 July, when three rounds of Hizbullah

anti-aircraft fire were reported to have fallen on the
Israeli town of Kiryat Shimona. UNIFIL reports that
another such incident occurred yesterday in another
Israeli town. I await a full report as to precisely what
happened. Whether this firing is in response to
overflights or not, we hold to the basic principle that
one violation does not justify a further violation.
UNIFIL has reported that on 4 July, after
numerous protests, the anti-aircraft gun that had been
placed in close proximity to UNIFIL position 8-32 was
finally removed. The continued extension of the
authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout
the south of the country would greatly assist in limiting
the violations of the Blue Line from the Lebanese side.
The Secretary-General has on many occasions in
the past called on both parties to meet their obligations
and abide by relevant Security Council resolutions in
fully respecting the Blue Line. We call again on both
parties to cease those continuing violations in order to
maintain what has been an otherwise relatively calm
environment.
It has to be noted, however, that the stabilization
of the situation in south Lebanon is best achieved by
broadening the current peace process to encompass
Lebanon and Syria, as contemplated in the road map.
The Security Council has already certified that Israel’s
withdrawal from south Lebanon represents the full
application of Security Council resolution 425 (1978).
The remaining issues between the two countries should
be quickly addressed in order to pave the way for
concluding comprehensive peace agreements.
The situation in the Golan Heights remains calm,
with both Syria and Israel respecting their core
commitments under the Agreement on Disengagement.
That mutual respect of commitments is a good
precedent and a reason for optimism in the region, as it
shows that the parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict do
implement agreements when signed. The calm on the
Golan should, and could, be turned into peace. There is
therefore a solid basis on which to resume negotiations
between Israel and Syria. Only last week in Damascus,
President Al-Assad of Syria personally expressed to me
his readiness to resume those negotiations, based on
the previously agreed terms of reference.
In addition to visiting Damascus, during the last
two weeks I have met with leaders from Lebanon,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, all of whom expressed
support for the current peace efforts and a desire to

5

S/PV.4788

broaden the process in order to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace. The road map
stipulates a resumption of negotiations on both the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks as early as January 2004.
Such a development would greatly stabilize the peace
process, including the Palestinian-Israeli track.
It is with pleasure that I report that the glimmers
of hope that I spoke of when I last briefed the Council
have been consolidated during the last few weeks. The
atmosphere has improved considerably. The first
halting steps — always the most painful — have been
taken. Now is the time for the international community
to rally its support of the parties as they proceed down
the difficult path of the road map.
Peace processes, anywhere in the world, thrive on
forward momentum. We must work to assist the parties
to continue to move in a positive direction. Now is not
the time for anyone involved in the process to look
back in order to pit the past against the present in ways
that could jeopardize the hopes of the future. Rather,
we must put the past behind us in order to focus our
energies on future peace and reconciliation.
Peacemaking, as we have said before, is not an
event; it is a long, demanding and difficult process.
The Israelis and Palestinians are at the beginning of
that process. The end point, as agreed by the parties

6

and the international community, is a just and
comprehensive peace based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002),
and two States — Israel and Palestine — living side by
side in peace and security.
Finally, I wish to pay tribute to Ambassador
Miguel Angel Moratinos, who has recently stepped
down as the Middle East envoy of the European Union.
In seven years of work on the difficult issues of Middle
East
peacemaking,
Ambassador
Moratinos
distinguished himself by his humanity, passion and
diplomatic skills. I count him as a friend and will miss
the partnership we have developed over the years. I
welcome the new European Union envoy, Ambassador
Marc Otte, and I look forward to working closely with
him through the Quartet to implement the road map in
the challenging period ahead. The difficulties are great,
but so is the prize. Let us never forget that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Roed-Larsen for his comprehensive briefing to the
Council.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.
