UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3325
22 December 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 22 December 1993, at 6.15 p.m.

President:

(China)

Brazil
Cape Verde
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. CUSTODIO dos SANTOS
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MARUYAMA
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. LI Zhaoxing

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-87471 (E)

S/PV.3325
2
The meeting was called to order at 6.30 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN GEORGIA
LETTER DATED 16 DECEMBER 1993 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/26901)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I should

like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Georgia in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia)
took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document S/26901,
which contains the text of a letter dated 16 December 1993 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26909,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.

S/PV.3325
3
(The President)
I should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following other documents:

S/26843, letter dated

3 December 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Italy to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/26856, letter
dated 3 December 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/26875, letter dated 9 December 1993 from the
Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a letter dated
8 December 1993 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia
addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the representative of Georgia, and I now
call on him.
Mr. CHKHEIDZE (Georgia) (interpretation from Russian):
The draft resolution under consideration raises to a new level the
efforts of the international community and opens the way to further
development of the peace process.
Consideration of this question, including the comments made
and the support for those comments, reflects the aspiration to
reinforce the first results of the negotiation process.

We cannot

allow this process to be frozen, despite the intention of the
Abkhaz side to carry out, on the territory of the autonomous
Republic, a referendum on the future political system of Abkhazia.
Naturally, we favour the free expression of the will of the people
of the autonomous Republic, but after the restoration of justice
and the return of the refugees, to which we aspire so much.
I have asked to speak to convey, on behalf of the leadership
of the Republic, our gratitude for the efforts the Council has been
making to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Abkhaz problem.
more than a year now, it has been claiming lives, wreaking havoc

For

S/PV.3325
4
(Mr. Chkheidze, Georgia)
with the destiny of people and threatening regional stability.

It

is one of those bloody links in the chain of events on which the
attention of the Security Council is now focused.
I should like to convey to the Council the expressions of
gratitude of hundreds of thousands of dispossessed refugees.

They

are given hope by the fairness reflected in the decisions of the
Security Council and by the objectivity of the United Nations
leadership in assessing the existing situation.

The lives of many

people and, most important, of innocent children have been saved by
humanitarian assistance.

The words of gratitude of my people are

addressed to the States and to the international organizations
which have responded to the Security Council’s appeal for emergency
humanitarian assistance.
The only path to a settlement is that which the leadership of
Georgia sees in the negotiating process.

It is well known that we

participated in these negotiations even after previous agreements
had been violated.

It is also well known that this conflict was

imposed on Georgia and that it is by no means an ethnic conflict.
Such an understanding of the events would be an oversimplication.
The conflict has a clearly expressed political basis.
Destabilization is the most effective method of struggling
against democracy.

Stability is a threat to those forces that are

striving for political power through the use of violence and that
are enriching themselves through trade and weapons, through pillage
and robbery.

All peaceful efforts will encounter vehement

resistance by these forces, but there can be no retreat from such
efforts.

We hope that today’s decision of the Security Council

will become one more authoritative reaffirmation of this policy.
We hope also that the efforts of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and his Special Envoy,

S/PV.3325
5
(Mr. Chkheidze, Georgia)
Mr. Edouard Brunner, will achieve positive results in the
development of the process of peaceful negotiations.

We wish to

take particular note of the active and comprehensive assistance
rendered by Russia.
The leadership of the Republic of Georgia expresses the hope
that, in order to achieve these objectives, the United Nations in
the very near future will expand its presence in the territory of
the region, including armed peace-keeping forces and civilian
experts.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

I thank the

representative of Georgia for the kind words he addressed to me.

S/PV.3325
6
(The President)
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it (S/26909).
If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution
892 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

My

delegation welcomes the decision just taken by our Council.
Just as, immediately following the violation of the Sochi
Agreement, the Council reduced the strength of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), today, in the light of the
encouraging results of the Geneva negotiations, the Council is
confirming the readiness of the United Nations to make its
contribution as soon as the parties prove their willingness to make
progress towards a political settlement of the conflict.
In addition to the 10 observers who will be deployed
immediately, we would like the Secretariat to deploy as quickly as
possible the maximum number of observers within the limit of 50
authorized by this resolution.
We await the results of the next round of negotiations, to be
held on 11 January, and the continuation of the discussions

S/PV.3325
7
(Mr. Merimée, France)
undertaken in Moscow on 15 and 16 December on the modalities of a
political solution.
In this connection, my delegation wishes to emphasize that,
even though the first meeting of experts in Moscow did not produce
immediate results, the fact that the parties began to discuss the
core of the problem is in itself a positive factor.
If further progress is achieved in the coming weeks, France,
together with a number of delegations directly concerned, and in
close coordination with the Secretariat and the parties, will not
fail to propose new forms of action to our Council.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The delegation of the Russian Federation has supported

the resolution just adopted by the Security Council, authorizing an
increase in the strength of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia up to 50 additional military observers, in the belief that
this is the first step in United Nations assistance in the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the
parties on 1 December this year.
We believe that, with the signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding, once again - as was the case after the Sochi ceasefire Agreement of 27 July this year - a real opportunity has
emerged to achieve a political settlement to the Abkhaz conflict.
Of course, if this opportunity is to be seized, the most energetic
efforts of the United Nations in support of the progress made in
resolving the conflict will be required.
The Russian Federation believes that progress towards a
political settlement should be accompanied by the deployment in
Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia, of a full-fledged United Nations
operation, which would include both a military and a substantive

S/PV.3325
8
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
civilian component and would cover the entire territory of
Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia.
Of great significance in this connection is the provision of
the resolution to the effect that the Security Council takes note
of the intention of the Secretary-General to plan and prepare for a
possible further expansion of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia.

Of significance also is the readiness expressed by the

Council to review the existing mandate of UNOMIG in the light of
the report by the Secretary-General that is due at the end of
January 1994.
As is clear from the present stage of the situation in the
Abkhaz conflict, of highest priority are questions of respect for
human rights, the return of the refugees, the restoration of
legality and law and order, and the cessation of violence.

We are

gratified that in the resolution just adopted due attention has
been paid to these issues.
We fully share the view of the fact-finding mission of the
Secretary-General in the area of human rights violations in
Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia, which in its report noted that
"The presence of representatives of international
organizations may be helpful in the restoration of guarantees
for the protection of the civilian population." (S/26795,
para. 61)
It also emphasized in its report that
"Human rights monitors placed in Abkhazia could make an
important contribution in this regard." (Ibid.)
We hope that during the upcoming review of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia this important
recommendation will be taken into account.

S/PV.3325
9
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
It is obvious that international support commensurate with the
scale and intensity of the conflict requires a significant
strengthening not only of the military but also of political,
humanitarian and other types of United Nations presence in
Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia.
For its part, the Russian Federation reaffirms its readiness
to make its contribution to the peace-keeping activities of the
United Nations in the region of the Abkhaz conflict and in
particular to render assistance to the Secretary-General in
ensuring the security of United Nations personnel.
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom):

The further phased

deployment of United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
observers to Abkhazia in the Republic of Georgia, authorized by the
resolution which we have just adopted, is another clear signal of
the international community’s concern for the situation in Georgia.
The mandate is designed to give UNOMIG the opportunity to make a
practical contribution to the implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding signed in Geneva on 1 December.

It applies to the

whole area of Abkhazia, not only to the town of Sukhumi or to the
present dividing line between the forces of the two sides, along
the Inguri River.
As in all peace-keeping operations, the security of United
Nations personnel is a very real concern for my Government:

we

therefore welcome the expressed willingness of the Government of
the Russian Federation to assist in ensuring the security of UNOMIG
personnel, and are happy that this is reflected in the resolution.
This further deployment of military observers is also a clear
signal of the international community’s support for the negotiating
process started in Geneva under United Nations auspices and in the
presence of the Council on Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.3325
10
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
(CSCE), and the Russian Federation as facilitator.

It is vital

that both sides now abide by the cease-fire and seize the
opportunity offered to restore peace and establish a lasting
political settlement.
in that process.

My Government will do all it can to assist

It hopes that the parties will heed the message

of this resolution and engage in further constructive negotiations
when they meet in January.

As the Secretary-General has made

clear, a further deployment of UNOMIG, beyond that authorized in
this resolution, and up to the strength originally envisaged for
the Mission, must depend on progress at the negotiating table.

S/PV.3325
11
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
Finally, may I note that the resolution rightly draws
attention to the humanitarian situation in Georgia.

United Nations

assistance to that country is not and should not be confined to the
provision of military observers.

We have all been moved by the

plight of the civilian population there as a result of the fighting
of the past year.

The United Kingdom will continue its efforts to

alleviate the plight of the refugees.

We have already responded to

the United Nations inter-agency consolidated appeal for Georgia,
and we stand ready to consider further assistance.
Mr. ERDOS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

By

voting in favour of resolution 892 (1993), Hungary has reaffirmed
its commitment to a political solution of the conflict in Abkhazia,
Republic of Georgia.

We welcome the readiness of both the Georgian

and the Abkhazian parties to engage in negotiations for a
comprehensive political settlement of the crisis.

In our view, the

expansion of the international presence in the conflict zone,
requested by the parties and authorized by today’s resolution, can
only help stabilize the situation and create conditions favourable
to negotiations.

We note with satisfaction the conclusions drawn

by the Secretary-General from an analysis of present developments,
according to which encouraging progress towards lasting peace in
the region has been achieved, as well as the decision to hold a new
round of negotiations next month.
Hungary attaches great importance to the activities in Georgia
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),
which are based on decisions taken at the recent ministerial
meeting of the CSCE in Rome.

On the situation in Georgia, the

Ministers of the CSCE countries stressed that the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Georgia must be

S/PV.3325
12
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
safeguarded.

That is fully in line with the position the Security

Council adopted on this subject in resolution 876 (1993) of
19 October.

The Ministers, further, undertook to strengthen CSCE

efforts to stabilize the situation in the country.

These efforts

cover a number of areas, including human rights and assistance for
the development in Georgia of legal and democratic institutions and
processes; they can be an invaluable contribution to solving
outstanding problems.

In this undertaking, the enhancement and

strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations and the
CSCE in Georgia could bring us closer to a settlement of the
conflict and increase the effectiveness of efforts to that end.
We appeal to the signatories of the Memorandum of
Understanding signed at the beginning of this month to step up
their efforts to bring the Republic of Georgia out of the present
situation and, on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and CSCE decisions, to settle all their differences.
Mr. GREY (United States of America):

We favour the phased

expansion of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) to a total of 55 observers.

With such an expansion the

United Nations lends practical support to the progress the parties
have achieved in the negotiations under the auspices of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Ambassador Brunner, in
their signing of the Memorandum of Understanding on 1 December.
This expansion is in keeping with the intention of resolution
881 (1993), which took as its guidelines for further development an
evaluation of the situation on the ground and in the negotiating
process.
We hope that, as negotiations resume on 11 January, the
parties will be able to confirm the progress they have begun so

S/PV.3325
13
(Mr. Grey, United States)
positively.

Among the many issues the negotiators will face is

that of a formal cease-fire.

We hope the parties will build upon

their agreement not to use force during the period of the
negotiations and will agree in substance and in detail on the
framework for a formal cease-fire with which UNOMIG can interact,
as was its original function.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report, expected in
late January.

We hope that he will be able to address specifically

and in detail the tasks which UNOMIG is performing and that he will
evaluate whether and to what degree UNOMIG might resume more
traditional observer functions in the light of the situation on the
ground and in the negotiations.

We would also welcome his estimate

of the costs and his evaluation of the time in which UNOMIG might
be able to accomplish its mission.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

Like most of the international

community, the Brazilian Government was dismayed by the turn of
events that, last September, shook the peace process in Abkhazia,
Republic of Georgia, rendering inapplicable the original mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).

At that

time, even in the face of very difficult circumstances, the
Security Council did not give up the hope that a negotiated
settlement to the conflict could be achieved.

The international

community remained ready to do its share in contributing to that
goal, as demonstrated by the continued presence of UNOMIG and the
prospect of a continuous review of its new, more modest, mandate.
That was the thrust of resolution 881 (1993), which was adopted
unanomously by the Council.

S/PV.3325
14
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
The signing on 1 December by the Government of Georgia and the
Abkhazian side of a Memorandum of Understanding proved the approach
of the Council to have been correct.

That most welcome development

deserved to be appropriately acknowledged, as the Council has done
today by adopting resolution 892 (1993).
We commend the diplomatic efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Edouard
Brunner, who has been instrumental in the progress attained so far.
We also recognize the very useful role played by the Government of
the Russian Federation as facilitator of the peace process.
By authorizing the phased deployment of up to 50 additional
military observers to UNOMIG, the Council once more signifies its
readiness to remain directly seized of the matter and to respond
promptly - but in a commensurate way and after having taken stock
of new developments - to real progress achieved by the parties
towards a comprehensive political settlement.
The deployment of United Nations personnel to areas of
conflict is always a delicate matter, and one that deserves to be
considered with great caution and care.

In the case of Georgia,

that need is further accentuated by two important elements:

the

involvement of the regional organization - the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe - and the presence in the area
of military personnel from a third party.
As a member of the Security Council, Brazil will continue to
consider events in the Abkhazian region of Georgia with interest
and attention and will be ready to work with other delegations on
further measures that may be necessary to support the peace
process, on the basis of the recommendations to be submitted in due
course by the Secretary-General.

S/PV.3325
15
Mr. MARUYAMA (Japan):

Japan welcomes the fact that there

has been some progress in the political dialogue on the situation
in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia.

Like other countries, Japan

attaches particular importance to the recent signing of the
Memorandum of Understanding, which was a tangible result of the
combined efforts of Mr. Brunner, the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), and the Russian Federation as
facilitator.

S/PV.3325
16
(Mr. Maruyama, Japan)
The resolution we have adopted today demonstrates the position
of the Council very clearly.

First, it reflects our belief that

the Memorandum of Understanding will be, and must be, implemented
fully.

Secondly, as the situation still involves some uncertainty,

it establishes that the Council must take a step-by-step approach
in providing assistance, and must keep UNOMIG under constant
review.

The Council should be kept fully informed of any

developments, as this is the only way to ensure the practical
review due at the end of January next year.
I urge the parties to heed this message and to demonstrate the
maximum political will to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the
conflict.

It remains for them to honour their own commitments; the

Council can only help them to move ahead.

Once again, the success

of the peace process depends primarily on the good and constructive
will of the parties.
Finally, I wish to stress that there are several factors which
I think are minimum preconditions to effective United Nations
assistance, some of which are properly reflected in this
resolution.

First, the safety of UNOMIG personnel and humanitarian

relief workers must be ensured.

Secondly, the provision of

humanitarian assistance should be facilitated.

Thirdly, the

violation of humanitarian law must immediately and unconditionally
cease.

Japan continues to monitor these aspects of the situation

carefully and is looking forward to a better climate, one which
will promote a just and lasting peace in the area.
Mr. YAÑEZ-BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
On several occasions in the course of the past few months, the
Security Council has expressed grave concern over the deterioration

S/PV.3325
17
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
of the situation in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia.

Today we have

been able to adopt a resolution which is part of a more encouraging
picture after the signing in Geneva, on 1 December last, of a
Memorandum of Understanding between the Georgian and Abkhaz
parties.
With resolution 892 (1993), the Council gives its support, by
the phased dispatch of up to 50 military observers to the region,
to the peace process initiated in Geneva under the auspices of the
United Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE), with the assistance of the Russian Federation, a
process which we hope will lead to the full restoration of peace in
Abkhazia and to a political solution to the problems underlying
this conflict.
It is now up to the parties to make their commitment to the
negotiating process a reality and to renounce the use of force once
and for all.

The resolution just adopted leaves no doubt in this

regard, since it insists on compliance both with the Memorandum of
Understanding signed in Geneva and with the Sochi Agreements of
27 July this year, which were violated by the Abkhaz party, as
previous resolutions of the Security Council have pointed out.
The Council must follow closely the developments in the
negotiating process, which will continue in mid-January in Geneva,
since the increase in the United Nations presence in the region which the parties themselves believe would contribute to
maintaining and consolidating peace - will depend on the progress
that is achieved.
As was expressed in a statement by the European Union, of
which Spain is a member, this negotiating process should lead to a

S/PV.3325
18
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
political solution within the context of the existing international
boundaries.

The European Union has also insisted on the need for

the parties to respect the principles of the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe as well as those of humanitarian law.
In this regard, I wish to express the concern of the Spanish
delegation over the situation of tens of thousands of refugees and
persons who have been displaced as a result of the conflict.

It is

urgent therefore that the necessary conditions be created for the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their places of origin
on a voluntary basis and in a climate of security.

In like manner,

all those who require it should have unimpeded access to the
humanitarian assistance intended for the victims of the conflict.
There is reason for hope.

We trust therefore that in the next

few weeks the Secretary-General will be able to report on progress
achieved in the peace process, which will enable this Council to
continue to act concretely and effectively to assist Georgia in
attaining normalcy.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):

There are no

further speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
