A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/50
30 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 18
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/48/656)]
48/50.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to New
Caledonia, 1/
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New
Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the
population, to promote political, economic and social development in the
Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection and
action with respect to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a
framework for its peaceful progress to self-determination,

_____________
1/

A/48/23 (Part VII), chap. XI.

/...

A/RES/48/50
Page 2

Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and
social development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved
in New Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New
Caledonia,
Welcoming the positive outcome of the mid-term review of the Matignon
Accords in February 1993 and the continuing support for the process by the new
French Government,
Noting the holding of the Pacific Regional Seminar at Port Moresby, from
8 to 10 June 1993, to examine the political, economic and social situation in
small island Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New
Caledonia and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region,
1.
Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to New
Caledonia; 1/
2.
Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people
of New Caledonia and building on the positive outcome of the mid-term review
of the Matignon Accords, to maintain their dialogue in a spirit of harmony;
3.
Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework
for the peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of
self-determination in which all options are open and which would safeguard the
rights of all New Caledonians according to the letter and the spirit of the
Matignon Accords, which are based on the principle that it is for the
populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control their destiny;
4.
Welcomes recent and impending measures to strengthen and diversify
the New Caledonian economy in all fields;
5.
Also welcomes the call by the parties to the Matignon Accords for
greater progress in housing, employment, training, education and health care
in New Caledonia;
6.
Commends the decision to establish a Melanesian cultural centre as
a contribution to preserving the indigenous culture of New Caledonia;
7.
Notes the recent positive initiatives aimed at protecting New
Caledonia’s natural environment, notably the "Zonéco" operation designed to
map and evaluate marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia;
8.
Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples
of the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French
authorities to facilitate the further development of those links, including
the development of closer relations with the member countries of the South
Pacific Forum;
9.
Welcomes in particular, in this regard, recent high-level visits
to New Caledonia by delegations from countries of the Pacific region;

/...

A/RES/48/50
Page 3

10.
Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this
question at its next session and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its forty-ninth session.
75th plenary meeting
10 December 1993
