SECURITY COUNCIL -.OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

lSS6 th

MEETING:

UN LBRARY

uN/sA COLLECTjoN

4 FEBRUARY

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1886) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

.. .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. ... . .. .... .. .. .

The situation in the Comoros:
(cr) Telegram dated 28 January- 1976 from the head of State of the Comoros
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/11953);
(h) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1959) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1886

..

,

,,,
i ,

1.1

4,
r

),I,

E
7

:
;

2:

;
:?

f

I-.-

,
,-.

,;,;a.
‘, I.,_ _

p:y:
I.~

-

;‘..,..

1;‘:
:.

NOTE
i
-I- .- .Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
e”.+.

-\

j

I

.~(

1

,p:i!

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppletncnts
of the Ofjkiul
Records
of the Scw~rity Council.
The, date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
und
Drc*i.sions
of the Smurity
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1886th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 February 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
Presidenr: Mr. Daniel P. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America).

i

discord, and had greatly diminished hopes and expectations with respect to a matter of profound seriousness.

Present: The remesentatives of the followinp: States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan: Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/1886)

Adoption

of the agenda

2,

The situation in the Comoros:
(u) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the
head of State of the Comoros addressed to
the President ofthe Security Council (S/l 1953);
(h) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea-Bissau
to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 1959)
_
wus culled to order

of the agenda

The agendu wus adopted.

1.

The meeting

2. It was surely a mark of the President’s leadership
that this time the occasion ended not in discord but
in an all but unprecedented display of firmness and
unity in the Council. More we could not ask of a
President,
and nothing less did we receive from
Mr. Salim.

The situation in the Comoros:
(a) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the head of
State of the Comoros addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11953);
(b) Letter dated 3 February 1976 from the Perman$nt
Representative
of Guinea-Bissau
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11959)
5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like now to inform
the members of the Security Council that I have
received a telegram this morning from the head of
State of the Comoros concerning the appointment
of
a representative
of the. Comoros for the Security
Council discussion of the matter placed before the
Council by his Government
[see S/11964]. If there
is no objection, I therefore intend to invite the representative of the Comoros, in accordance with rule.37
of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate
in’the discussion without the right to vote.

at 4.40 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT:
As the members of the Security
Council know, it is the pleasant practice of incoming
Presidents to speak about their predecessors, and it
is part of the civility of the Council always to find
something gracious to say, even to the point of taxing
the inventiveness of some of us on occasion. Jt is my
much happier opportunity to speak not only the sentiments of the United States but I think I can say those
of all the members of the Council in praise of, and in
gratitude for, the exceptional
performance
of my
predecessor, the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania,
Mr. Salim, who served with such
equanimiiy
and, on occasion, fortitude and understanding through a most difficult month in which the
gravest questions that come before the Council were
dealt with, and dealt with in the full solemnity to which
they were entitled, which they demanded, but also
with a degree of civility and openness that is unhapily
rare. It was the singular culmination of this presidency
that brought us only on Friday of last week [1885th
meeting] to a unanimous judgement
with respect to
a matter of the greatest seriousness, and an i,ssue
which not seven months earlier had brought discord to
the Council, had resulted in a singular record of

It wus so decided.
At the invitution
of the President, Mr.
(Comoros) took u place at thk Council table.

Sultun

4. The PRESIDENT:
We welcome the representative of the Comoros. In addition, I have received
letters from the representatives
of Algeria, Gtiinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Kenya, Madagascar
and Somalia,
containing requests that they be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. Accordingly, if there is no objection I propose that the
Council agree, in accordance with the usual practice,
to invite the representatives I have just mentioned to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
It MWS so decided.
1

5. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the limited number
of seats available at the Council table, I invite the
representatives
of Algeria, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau
Kenya, Madagascar and Somalia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding
that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when they address
the Council.

10. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, before entering into the
substance of the discussion of the item on the agenda,
I should like to convey to you my congratulations
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Your distinction, your qualities, your abilities,
which are widely known, are a guarantee to us that you
will conduct our proceedings
with the authority
appropriate for such an important
and responsible
body as ours. Also before going into the substance
of the matter, I should not like to omit to say to your
predecessor, Mr. Salim of the United Republic of
Tanzania, how indebted and grateful we are to him for
having conducted the proceedings of the Council over
the last month with so much tact, intelligence, political
sagacity, skill and impartiality.
Mr. Salim, for whom
we all have great respect and esteem, has once again
demonstrated
the diplomatic
and statesmanlike
qualities that distinguish him. I should like to say how
grateful we are to him for the way in which he
presided over the Council in January.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. Camara (Guinea), Mr. Fernandes (GuineaBissau), Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Rabetafka (Madagascar) and Mr. Hussein (Somalia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT:
In a telegram dated 28 January
1976 [S/11953], the head of State of the Comoros
requested that the Security Council be convened
urgently, and that request was supported by the
representative
of Guinea-Bissau
in a letter dated
3 February addressed to the President of the Council
on behalf of the Group of African States [S/11959].
I should like to draw attention also to the text of a
letter, of today’s date, from the representative
of
Uganda [S/l 19601.
7. The first speaker is the representative
Comoros. I invite him to make his statement.

11. The matter which is before us is nothing which
a serious, profound and objective discussion cannot
clarify, and we are not against a debate taking place
in the Council on the complaint lodged by the Comoros.
Our institution
has the right to examine difficulties
-well-founded
or not-which
arise between its
Members.

of the

8. Mr. SULTAN
(Comoros) (interpretation
from
French): I should like to thank you most sincerely,
Mr. President, for the honour you have done me in
enabling me to participate
in the ,debate in this
illustrious Council. I should also like to thank all the
representatives
of members of the Council for the
diligence with which they agreed to meet at the request
of my Government.
The Government of the Comoros
has chosen me, and Mr. Said Omar, Ambassador
Plenipotentiary
and head of Mission, to represent it
in this debate with regard to the complaint submitted
by the head of the Comorian State to the Security
Council concerning the territorial
integrity of our
country, which is threatened by France.

12. The true nature of the problem, however, should
not be presented in inaccurate terms. Because next
Sunday it is organizing on part of its territory a
referendum which is perfectly democratic and open to
all investigations,
France has been accused of aggression. Obviously, this is unjustifi$ble. Permit me to give
a brief summary of the background of the problem.
13. First of all, what happened in the Comoro
Archipelago itself? The French Government aflirmed
on 15 June 1973 that the archipelago was destined
for independence
Then, on 22 December 1974 it
organized a consultation of the Comorian population.
The results showed a very storng majority of voters
in favour of independence, but two thirds of the votes
of the island of Mayotte were negative. In order to-take
account of this difference the French Parliament,
on
30 June 1975, adopted a law providing for the drafting
of a ‘constitution
which would preserve the political
and administrative
identity of the islands. In order
to come into effect this text had to be approved by
a majority
of voters in each of the four islands.
Following the consultation,
the French Parliament
alone was able to decide to transfer sovereignty.

9. The head of the Comorian Mission, travelling from
Moroni and now in London, has not yet been able to
reach New York, but I am expecting him at any
moment. In his absence, I shall therefore confine
myself to reminding the-members of the Council of the
position of the Comorian Government.
That position
wasclearly expressed in the telegram dated 28 January
1976 from the head of the .Comorian State to the
President of the Security Council. The telegram reads
as follows:
[The

speaker

read

out

the

text

of

14. ~. Breaking with the procedure which had thus been
prepared, the Chamber of Deputies of the Comoros
decided on 6 July 1975 to proclaim independence.
In spite of this unilateral action, the French Govemment immediately
took note of the fact. On 31 December’ 1975 the French Government
adopted a law
recognizing the independence of the islands of Grande-

document

S/11953.]

We reserve our right to speak again, as soon as the
head of the Comorian Mission arrives, in order to give
you all the additional
information
necessary in the
light of the gravity and urgency of the situation.
2

19. It’s true that we also recognized the fact that the
Comoros wag destined for independence,
the independence of the entire archipelago,
which forms a
natural geographical whole. We had hoped that the
Comorians would end by agreeing among themselves.
France certainly has no interest in keeping Mayotte
within its constitutional
framework.
We have done
nothing to influence the choice of any part of the
Comoro Archipelago
and have no wish to do so.
We have not manauvred in ordef to prevent any one
of the islands of the archipelago from remaining united
with the others-quite
the contrary. Once again, we are
putting before the inhabitants of Mayotte this very
simple question: Do you want to be part of the Republic of the Comoros or to remain part of the French
Republic?

Comore, Anjouan and MohCli but providing for the
people of Mayotte to make a choice between the
islands remaining
within the French Republic
or
being integrated with the new Cotiorian
State. This
consultation will be organized on 8 February next.
15. The Members of the United Nations will also
recall the circumstances in which the Republic of the
Comoros was admitted to the Organization.
France
did not oppose that admission out of loyalty to its
ideal of universality. In particular, we did not want to
go back on our promise to lead to independence the
Comorian people who wished it. However, we could
not agree to the definition given of the geographical
make-up of the Comorian State in the draft resolutions submitted which prejudged the will of the people
concerned. France did not wish to involve itself in
polemics on this subject at the time of the admission
to the Organization
of the Comorian State. But the
reservation we made at the time stressed-and
.olir
representatives said so--that France kept entirely to
its view as to the obligations which its very Constitution made incumbent upon it with regard to the integrity
of its territory. Those are the facts.

20. The question which will be asked on Sunday
results from the scrupulous application of the principle
of self-determination,
which, in France’s view, as
indeed in the eyes of the United Nations, remains the
fundamental criterion whereby the destiny of peoples
and their framework of existence may be determined.
21, Within the canons of contemporary political law
and morality this principle cannot be subordinated to
any other. Of course, the famous resolution 1514 (XV),
on which France, I note incidentally,
did not vote,
includes a second principle: the territorial integrity of
Territories destined for independence.
Here I do not
want to go into a long political and juridical discussion.
I shall simply say that respect for territorial integrity
inherited from the limits of the colonial Territory, is
a custom-or
an ideal, if you prefer-which
yields in
importance
however to the requirement
of selfdetermination.

16. Members of the Council will have noted at least
one salient feature, that is, the continuity with which
France, the administering
Power of the former Territory of the Comoros, enabled the people concerned
to express their will, whether in the course of local
elections which preceded the period in question or
in the more decisive consultations
subsequently
scheduled in order to permit the people of the Comoros
to decide on their future. It is precisely those procedures that have been challenged here and described
as aggression.
*

22. If territorial integrity according to the limits of the
former colonies were to take precedence over selfdeterminaiion,
we would very rapidly be back in the
time when the geography of the world was the result
of a perpetual conflict be!ween chance and force and
the fate of peoples was decided not by them but by
marriages and alliances between princes or chiefs
having recourse to war in order to have the territorial
principle take precedence over that of liberty.

17. Let’s be serious. A free vote has never been
included among the elements of a definition of aggression. At no time and in no way has the use of armed
force appeared, which is the characteristic of aggression. So there is at least impropriety of language here,
because everyone knows that if a problem exists in
Mayotte it is that of achieving by means of peaceful
consultations a clarification
of the difficulties which
emerged at the time of the voting that took place last
year. Is it committing aggression to ask the inhabitants
of’ an island who appear to have some difficulty in
coming to an agreement with their neighbours to choose
their future a second time?

23. To come back to more concrete considerations,
permit me, in my turn, to raise some questions for
those who so lightly accuse France of not recognizing
its duties. Is it not obvious that everywhere in the
world the possibility ‘of choosing one’s own destiny
is acknowledged as belonging to entities determined
by history and geography? Do we ndt all agree, are
we not all aware, that misunderstandings
can arise in
the case of an archipelago or, to take continental
examples, the cases of Bangladesh and Belize? Those
examples
confirm
that self-determination
is the
supreme principle, even if it is not the only one and
even if political wisdom dictates avoidance, where
possible, of what is known as the Balkanization
of
regions which have some interest in remaining
homogeneous.

18. The problem of Mayotte is not a new one. As
far back as the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assembly we stressed that it would still be necessary,
at the request of the Comorians themselves and before
they achieved independence to establish the necessary
conditions for independent national life. The organization of Comorian national life, we said at that time,
presupposed that various problems which arose from
the fact that the Comoros was not a homogeneous
Territory would be resolved.
3

24. Furthermore,
I should like to challenge and
rebut one of the arguments adduced in the telegram
of the Moroni authorities which we have just heard
read out, that is, the idea that French laws of 1912
defined the unity of the Comoro Archipelago. This is
not the place to give a lecture on administrative
history. I should simply like to make it clear that it
was for reasons of convenience that the four islands
of the archipelago
were grouped together in 1912
within the same administrative
unit. That measure
was never supposed to prejudge the individual
character of each of the islands nor to place Mayotte
-where
the French presence came first-on
the
same footing as the other three islands which came
under France’s control only at the end of the nineteenth
century. In addition, I should like to point out that
the’ law of 1912-again,
for reasons of convenienceplaced the four islands under the authority of the
French Governor of Madagascar,
but, as far as
1 know, Madagascar has never used that as an argument to claim sovereignty over the Comoros.

clarify their will as to their future. France has the
duty to provide them with the means of making a
democratic and impartial choice.
30. On 12 November last I stated that the consultations-which,
as we announced, a few weeks ago, will
take place on 8 February-could
take place in the
presence of international
observers. This was confirmed on 10 December by the competent French
Minister, Mr. Stim, in the course of debate in Parliament. Mr. Stim said:
“All observers, whether they be journalists
or
international
observers, will be able to go and to
verify that the Mahorais are enjoying freedom of
expression”.
31. I am authorized to repeat here that my Govemment is ready to invite as observers in the voting
which will take place on Mayotte on 8 February repre;
sentatives of members or non-members of the Security
Council who wish to attend these consultations. These
observers would be able to go to Mayotte as envoys
of their Government
and attend the electoral proceedings, respecting the competence of the organs
entrusted with ensuring the regularity of the consultation.

25. It is quite clear that the administrative
limits
established under such circumstances cannot be used
as a basis for defining the limit and relationships
within a future independent State. The definition of
French territory is juridically
and historically
prior
to that of the new State, and the principle of territorial
integrity cannot be invoked in just one direction. It is
precisely the reply, which has hitherto been different,
of Mayotte with regard to the questions raised within
the framework of self-determination
which constitutes
I repeat, the whole problem.

32. The PRESIDENT:
I now call upon the representative of Guinea-Bissau
to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
33. Mr. FERNANDES
(Guinea-Bissau):
Mr. President, if you will allow me, at the outset I should like
to congratulate my colleague from the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Salim, for the way in which
he guided our discussions during the last month, and
we believe that, being the man that he is, he did true
justice not only to the United Republic of Tanzania
but to Africa as a whole. I think that the debate which
took place in the Council last month was probably
one of the most difficult and, if I might say so, probably
one of the most crucial ones, and my colleague and
brother from the United Republic of Tanzania showed
himself to be more than equal to the task which he
had to deal.

26. This is the only fact we have to consider. We
should not try to prevent the second referendum
which will be taking place in four days’ time. On the
contrary, we should allow it to yield a reply for us.
27. In the light.of these various considerations,
the
reasons adduced by the Comorian Government
for
requesting a meeting of the Council do not appear to
my delegation to be convincing. They are not in keeping
with the existing situation. No armed confrontation
has pitted the inhabitants of the islands against each
other, and certainly not Comorians against France.
There is, therefore, no aggression. The situation boils
down to this: disagreement,
which does exist, with
regard to the geographical limits of the new State, and
at the most we could ask the interested parties to
attempt to resolve that problem.

34. Mr. President, I do not really know. how to be
diplomatic
about your presidency in the Council,
because Guinea-Bissau
and your country, during the
previous session of the General Assembly, probably
did not enjoy the best of relationships,
but I am
willing, Sir, to give you and your country the, let us
say, benefit of the doubt, and I will probably give you
a rain-check until the end of this month. And 1 do
believe that with your expertise in international
law
you -will be able to guide the Council in the proper
manner so that we can find a solution of the problem
of the Comoro islands confronting the Council.
~I

28. I should like to make it clear here that the French
Government
attaches great value to the historical
links and long-standing friendship between France and
the new Comorian State, and we are ready, if this is in
keeping with the wishes of the Comorian authorities,
to send them at a very early date a representative
charged with a mission of goodwill.
29. That having been said, the situation is for us
clear. The inhabitants of Mayotte have the right to

35. As we approach the end of an era it is only
normal that ,problems connected with the end of that
4

era will proliferate and become more acute. It is
probably wrong to use the word “proliferate”
since
the problems of decolonization
have been with the
Organization
since the signing of the Charter of the
United Nations.

1974, inter alia, reaffirmed
the unity and territorial
integrity of the Comoro Archipelago.
General Assembly resolution 3385 (XXX) of 12 November 1975,
by which the Comoros were admitted to membership in the United Nations, reaffirms the necessity
of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago, composed “of Anjouan, GrandeComore, Mayotte and MohCli”.

36. Within a short span of time. considerablv less
than a generation, I would say, .we have seen the
political fate of a continent with its millions of people
undergoing a radical change. The Comoro islands
are only a link in this long chain of decolonization.
The Comoro islands are, for France today, what the
Republic of Guinea-I
am talking of Guinea (Conakry)-was
to France in the late 195Os, and to some
extent, I should say, what some of the ex-Portuguese
colonies are to Portugal at this very,moment.

42. My Government is quite aware of the difftculties
and problems which arise when one is trying to build
a nation consisting of territories which are physically
separated from one another. It is perfectly natural
that there should be some differences,’ and there
are-local
idiosyncrasies
and regionalism
between
islands. And this is not the case of the Comoros
alone but is, I would say, the case of any group of
islands, probably, anywhere in the world living under
the same circumstances.

37. It took a considerable amount of investment of
human resources, as well as of wealth, for the
colonizers to dominate the African continent. It took
a lot of oppression,
and even sometimes outright
genocide, to maintain a European presence in Africa.
As we approach the end of an era, as we are now
working out new relationships with the old metropolis,
it is in the interest not only of Africa but also of the
colonizing Power that we part in peace, that there
should not be hatred in the heart of the colonized nor
frustration in the mind of the colonizer. We should part
in peace and look forward to an era of co-operation,
reconciliation
and friendship. For, as we have always
said in our country, the struggle was directed only
against a system and never, never against a people.

43. If you would allow me, Mr. President, I could
probably use an example close to home. In the early
196Os, if the Portuguese Government
had used a
referendum in the Cape Verde Islands the chances are
very good--I would say probably very ,great-that
Portugal would have been able to form at least two
countries in the islands, not to say probably 14, because
there are 14 islands.
44. My Government
maintains-and
we are quite
sure of it-that
in the situation in the Comoro islands
one should not accentuate the negative aspects of the
situation.
France has the moral duty to help the
Comorians
forge a nation. France has the moral
obligation to preserve this group of four islands as a
united republic and as a viable entity. France has to
show courage and leadership in carrying on the process
of decolonization.
France should not look back and
get immersed in nostalgia of the past, of an era which
did not bring much glory to’ the French Republic.
My Government is therefore disturbed by the circumstances under which there will be a .referendum in
Mayotte on 8 February. We believe that this referendum will be accentuating-and
I repeat, will be
accentuating-the
negative. That will probably be the
beginning of a long struggle between France and the
Government of the Comoros and, indeed, if I may say
so, the -beginning of a confrontation
between France
and the rest of Africa.

38. I think that what is happening today between
Guinea-Bissau and Portugal could be a case in point.
We do have a very good working relationship
with
Portugal, and we probably are looking to and, if I may
say so, trying to have a better one in the future if
possible.
39. We follow the affairs in the Comoros very closely
-and here, if I may be permitted, I am talking in the
name of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU),
as I am Chairman of the group of African States for
this month-and
we are very happy with regard to the
steps which France took at the very beginning in
connexion with this problem. However, with a feeling
of distress, we saw that France did not participate
in the voting when the problem came up for discussion
in the Council [see 1848th meeting].

45. OAU has always stood, and my Government
stands and always did stand, for the principle of selfdetermination.
We believe that people everywhere
have the right to choose their own destiny and political
affiliation. The case of Mayotte is not-and
I repeat,
is not-the
same thing. We see the case of .Mayotte
as one of political manipulation
of local parties by the
French Government in order to preserve some degree
of influence in that region in the foreseeable future.
A referendum in Mayotte, in the present circumstances, is but, I would say, an interference in the
internal affairs of the Republic of the Comoros.

40. My Government is convinced-and
I am again
talking in the name of Africa-that
the island of
Mayotte ‘should not become a thorn, should not
become a point of contention, between the Comorian
Government
and the Government
of France, nor
indeed between France and the rest of Africa.
41. The Comoro islands are a full member of OAU,
and this organization recognizes Mayotte as an integral
part of the Comoro Archipelago.
Indeed, General
Assembly resolution 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 December
5

I

46. In conclusion,
my Government
is not making
demands-I
have nothing to demand, and, if I may
say so, even Africa is not demanding-but
making an
appeal to the French Government
to desist from
carrying out the referendum. We are making an appeal
that the French should work hand in hand with the
majority of the Comorians in order to forge a united,
viable, prosperous and friendly country in that area of
the world.

in all these aforementioned
developments,
was
consistently considered one united Territory. French
law sanctions this national unity and territorial integrity. The law of 22 December 1961, outlining the
political organization of the archipelago, was amended
on 3 January 1968. According to this law, the Territory possesses a juridical identity-persnnnalitP
jurid&e-and
exercises internal self-government.
For
purposes of administration,
each island constitutes an
administrative
district under the direction of a prefect.
Each district is subdivided into cantons. The Territory
has a Governing Council and a Chamber of Deputies.
The Joint Declaration on the Accession to Independence of the Comoro Archipelago,’
signed on 15 June
1973 in Paris, marks an important progressive step
for the Territory. France affirmed in this Joint Declaration the readiness of the archipelago for independence,
which was to be achieved no later than five years
following the date of the signature of the Declaration.

47. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to extend to you my
congratulations,
as well as our wishes for your
success in performing the duties of the high office
of President of the Council for this month. We hope
that your contribution
will prove effective and
beneficial to the Council in the fulfilment of its important responsibilities.
48. May I also express gratitude and appreciation
for the distinguished service which our colleague and
brother from the United
Republic
of Tanzania,
Mr. Salim, performed in his role as President of the
Council in the month of January, guiding our deliberations during a whole series of Security Council
meetings on the questions of the Middle East and
Namibia.

53. During the transition period the people of the
Territory pressed for an early declaration of independence, to be achieved no later than 1976, and
warned against any attempts to destroy partially or
totally the national unity. They were particularly
apprehensive of the threat of any consultations on this
question that would fail to treat it in its totality.
54. A separatist movement in Mayotte, encouraged,
if not created, by certain lobby groups in the archipelago and in Paris, attempted to contest the legitimacy
of independence by maintaining
that Mayotte wished
to remain under French administration.
Yet in the
elections for the new Chamber, held in December
1972, the separatists obtained only about 9,000 votes
out of a total of approximately
105,000 and only
5 seats out of 39. Leaders and intellectuals
from
Mayotte expressed their anti-separatist position.

49. When the independence
of the Comoros was
declared on 6 July 1975, the entire world recognized the
territorial unity of this new African State. The General
Assembly endorsed this recognition on 12 November
1975 in its resolution
3385 (XXX), admitting
the
Comoros, consisting of the four islands of Anjouan,
Mayotte, Moheli and Grande-Comore,
to membership
in the Organization.
50. In spite of the fact that the French Government
initially recognized the unity of the archipelago,
it
does not recognize the sovereignty of the new State
over the island of Mayotte and has decided to organize
a referendum there next Sunday, 8 February 1976.
Mayotte forms an integral part of the Comorian
territory.
Ever since 1912 the French laws have
recognized the de filcfo and de jure unity of the
archipelago.

55. In the face of the defeat of the separatist movement and the reaction of the Comorian people condemning these manipulated
attempts to divide the
archipelago, the French Government issued a declaration reaffirming the unity of the Territory. On 26 August
1974 a communique
from France Presse quoted
Mr. Olivier Stim, the Minister in the French Govemment, who announced that:

5 1. France initiated its occupation of the archipelago
in 1841, when it took possession of Mayotte, and
extended this occupation to all the islands by the
end of the nineteenth century. In 1886 the sultans of the
other three islands were placed under French protection. In 1914 the archipelago was placed under the
jurisdiction
of the Governor-General
of Madagascar
and in 1925 was granted its own local administration.
The Territory was made an autonomous administrative
entity in 1947 and became an overseas territory of
France.

“The French Government
has opted for an
archipelago-wide
consultation
for three reasons:
first, for the legal reason that under the rules of
international
law a Territory retains the frontiers
that it had as a colony; secondly, a multiplicity
of
different statuses for the various islands of the
archipelago is inconceivable;
thirdly, it is not for
France to set the Co,morians against each other; on
the contrary, its role is to help to bring them closer
together.”
That was France’s official position

The Comoros voted to retain overseas territory
status in a referendum held in 1958. In 1960 they were
granted internal autonomy. The Comoros Archipelago,

at that time.

52.

56. The President of the French Republic articulated
this idea of the unity of the archipelago even more
6

legionnaires,
boatloads of marines and, it is said,
the famous’TREPEL
commando unit, which is one
of the three crack commando units in France.

explicitly on 24 October 1974 in a press conference,
when he made the following statement: “The Comoros
are an archipelago which constitutes a single entity”.
is homogeneous,
with
Or, again: “The population
practically no people of French origin, or only a few”.
Also, he said:

“It is one-sided because it knows that we are
economically
weak, and it is making co-operation
conditional
upon the demolition
of our nation and
our beloved homeland.

“Would it be reasonable to imagine one part of
the archipelago becoming independent while another
part, regardless of the feelings of its inhabitants,
retained a different status? I think that we should
face the realities of the world today. The Comoros
are indivisible;
they have always been so; it is
normal that they should have a common destiny.”

“It is one-sided because the aid which it can give
us and which we have become accustomed to
receiving is being made more contingent upon the
. dismemberment
of our country,
when France
knows full well that the integrity of our ancestral
homeland is not, cannot be and must not be negotiable.”

The President of the Republic of France continued:
“We do not have the right... to propose that the
unity which has always characterized
the Comoro
Archipelago be terminated.”

61. We cannot reduce this problem to a simple
difference between the French legislative and executive. We cannot accept the explanation of the situation by simple constitutional
technicalities.
While
we do not like to question the good faith of France,
it is relevant to suppose that France wanted to
accommodate
the Comoros’ independence with some
form of French presence and influence. The Comorians
declared their independence on 6 July 1975 when they
became aware of France’s intentions to make their
independence conditional upon meeting certain deadlines and demands, and thus encouraging partition of
their country.

57. Although 95 per cent of the Comorian population
voted for independence in the referendum of 22 December 1974, the French Parliament,
in direct contradiction of the offtcial French position, legislated
on 27 June 1975 to permit individual islands to vote
separately on a constitution,
to be drawn up by the
Territory’s Chamber of Deputies.
58. While the independence of the Comoro islands
was proclaimed on 6 July 1975, France again contradicted its declared position by recognizing the independence of only three islands: Grande-Comore,
Anjouan and Moheli. The French Parliament adopted
a law on 31 December 1975 providing for a new
partial consultation in Mayotte.

62. Other reasons also could have motivated the
regrettable French actions. An article in The Christion
Science
Monitor
of 9 December 1975 cites additional
reasons:
“The Comoros also have strategic importance
that belies their small size and modest population
of 300,000, mostly Moslems. Visible from the docks
of Moroni, the capital, are oil super-tankers passing
from the Persian Gulf, around the Cape of Good
Hope, and into the Atlantic. Too large for the newly
reopened Suez Canal; these Goliaths skirt the
African coast, passing through the Mozambique
channel between Madagascar Island (the leftist-led
Malagasy Republic) and Marxist-controlled
Mozambique on the African mainland. This is the shortest
sea route around Africa to South America, the
United States and Europe. The Comoros at the
northern entrance to the channel forms a potential
military asset for either the East or West... Western
nations want to prevent the Soviet Union from
access to the Comoros. One French diplomatic
source said United States Secretary-of State Henry
A. Kissinger had asked France to keep Mayotte
within the Western fold.”

59. It is legitimate
for us to question why, the
Comorians having unilaterally declared their independence, France wished to punish the Comorian people
by denying recognition of their territorial and national
unity. Naturally, in the face of the ambiguous attitude
of the French authorities,
the Comorians
became
concerned that further delays and obstacles would be
imposed by the French Parliament, compromising their
independence and territorial integrity.
60. Mr. Soilihi, in his address broadcast on 14 November 1975, explained the situation as follows:
“As time has gone by and in light of specific
actions, France has adopted a one-sided attitude. It
is one-sided because, disregarding our sovereignty,
it is talking of arranging for consultations concerning
a part of our national territory,
after taking the
precaution
of promoting
the expulsion of 2,000
nationalists from the island of Mayotte, thereby
demonstrating its concern to ensure that the combat
ceases for want of combatants. But France is in a
better position than anyone else to know that our
country is one and indivisible.

We hope that the French position is not a part of a
new strategic and military co-ordination of the policies
and interests of certain Powers in the area.

“We say that France is one-sided because it has
set up a military
arsenal with several hundred

63. I should also like to recall that the French decision flouts the principles enshrined in the Charter of
7

the United Nations and reaffirmed by resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960, which specifically stipulates that any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and the territorial
integrity ofaTerritory
is incompatible with the Charter.
It also flagrantly violates General Assembly resolutions concerning
the Comoros.
Resolution
3161
(XXVIII)of
14 December 1973, resolution 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 December 1974, and, most recently, resolution 3385 (XXX), admitting the Comoros to membership in the United Narions, reaffirmed the necessity
of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of this
archipelago,
composed of the islands of Anjouan,
Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and MohCli.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ecua Miko
(Equatorial Guinea) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

64. Clearly, it. has never been the intention of the
Comorians to create conflict with France. As the
President of the Republic of the Comoros previously
stated, their actions have always been directed by
wisdom and respect for the genuine interests of their
country. The Comoros Government
has spared no
efforts to normalize its relations with France on the
basis of non-interference in internal affairs, respect of
national sovereignty and territorial integrity.

71. The issue before the Security Council is clearly
that a powerful State, itself a member of the Council
and a guardian of international
law, is attempting to
threaten and to intimidate
a small and newly independent nation. My Government is familiar with the
methods and attitudes that colonial Powers can adopt
when a legitimate process leading to independence
runs counter to their material interests. The current
threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Comoros by the French Government
is an example
of this kind of outmoded colonialism.

69. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Somalia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
70. Mr. HUSSEIN
(Somalia): Mr. President, I am
grateful to you and to the other members of the
Security Council for giving me this opportunity
to
speak on the question of the Comoro islands, a matter
of grave concern to Africa, and particularly to the east
African States.

65. We appeal to France’to settle this conflict in an
atmosphere of friendship and good relations with the
Comorian people, the entire African continent, the
third world and the progressive and democratic forces
in the world as a whole. France must effect the
liquidation
of its remaining colonial empire in an
orderly and graceful way. We hope that France, itself
a land of revolution and today serving as an important
link between the developed countries and the third
world in the new international
context, will avoid a
useless, destructive
and costly confrontation
with
the nations of the third world.

72. We are all familiar with the facts of the case
before the Council. We know also that the Comoro
Archipelago was recognized and accepted, both by
the former administering
Power-that
is, Franceand by its inhabitants as a single political, geographical and cultural unit. It had been recognized as such
under the laws of France since 1912. I may add that
my delegation rejects the allegations made in the
statement of the representative
of France to the
effect that the Comoro islands had never been a
homogeneous
people.
We know, too; that the
population as a whole was consulted by referendum on
22 December 1974, and declared itself overwhelmingly
in favour of independence.
In response to a clear,
national consensus, the representative of the people
solemnly proclaimed the independence of the Comoros
on 6 July 1975.

66. We reiterate our solidarity with the African
Comorian people, and I again stress that the Libyan
Arab Republic will spare no efforts to ensure to our
Comorian brothers all the needed assistance in their
struggle to achieve total liberation, territorial integrity
and national unity.
67. The PRESIDENT:
I should like now to inform
the members of the Security Council that I have just
received a letter from the representative of Equatorial
Guinea containing a request that he be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. Accordingly, if there is no objection, I propose
that the Council agree, in accordance with rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, to invite the representative of Equatorial
Guinea to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

73. In the international
field, the accession to independence of the Comoro islands was recognized by
OAU which welcomed the new State as a member
at the twenty-fifth ordinary session of the Council of
Ministers of OAU, held at Kampala in July 1975.2
The OAU Council of Ministers had previously con-’
demned the manoeuvres of the French Government
against the integrity of the Comoros, urged the French
Government
to withdraw its troops from Mayotte
and had called the attention of the international
community to the threat being posed by the French
Government to the independence and sovereignty of
that new State.

68. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the limited number
of places available at the Council table, I invite the
representative of Equatorial Guinea to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever he wishes
to address the Council.

74, Further international
recognition was accorded
to the Comoros by the Conference of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at
8

Lima one month later, which, in the Lima Programme
for Mutual
Assistance and Solidarity,
reaffirmed
support for the new State and condemned any attempts
against its independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity.3

78. The question of the illegal referendum planned
for Mayotte is only one aspect of a situation which is
intolerable
from every point of view and which is
without parallel. The Republic of the Comoros is a
sovereign State and a Member of the United Nations.
Yet it is being forced by the French Government,
against its will, to have on its soil a French administrative and military presence. France not only refuses to
withdraw, as it has been asked to do by the Govemment of the Comoros and by OAU, but continues to
interfere in the internal affairs of the Comoro islands
and to promote the division of Comorian territory.

75. Of the highest significance,
of course, is the
fact that, in its resolution 376 (1975), of 17 October
1975 the Security Council recommended to the General
Assembly that the Comoros be admitted to membership in the United Nations. We know that the General
Assembly, in accepting the Council’s recommendation, reaffirmed in its resolution
3385 (XXX) the
necessity of respecting
the unity and territorial
integrity
of the Comoro Archipelago,
and noted
specifically ,that the new State was composed of all
the islands formerly administered
by France and
constituting the Comoro Archipelago.

79. Frankly speaking, my delegation ,is not unduly
surprised by the actions being taken by France. We
have seen before attempts to carry out a policy of
“divide and rule”; notably in so-called French Somaliland. In that Territory, as in the Comoros, a minority
was encouraged to support French interests and to
oppose :the aspirations of the majority for true independence. In Mayotte,
and in Djibouti,
peaceful
and legitimate demonstrations
in support of national
independence were met by the threatening presence
of French military forces.

76.’ ‘In view of these facts, the high-handed action
taken or proposed by the ‘French Government
in
recognizing the independence of only a part of the
Comoros and in deciding to hold a further consultation
concerning the future of the rest of the Territory can
only be described as’aggression against a sovereign
State and a flouting of international law. The intention
of the French Government
to hold a referendum on
Mayotte on 8 February 1976 runs counter to decisions
and resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly. This plan could only be countenanced by the Council if it were to disregard the
principles and purposes of the Charter and revoke its
own decision on the independence,
sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of the Comoros.

80. It is most unfortunate that in the final stages of
decolonization
Franee has departed from the enlightened policy which it followed in West Africa. In the
case of its few remaining colonies in East Africa,
it has consistently
put its own supposedly-and
I
repeat the word “supposedly’‘-strategic
and other
material interests before the wishes of the majority of
the people for national sovereignty.
81. The decision of the Security Council in favour of
admitting the Comoros to membership in the United
Nations as an undivided, unitary State meant that the
United Nations accepted the results of the referendum
of 22 December 1974, and the subsequent declaration
of independence
of 6 July 1975. My Government
considers that in view of the clear commitment
of the
world community to the independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of the Comoros, the Security
Council must, in our view, demand that France withdraw immediately
from the Territory and refrain from
any action detrimental
to its territorial and national
sovereignty. We believe that nothing less than this
demand will be a suitable response to the appeal of
the Comorian Government for support in its national
struggle. We believe also that nothing less than this
demand will restore the.faith of States, and particularly
the small ones, in the system of international
law
which the United Nations was created to uphold. It
should be remembered that the Security Council, and
specially the members with the right of veto, are
vested -with specific responsibilities
for the maintenance and preservation of peace and security in the
world. The Comoros situation is clearly a case in point
for the execution of these responsibilities.
It is my
delegation’s earnest hope that the deliberations of the
Council will not be shorter than the actions demanded
by the gravity of the situation.

77. We know that the colonial Powers, when granting
independence to colonial Territories and peoples, have
the moral obligation
to extend the necessary assistance without conditions
which might compromise
their sovereignty and national dignity until they can
stand by themselves and establish vital relations with
the rest of the world. We also know that France, far
from fulfilling this noble obligation, already undertook
unwarranted and drastic measures against the people
of the Comoros, whose only crime was to ‘opt for
national
independence
and sovereignty.
Nations,
like individual
human beings, have the right to life.
And yet the French Government,
by withdrawing all
technical assistance, by recalling all its civil servants
-an
act which disrupted
all administrative
and
communication
facilities in the Comoros-and
by the
cessation of all its economic aid to the Territory, has
plunged this young nation into the most acute crisis
that it faces today. We say here that France must be
held responsible for the insurmountable
difficulties
now facing the new Republic of the Comoros, difficulties that are the consequences of France’s condemnable arrogance and abuse of power at the expense
of a small, defenceless and newly-born nation whose
economic and social life, like that of any other colonial
Territory,
was always exclusively
linked to the
metropolitan
country-in
this case France..
9

82. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

87. By providing this clarification
the General Assembly wished to demonstrate its fidelity to resolution 1514 (XV), on which it has based the whole of
its doctrine on decolonization,
and in which it stipulates
that “any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity
of a country is incompatible
with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.”

83. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
French): In view of the persistent intention of the
French Government to organize a referendum in the
island of Mayotte, the head of State of the Comoros
requested an urgent meeting of the Security Council
for the purpose of ensuring respect for the sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of his country. We congratulate the Council for having heeded this appeal so
quickly and thus having given proof of its concern
about one of the newest members of the international
community.

88. The attempt of the French Government to isolate
the island of Mayotte from the rest of the archipelago
is thus in flagrant contradiction
with those principles
and with the decision of the General Assembly to
confer the status of full membership in the Organization on the Comoro Archipelago, comprising the four
islands just mentioned. But we need not refer to only
resolutions of the General Assembly to realize that
Mayotte can no longer be considered as a French
territory. It suffices here to recall what was said by
the head of the French State, President Giscard
d’Estaing, in his press conference of 24 October 1974:

84. For the head of State of the Comoros, the French
plan to hold a referendum in Mayotte is an aggression against the sovereignty of the Comoros and an
encroachment upon its territorial integrity, since the
island of Mayotte is an’integral part of the archipelago,
which acceded to independence in its entirety. But
the French Government maintains that it is paradoxical
to assert that the referendum of 8 February, the
purpose of which will be once again to consult the
population of the French territory on its fate, constitutes an aggression. It bases its position on the axiom
that no one can contest France’s right to proceed to
a clear consultation of the will of the people in a part
of its territory.

“The population of the Comoros is a homogeneous
population,
where there is no colony of French
origin, or at least only a very limited colony. Would
it be reasonable to imagine one part of the archipelago becoming independent while another part,
regardless of the feelings of its inhabitants, retained
a different status? . . . The Comoros are indivisible;
they have always been so; it is normal that they
should have a common destiny, even if some of their
inhabitants wish for another solution. We do not
have the right”- continued the President of the
French Republic-“
at the time of the granting of
independence to a Territory,
to propose that the
unity which has always characterized the Comoro
Archipelago be terminated.”

85. The substance of the problem hence is to determine if the island of Mayotte is a French territory
over which the French Government would, of course,
have a perfect right to exercise its sovereignty, or if
it is a territory belonging to the State of the Comoros,
in which case, the carrying out of French intention
would manifestly constitute an aggression against the
Comoros and an encroachment
upon its territorial
integrity.

It is impossible to defend with greater conviction or
eloquence the cause of the integrity of the State- of the
Comoros and the extension of its indivisible
and
unquestionable sovereignty over the four islands which
make up this archipelago.

86. I should say right away that, to us, the reply
to this question can give rise to no doubt, and it is
hard for us to conceal our surprise, even our disappointment, at the misrepresentations
of the French Govemment which, having gone so far and so courageously
along the road of decolonization
without regrets, is
today engaging in a last-minute battle, without grandeur or generosity. For it is quite clear to us that the
island of Mayotte, one of the four islands of the
Comoro Archipelago,
is no longer French territory
since the archipelago became independent,
that is,
since 6 July 1975. That at any rate was the conviction
of the General Assembly when, in its resolution 3385
(XXX), it admitted the State of the Comoros as a
Member of the United Nations. It will be recalled
that the General Assembly adopted the resolution
by consensus, reaffirming the necessity of respecting
the unity and the territorial integrity of the Comoro
Archipelago,
composed of the islands of Anjouan,
Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and Moheli, and that only
France refused to associate itself with the consensus.

89. Moreover, the French Gqvemment,
after having
recognized, as early as 15 June 1973, the right of the
Comoros to independence,
on 22 December
1974
organized a referendum which covered the whole of
the archipelago, by which it consulted the population
of the Comoros as a whole on its choice of its political
future. The French Minister of Overseas Departments
and Territories explained:
“Why a global referendum and not a separate
plebiscite for each island? It is because the intention
of France is not to divide countries which attain
independence.
This is the case of the Comoros,
whose inhabitants
all practise the same religion,
have the same language, the same economic and.
political interests. Far from being one of dismembering the territorial integrity, our role is to help
the efforts of the Comorian
people themselves
towards a rapprochement.”
10

of the Comoros decided to proclaim independence
on 6 July 1975 before the French Parliament
could
implement its law of 30 June 1975 providing-according
to what he said-” for the drafting of a constitution
which would preserve the political and administrative
identity of the islands... the French Parliament alone
was able to decide ,to transfer sovereignty”
[XC

This referendum-organized,
I repeat, by the French
voter
participation
of
Government-elicited
93 per cent, and 95 per cent of those voting were
in favour of independence
for the Comoro Archipelago.
90. Now, in ail logic and justice, that is what should
have simply closed the’ problem, putting an end to the
chapter of the French colonial domination and opening
for the Comoros a new era of independence, during
which the young State could, for good reason, count
on the friendship, the assistance and the co-operation
of France to help it to take its first steps on the
international
scene.

pnrtrgraph

13 above].

97. This might give us leave to imagine that the
French Government wanted in some way to “punish”
the representatives of the Comoros for having themselves assumed sovereignty over their own country.
But how could their haste be held against them, when
the law of 30 June .1975, drafted by the French Pariiament, aimed at nothing less than calling in question
the results of the referendum on self-determination
and going back on the principles so many times
previously reaffirmed by the French authorities?

91. If we recapitulate at this stage of our statement,
we can see that the Comoro Archipelago, as a unitary
whole, became a French protectorate in 1886. Still
as a whole, it acquired its administrative
autonomy
in 1947, and in 1958 achieved the status of an over:
seas territory.

98. We cannot believe-even
now-that
France
should now so cheapen what in the past made its
greatness and what today has gained it so. much
friendship ail over the world and, in particular, in the
third world, by concealing behind the highly respected
principle of self-determination
of peoples an attempt to
carve up a small country over which it had extended
colonial domination
and to which it should today
restore unity, dignity and grandeur.

92. Up until the time of the organization
of the
referendum for self-determination,
that is to say, until
December 1974, the French Government continued to
consider the Comoro Archipelago
as forming an
indivisible
unit and it disclaimed
in advance any
desire to infringe on that unity.
93. In that same spirit, the French Government did
not proceed to a separate consultation for each one of
the islands, but to a referendum covering the whole of
the archipelago.
The referendum therefore was to
decide on the political future of the archipelago in its
entirety. In the referendum an overwhelming majority
of 95 per cent of the voters opted for independence,
and that result was duly recognized and registered by
the French Government.

99. Mr. President, I do not wish to conclude this
brief statement without emphasizing what a privilege
it is for me to address the Council now that you have
assumed the presidency. I also feel that it is a happy
coincidence that the problem of the Comoros is being
debated under your guidance. I say this, of course,
as. representative
of Algeria, but I also say it on
behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned
States, of which,
as you know* my coufitry is now chairman.

94. The French Government shduid therefore recognize today-as
we do--that there exists an independent Comorian State whose territory covers the whole
of the Comoro Archipelago. Certainly, it is not for us
to give lessons on Cartesianism
to the country of
Descartes, but it seems to us that such should be the
normal and reasonable outcome of the actions undertaken by France in the task of decoionizing
the
Comoros.

100. Those countries are united in their determina-.
tion to preserve their national character and their
independence and in their struggle to improve the Ieve!
of their social, economic and cultural development,
thus participating
in the establishment of a more just
and hence more stable world founded on a better
understanding
amongst peoples. Those countries do
not nourish the mad ambition to rival the major Powers
and their ‘efforts are not aimed at disrupting
the
present system in order io replace it with an order of
which they would be the masters. Our vision of
tomorrow’s world is not built on simple relationships
of domination and subordination.
And bur action, far
from being disigned to disrupt the organization
of
international
society, has as its single objective to
safeguard rights which have been acquired by our
peoples and which are denied to them in a world
order which is basically unfair. This action is not .the
revolt of Spartacus. It is the determined and conscious
decision of responsible peoples which, aware of the
‘validity of their claims and the iimitatioris of ihe means
they have to defend them, do not wish to abandon

95. But today the French Government,
pointing out
that two thirds of the votes of the island of Mayotte
were not for independence, considers that it cannot
recognize that island as belonging to the independent
Comorian
State before holding a’ new referendum
among its population. We state quite frankly that we
cannot understand this attitude, which calls in question
in a manner that is ail too flagrant the principles
which the French Government
itself had defined as
being those of its policy of decoionization
of the
Comoros.
96. The representative
of France explained to us
just now in his statement that the Chamber of Deputies
11

a struggle for justice where they benefit from the
advantages of law and morality to allow themselves
to become involved in a power struggle for which
they have neither the taste, nor the will, nor the
desire, and which they lack the capacity to sustain
and win.

role is quite modest in the huge work which is carried
on around us and of which we sometimes think we
occupy the centre. Beyond the divergences, contradictions and incompatibilities
of the positions that we
are charged with setting forth and supporting here,
we are aware that the universe in which we have
developed our personal relations, our friendships and
the esteem we have for each other.makes it possible
in fact to cushion the blows, to soften opposition
and to promote better understanding in a world which
is so rich in its diversity and so vulnerable in its
antagonisms.

101. Such an attitude should’not be confused with
an attitude of hostility vis-a-vis the major Powers.
It should not be deduced that we are hostile to France
because today we have criticized the policy of the
French Government.
On the contrary, our friendship
for France places us in a better position to state our
disagreement when we see in its behaviour a deviation
from its principles or an encroachment upon the rights
of another people.

106. ,Mr. President, you will excuse me for having
taken advantage of this occasion and also of the
opportunity to address myself to you directly to attempt
to respond partially-and very imperfectly, I am certain,
to some of your concerns. I should..not like you to
leave us without’our having an opportunity to rectify
what has seemed to us .an inaccurate evaluation of
our feelings, our aspirations and our actions. I thank
you for having given me this opportunity
and for
having allowed me in this way to express my best
wishes for success in the work to which you will
now devote yourself and which you will assume; I am
convinced, with the vigour, the warmth and the force
of conviction which we all know you possess.

102. Mr. President,
as the representative
of the
United States you have several times expressed your
impression that our countries have been systematically
hostile to yours. I should like absolutely to deny that
allegation, which is totally unfounded and could hardly
be justified. As proof of our good intentions towards
the United States, I do not suppose you would expect
us to approve of all your attitudes, applaud all your
actions and obey all your commands. We have very
frankly expressed our disagreement with the policy
of your Government each time it seemed to us that that
policy ran counter to the well-understood
principles
of the freedom of peoples and respect for their most
legitimate rights.

107. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Equatorial Guinea. I invite’him
to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

103. Our countries are proud to be amongst the first
which protested most strongly against United States
involvement
in Viet-Nam,
against United States
aggression in Cambodia, against its support of South
Africa and .against its assistance given to Portugal
to maintain its colonial presence in Africa. Mr. President, that is not anti-Americanism;
that is the healthy
reaction of countries which would like the great power
of the United States, the creative genius of its people
and the audacious imagination of its elite to be better
employed in the fight for the liberation and development of all peoples rather than in the’ sterile search
for the affirmation and consolidation
of a supremacy
which we Iwould not even dream of challenging.

108.

Mr. ECUA

(Equatorial Guinea) (ih-+
Mr. President, I should like
to express the satisfaction of my delegation at seeing
you preside over the Security Council in the course of
this month, February 1976, such an important body
within the United Nations’ sytem, responsible for
international peace and security; we have every reason
for satisfaction in noting that the representative
of
a Government like that of the United States of America,
which is involved in all peace-keeping
efforts and
operations as well as operations designed to maintain
security’ and democracy in their truest sense, is
beginning his work as the Security Council President
on an item which precisely constitutes a threat to
peace; democracy and which may confuse the international public with regard to the true meaning of the
principle of self-determination.

pretntionjhn

104. Mr., President, we know that you will very soon
leave your functions as United States representative
to the United Nations. Your stay with us will have
been too short for you to get to know us better and
to discover, beyond summary judgements and sterile
cliches, the true nature of the third world, which
is still in search of itself and so poorly defined; what
is really’at stake in the political battle which we are
waging here, perhaps with an agitation that is not
always very productive but with the obstinacy of those
who have faith in the rightness of their cause.

MIKO

Spanish):

109.’ In congratulating you, Sir, we would at the same
time wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, representative of the United
Republic
of Tanzania,
who, with his recognized
experience,
ski11 and tact, which are beyond the
powers of my delegation to describe, presided over
the work of the Securify Council in the busy month of
January 1976. We are sure he will enjoy even more
success in the Special Committee
on .the Situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Coun-

105., All of us‘ here are spokesmen of Governments
whose directives we apply, whose policies we defend
and to which we must submit our suggestions. Our
12

tries and Peoples, where his combative spirit against
the forces of evil is becoming ever more apparent in
the total eradication of colonialism in all its forms.

“The unilateral declaration of independence of
6 July 1975 was not an act of defiance against
France but rather the expression of our will and our
determination
in the face of manmuvres of certain
circles within the French Republic which, despite
the irresistible tide of history, remained desperately
attached to the pleasures of colonization”.4

110. Similarly we should like to thank most sincerely
all the members of the Security Council for having
enabled us to participate
in the discussion of the
situation in the Republic of the Comoros.

115. The French presence and the referendum
scheduIed for the island of Mayotte not only constitutes a violation of the sovereign territory and an
interference
in the affairs of another State, but
represents a total disregard of the elementary principles of international law, a rejection of the provisions
of General Assembly resolutions 3161 (XXVIII),
3291
(XXIX) and 3385 (XXX) and-are not in keeping with
democratic procedures when it is noted that under the
auspices of the French Government 95 per cent of all
Comorians voted in favour of independence in the
referendum held on 22 December 1974.

111. While the drums of colonialism are being heard
ever further from the African continent and in other
parts of the world, the bells of pro-colonialism
and
neo-colonialism
are being heard ever nearer. The
inte’mational community;
apparently made up of those
who preach peace, freedom and democracy, should
not permit the odious banner of colonialism,
which it
has been fighting for centuries,
to be unfurled,
whatever face it may present. The Republic
of
Equatorial
Guinea, for its part, will as always be
behind those who want to eradicate this ignoble system
of colonialism in order to restore and preserve unity,
peace and justice, not only for the people of Equatorial
Guinea but also for all those who are fighting for the
same objectives.

116. In a statement on 12 November 1975 made in
the General Assembly just a few minutes before the
admission of the Comoros to the United Nations, the
representative of the French Government stated, and
repeated this afternoon:

112. At this time we are, as always, behind the valiant
people of the Comoros, ‘which is fighting with every
means at its disposal to restore its national unity
and to have it respected since part of its territory,
the island of Mayotte, continues today to be occupied
by the forces of a colonial Power, France. And, not
content with this illegal occupation, France is going
even further. It has scheduled a referendum for 8 February 1976 with regard to the people of a country
which attained full sovereignty and independence on
6 July 1975.

“The Assembly will recall that France, having on
15 June 1973 affirmed the aspirations of the Comoros
to independence, on 22 December 1974 organized a
plebiscite
among the population
of that archipelago.“I stress this: “the population

of that archipelago”-

“The results indicated an overwhelming majority
of voters in favour of independence. However, two
thirds of the inhabitants of the island of Mayotte
- ‘“the inhabitants
of the island of Mayotte”,,
I stress-decided
otherwise”.4

113. It would be confusing terms and confusing the
international
public if it were to be believed that this
act constitutes the exercise of democracy and the
application
of the principle
of self-determination,
because, no matter how separatist or ‘annexationist
France might be, it would never welcome practices of
this kind in its territory. The referendum scheduled
by the French Government
for Mayotte’ is as illegal
as is its military presence in this part of the Republic
of the Comoros. This action on the part of the French
Government
calls into question the integrity and
authority of the members of the Security Council
and of the United Nations as a whole. Indeed, this
attitude on the part of the French Government implies
only contempt for a people which is helpless but
brave and which, because of fear of shedding the
blood of innocents and because it is convinced that a
solution should be arrived at only by peaceful means,
proclaimed
its unilateral independence
last summer
in 1975.

117. It now seems to us that the French Govemment held a consultation
of the population
of..the.
archipelago and not a separate consultation .of each
of the populations of the various islands .making up
the archipelago. This statement on the part of the
French representative,
like so many others by better
authorized spokesmen, in the view of my delegation
strongly suggests the illegality
of, the proposed
referendum for 8 February 1976. Furthermore,
for
more than half a century now, the French authorities
have recognized and respected the ethnic, cultural
and religious homogeneity of the islands of Anjouan,
Mayotte, MohCli and Grande-Comore,
which they
maintained under the same colonial administration
as j
a single juridical entity.
118. In order to give effect to this ardent desire of
22 December 1974, the valorous people of the Comoros
unilaterally
proclaimed their independence on 6 July
1975. And indeed, the Council of Ministers of OAU,
meeting at Kampala from 18 to 25 July 1975, not only

114. The leader of this State, Mr. Said Mohamed
Jaffar, in his speech made in the General Assembly
on f2 November
1975, stated the following humbly
but courageously:
13

decided unanimously and by acclamation to admit the
Republic of the Comoros as a State member of that
organization
by resolution 419 (XXV), but, under
another resolution-42
1 (XXV)-also
condemned
the manmuvres and actions of the French Government
to infringe upon the national sovereignty and unity,
the territorial integrity of the Republic of the Comoros
and consequently, urged it to withdraw its forces from
the island of Mayotte and to honour its commitments
in the interest of international
peace and security in
our waters of the Indian Ocean.2

and with all the parties concerned, we may find a
equitable and appropriate soiution.“4

just,

122. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, allow me first to take this opportunity
to extend to you our very sincere congratulations
on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I have had the pleasure of working with you
and the United States delegation in the Council, and
more particularly last month. I have no doubt that you
will conduct the deliberations
of the Council with
effectiveness, skill, fairness and impartiality.
I want
to assure you, as the President of the Council in the
important task before you, of the fullest co-operation
of the Tanzanian delegation.

119. Furthermore, with regard to the Republic of the
Comoros, the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lima from
25 to 30 August 1975, adopted an important
Programme, one of the paragraphs of which states:

123. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
thank you first and foremost for the generous remarks
and the tribute that you paid to me personally as
President of the Council for last month. Equally,
I thank with no less wramth, enthusiasm and sincerity
my colleagues in the Council, the representatives of
France and the Libyan Arab Republic, for the tribute
they paid to me. I also want to thank all my colleagues
non-members of the Council who have addressed the
Council and who were kind and generous enough to
pay such overflowing tributes.

“The Ministers for Foreign Affairs warmly congratulate the people of the Comoro islands on the’
progress of their struggle for national liberation.
They applaud the proclamation
of independence
of the people of the Comoros and call upon the
French Government
to provide for the immediate
withdrawal of its troops from that country. The
Ministers condemn any attempt against the national
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro islands
and reaffirm their absolute support to its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.“3

124. It was not the original intention of my delegation to speak on the subject before us; in fact, I had
desired only to take this opportunity
to express my
warm congratulations
to the President of the Council
and my thanks to the members and non-members of
the Council for their generous remarks. But I was
disturbed by the statement made by our colleague
from France; it is because of that statement that
I think it is important
for my delegation to make
certain observations in connexion with. the matter
before us and, of course, on the usual understanding
that we reserve our right to make a more substantial
statement, should the necessity arise, at a later stage.

120. The Security Council at its 1848th meeting on
17 October 1975 adopted Security Council resolution 376 (1975) recommending to the General Assembly
the admission of the Republic of the Comoros as a
Member of the United Nations. In its resolution 3385
(XXX), adopted by consensus on 12 November 1975,
the Assembly not only agreed to the recommendation
of the Council, but went even further and reaffirmed
the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial
integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the
islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and
Moheli.

125. The representative
of France, for whom, as
I have had occasion to point out both publicly and
privately,
I *have the highest respect and esteem,
said in the Council that we should be serious, and
perhaps by implication
he characterized the telegram
received by the Council from the head of State of the
Comoros complaining about French actions in Mayotte
as lacking in seriousness. I do not want to go into the
merits of the cable dispatched to the President of the
Council by the President of the Comoros. Suffice it
to say that it was a cable addressed by a head of
State who is faced with certain problems which are
not of his creation, but which in all candour, I must
say, are the reesult of policies perpetuated by the
Gove.mment
of France in respect of the question
before us. I therefore believe that it is a serious
cable and that the charges levelled in that cable are
also sufficiently serious to command the most careful
attention of the members of the Council. It is with that
view in mind that I should like to make specific

121. If these appeals have not yet come to the ears
of the French Government, we are convinced that, in
the name of the excellent relations of friendship and
co-operation
which happily exist between our two
countries, the French delegation here will use its
good offices in order to bring the appeals to the notice
of its Government.
At the same time the delegation
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea very much hopes
that the Security Council will take the practical and
urgent measures necessary in the light of the situation
to halt the proposed referendum in the interests of
peace, justice, security and conciliation.
This was the
prediction of Mr. Said Mohamed Jaffar, head of State
of the Republic of the Comoros, when he addressed
the General Assembly on 12 November
1975 and
stated:
“We leave it to the Assembly to assess the gravity
of this situation, while ardently hoping that together,
14

comments in connexion with the statement
the representative of France.

made by

131. I said earlier that even the French Government
did not seem to have any doubt about the frontiers
of the Comoros, did not seem to entertain any doubt
about the need to respect the unity and territorial
integrity of the Comoros;
I could quote various
statements made by our French colleagues, but, more
importantly,
made by eminent French spokesmen.
But to make a long story short, let me refer briefly
to two or three specific statements. I shall begin with
the statement made by the Government of France on
26 August 1974,5 I believe, with respect to the referendum which was about to be held in the Comoros,
and I shall not put it in the words of the United
Republic. of Tanzania but shall merely paraphrase the
thrust of the statement. It was a responsible statement
made by the Government of France to the effect that
the referendum would be organized on an archipelagowide basis. That is the first point.

126. To begin with, the representative
of France
referred to the geographical limits of the territory and
cast a certain doubt on the propriety of our collective
demand. When I say our collective demand, I mean
the collective demand of the international
community
and of the United Nations in particular, to the effect
that the territorial
integrity
of the Comoros,
a
sovereign, independent State whose area, of course,
comprises
the four islands of Grande-Comore,
Mayotte,
Anjouan
and MohCli,
should not be
questioned.
127. I should like only to say that there has never
been any doubt on the part of the United Nations or
the Tanzanian delegation as to the geographical limits
of the Comoro Archipelago.
I dare further say that
the records will show that there has never been any
doubt on the part of the Government of France’ as
to the geographical limits of the territory, at least if
we are to take at their face value the many important
statements
made by eminent
representatives
of
France, both in the Organization and elsewhere.

132. The second is that the Territory of the Comoros
would “retain the frontiers that it had as a colony”.”
Which means the four islands. And, furthermore, that
to the French Government
a multiplicity
of different
statuses for the various islands of the archipelago was
inconceivable.

128. It is at the same time extremely important to
underscore,
if only for the purpose of historical
perspective, the responsibility
of the administering
Power in connexion
with a Territory
under its
administration.
These responsibilities
have clearly
been affirmed and reaffirmed in General Assembly
resolutions. They have been clearly affirmed in the
Charter of the United Nations, but, above all, if
I may say so, they have been clearly and without any
ambiguity afftrmed in what we normally refer to as the
Bible or the Koran of decolonization,
the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in resolution 1514 (XV).

133. That was a responsible statement made by the
Government of France. It was on that basis that the
General Assembly, in the resolution to which I alluded
earlier, specifically took note of the French statement
and specifically reaffirmed the principle of the unity
and territorial integrity of the Comoros.
134. At that time, neither the Tanzanian delegation,
nor Members of the United Nations, had any reason
to doubt or to question the motives or the intentions
of the Government of France with regard to its respect
for the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros.
We had no reason to doubt the French Government’s
position, perhaps not merely because a government
statement of 26 August had particularly
laid down
certain principles which we wholly endorsed, but also
because other eminent spokesmen of the Government
of France had also, on one occasion or another, made
statements which, if we had any fears at all, tended
to allay those fears.

129. That resolution clearly calls for decolonization
of colonial Territories and at the same time underscores
the importance
of the principle of respect for the
unity and the territorial
integrity of countries. In
particular, it rejects any attempt at the partial or total
destruction of the national unity and territorial integrity
of a country and considers that such attempts are
wholly incompatible
with the purposes and principles
of the Charter.

135. The Minister for the so-called Overseas French
Territories, for example, in October 1974, is reported
to have said:

130. Clearly, the United Nations, as is to be expected,
has consistently
and without
any equivocation,
maintained and defended that position. If I were to
quote references-and
I do not want at this late hour
to bore members of the Council or to exhaust their
patience-I
would refer to resolution 3291 (XXIX),
which clearly reaffirmed the need for respect for the
unity and the territorial integrity of the Comoros. But
perhaps what makes resolution 3291 (XXIX)
particularly relevant in the context of the discussion
before us, are the background circumstances which led
to the adoption of that resolution.

“Why a global referendum and ‘not a separate
plebiscite for each island? It is because the intention
of France is not to divide countries which attain
independence.
This’ is the case of the Comoros,
whose inhabitants all practise the same religion, have
the same language, the same economic and political
interests. Far from being one of dismembering
the territorial integrity, our role is to help the efforts
of the Comorian people themselves towards a rapprochement.”
15

136. That was a statement by a Minister.. If any of
us have doubts about statements of Ministers-and
certainly it would not be the first time that Ministers
have made statements .only, to be repudiated by their
heads of State-we might perhaps still have entertained
some doubts as to the authenticity
of the statement
made by, a responsible Government Minister of France.
But it was not just a Minister of France who made
the statement.

its wisdom, on 12 November 1975 in resolution 3385
(XXX), admitted the Comoros as a new Member of
the United Nations. Here it is important to bear in mind
that, when the General Assembly
admitted
the
Comoros as the newest Member, in the same resolution
it also reaffirmed the necessity of respecting the unity
and territorial integrity of the Comoros, composed of
the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and
MohCli.

137. My colleagues, the representatives of Algeria
and the Libyan Arab Republic, have already alluded
to an important statement made by the President of
France in October 1974. Since they have quoted that
particular statement more or less in extent,
I need
only refer members of the Council to its contents. But
may I say that it was only logical, it was only fair,
for us to expect that, in the light of that statement
made by the most authoritative source in France with
respect to policies of the Government of France, we
would have no reason to doubt, no reason to question,
the intentions of the Government of France in connexion with the scrupulous respect of the territorial
integrity and unity of the Comoros.

141. We do know, of course, that our French
colleague did not participate
in the consensus on
the adoption of that resolution; however, the resolution does not become less valid simply because one
delegation chose to express a different viewpoint or
chose not to participate-unless
we want now to create
a situation where the views of one delegation must
prevail above all else, and knowing my French
colleague as I do, I dare to be presumptuous enough
to believe that that could not have been and cannot
be his intention.
142. Now we are told that France wants to hold
another referendum in Mayotte on 8 February. The
French representative-and
this is what really disappoints me-defends
the proposal to hold that referemdum as an act of self-determination
and, by implication, says how consistent the French have been on
this particular position. In fact, not only by implication;
he really spoke of the consistency of France in holding
elections at regional, district and other levels.

138. It was in the light of all these factors that the
General Assembly, as I stated earlier, adopted resolution 3291 (XXIX). That was before the referendum was
held in the Comoros; that was before the people of the
Comoros, in accordance with the government policy as
explained to the United Nations, as explained to the
world by French spokesmen, was given the right to
exercise its self-determination
in December. Then
came the exercise of self-determination-a
popular
referendum freely conducted, supervised by French
Government
authorities,
without any possibility
of
doubt as to either its authenticity or its motivation
in
this particular ‘case, since the motives of the referendum were clearly enunciated by the’ Government
of France and confirmed by the United Nations.

143. It-is the height of irony that we should have in
the Council an attempt to give sanctity to an illegitimate
situation and to justify that act as the process of selfdetermination.
The French representative
asked us:
“Since when can a free vote be interpreted as an act
of aggression?” I know the representative of France
better than to believe that he really and seriously
expects us to take that oversimplification
seriously.

139. That popular referendum resulted in 94.56 per
cent of the population
of the Comoros opting for
independence, which means that less than 6 per cent
of the population of the Comoros opposed the principle
of independence. Yet, the French Government seems
totally to ignore this factor; yet, the French Govemment now wishes to subordinate the views .of the
overwhelming
majority of the people of the Comoros
to the views of a tiny minority of the population of
the Comoros. Mr. President, you are, I believe, a
greater expert on democratic procedures, and I leave
it to you to judge whether the position articulated by
our French colleague can under any semblance of
democratic procedures be considered to be democratic.

144. The issue is not whether free elections constitute aggression; the issue is, given the background
of this situation, given the decisions of the Assembly,
given the resolutions of the United Nations, that the
mere holding of elections or a referendum by the
French authorities
in Mayotte now is an outright
intervention
in the domestic affairs of the Comoros.
What is perhaps even more significant is that, whereas
the holding of free elections certainly cannot be
considered to be an act of aggression, I do not believe
that any member of the Security Council can also
subsc.ribe to the concept that interference
in the
internal affairs of a Member State is a demonstration
of friendship or a demonstration of an act of good faith.
Furthermore, a referendum to sanctify the Balkanization of a State is something which can only be
deplored.

140. At any rate, the General Assembly.was in no
doubt again about the results of that referendum.
Neither, for that matter, was the Security Council.
The Security Council in resolution 376 (1975) recommended the admission of the Comoros to membership
in the United Nations, and the General Assembly, in

145. Is it really fair or just that France-such
a
powerful nation with such powerful political,
economic, material and even moral resources-should
16

use its resources to undermine the independence and
sovereignty of one of the newest States in Africa?
The representative of France again today, as he did in
the General Assembly, tried a new definition or, should
I call it interpretation,
of the concept of self-determination in defence of what they are planning to do in
Mayotte.

we seriously question, whose legality is definitely
questionable,
and yet less than a year ago when the
Special Committee kept asking the French Government
to allow it either to send a visiting mission or to go and
observe any of the actions then taking place in the
Comoros, which was then a colonial Territory,
the
French Government maintained a very negative position. I do not know how we can reconcile with that
position this newly found interest in the desire of the
international
community
to witness a referendum. in
Mayotte.

146. I would refer the members of the Council to a
statement which I made in the General Assembly,4
whose relevance and validity has perhaps been morally
enforced by the statement of our colleague from France
this afternoon. I said then-this
was a little more than
two months ago-and I maintain now that the French
argument that to hold a referendum in Mayotte will
enable the people of Mayotte
to exercise selfdetermination
is not only distorting the whole concept of’ self-determination
but is in fact making a
mockery of the decisions taken by the Organization
and giving a completely
erroneous interpretation
of
the concept of self-determination
as articulated
in
the Organization,
as defended in the Organization and
also as defended by our colleagues of France in .other
situations.

150. On a more serious and solemn note, clearly the
French Government’s
position, as expressed by the
representative of France in our midst, is inconsistent
with the objectives. and decisions of the United
Nations. As I said also, judging by the position taken
by the French Government
in the past with respect
to the question of the Comoros, it is,also inconsistent
with the position taken by the Government of France
as expressed by its many eminent spokesmen.
151. We believe very strongly that such a referendum
is wholly unwarranted and is in every way an interference in the internal affairs of a Member State. We
believe very strongly that it is incompatible
with the
interests of preserving the unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros. We believe very strongly that it
certainly flies in the face of the demands of the United
Nations, of the demands of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), and, above all,‘of the’demands of the
people ofthe Comoros expressed through its legitimate
Government.

147. The representative of France insists on a referendum. Why do they simply choose to ignore the
results of the referendum which was held in December
1974? Why should a new referendum bring anything
new? The new interpretation
of “self-determination”
is disturbing, and I hope that members of the Council
do not take it seriously. I have said this in private
and I said it once in public in the General Assembly,
and I want to say it in public once again before the
Security Council: I do not know how many of us would
survive the test of self-determination,
as expressed by
our colleague from France. Are we to allow the
principle of serf-determination
to be applied at the
village level, at the district level, at the provincial
level, let everybody decide what he wants to do?
I do not know. Perhaps instead of having 146 States
Members of the United Nations we would have up to
1,000 Member States. And I say this in all seriousness and without wishing to throw out challenges,
for it is not for me tothrow out a challenge to anyone,
but I dare predict that many members of the Council
also would not survive that test.

152. We want at this rather late hour to call upon our
French colleagues
to reconsider
this obviously
erroneous policy, not to tarnish the good image that by
and large France has in .Africainotwithstanding,
.of
course, the differences we have in some other casesnot to tarnish the responsible image that France has
with respect to many issues in international
affairs,
and certainly not to create a situation which can be
characterized only as inimical to the interests of the
people of the Comoros, inimical to the aspirations of
the African people as outlined through OAU, and
definitely not conducive to the promotion
of good
relations between ‘France and Africa.
153. Is.it really too much to ask France to desist
from such folly? Is it really too much to expect France
to take positions consistent with those previously
advocated by its own Government
through many
eminent spokesmen?
We sincerely hope that the
Government
of France will adopt a mature and
responsible attitude for the sake of the Comoros, for
the sake of peace in that region, for the sake .of
friendship between France and Africa, and. for the
sake of France’s own image in the world.

148. The concept, as elucidated by our ‘colleague
from France, cannot be taken very seriously. I believe
that the French Government
itself cannot really
seriously say that what it is now planning to do in
Mayotte is simply to implement the concept of selfdetermination,
as defended and expressed .by the
international
community.
149. The representative
of France has toid us that
this is going to be a free exercise of self-determination
and, therefore, members of the Council who wish
to observe the referendum are free to do so. Again,
it is ironic that the representative of France is inviting
us to go and observe a referendum whose merits

154.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
I should like to clarify certain points
which seem to have particularly
troubled certain

j&m

French):

Ii
,.

,

speakers this afternoon. I have the greatest esteem
and respect for speakers who have dealt with the
subject which concerns us today and I have listened
very carefully, particularly
to the statements of the
representatives of Algeria and the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Both of them referred persistently
to
statements
of Ministers
members of the French
Government and authorized spokesmen of the French
Government, and even quoted a statement by the head
of the French State.

158. I reserve my right to go into further detail on
this subject subseque&y, butthis very evening I want
to dispel the idea that might have been suggested in
certain statements that there were ulterior motives in
certain statements on the part of members of the
French executive and authorized spokesmen for the
French Government,
including myself. Those statements were made in all good faith, and expressed
intentions
which were not ratified by Parliament.
Parliament is sovereign.

155. I should like it to be very clear that those
statements were made in good faith; those statements
about our wish for the Comoro Archipelago to achieve
independence in unity are proof of the fact that the
French Government
had and ‘has nothing but good
intentions towards the Comoro Archipelago.
Those
statements make it quite clear that there are no
ulterior motives on the part of the French Govemment, and certainly none of an economic or military
kind, reference to which has been made on the basis
of the most farfetched
speculations
of certain
journalists.

159. Today, rather than attempt to aggravate this
difference between the independent
Republic
of
the Comoros, which we recognized in the three islands
that I mentioned before, and the Government of the
French Republic, I think the best thing would be to
try, rather, to help the French Government,
as it
wishes, to maintain good relations with the Republic
of the Comoros and to establish, if possible, arrangements to allow the Republic of the Comoros to live
as a good neighbour, in conditions which remain to be
defined, with the island of Mayotte.

156. But, however surprising this may seem to certain
people, in France the executive, the ministers, the
head of State himself, cannot act against the will
of Parliament.
In France, Parliament ‘is sovereign.
The French Constitution
stipulates that no territory
can be withdrawn from national sovereignty without a
vote in Parliament.
The French Parliament,
which
possesses national sovereignty, which it is necessary
for ministers and even for the head of State himself to
respect, has decided that the vote on the island of
Mayotte constituted a refusal by that island to leave
French sovereignty. The Government,
the executive,
the head of State himself can only bow to a decision
of Parliament.
157. I am well aware that there are many countries,
Members of the United Nations, in which the executive
is not accustomed to bow to the Iegisiature, but in
France this is the case. It is Parliament
which is
sovereign, and Parliament
a!one can hand down a
decision with regard to national sovereignty. Representatives of States here, the authorities of some 20 or
25 States which are independent today, but over which
French sovereignty was formerly exercised, those
people who have been members of the French
Parliament--quite
often, some have been members,
indeed, of the French Government--are
very well
aware that in France the Constitution gives Parliament
precedence over the executive. Even if they deplore
the situation which has arisen because of this in the
Comoro Archipelago, I am sure that these people, who
are so familiar with the constitutional
system of
France-and
France is not alone in this, of course;
there are other countries in which the executive is
also subject to the legislature-understand
the constitutional
obligations
incumbent
upon the French
Government.

160. I would remind the Council further, and this is
additional proof of our good faith, that in the referendum, which is to take place on Sunday, a twofold
question is asked of the inhabitants of the island. They
are being asked if they want to join the Republic of
the Comoros or remain under French sovereignty.
This referendum will be carried out in conditions of
total liberty. As evidence of this, there is the fact that
we are inviting any Government which so wishes, to
send observers. If the inhabitants of Mayotte decide
to join the Republic of the Comoros, we shall never
reproach them for that;.they are free to do so. I do
not believe that good faith can be better demonstrated
in such a situation. In conclusion, I should simply like
to say that I wanted to make this clarification
this
evening, and I reserve my right to intervene subsequently on the same subject.
161. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
First, I should like to assure the representative
of
France that my delegation had never questioned the
motives of the spokesmen of the Government
of
France. We built our whole case on the statements
made by the representatives of France, and it is because
we never doubted their motivations that we are disappointed by what they are doing now,
162. Secondly, we do not want to interfere in the
internal affairs of France. So we do not want to start
discussing the constitutional
set-up of France, the
responsibility
of the executive and. the responsibility
of the legislature, though I must tell you-and I am glad
that the representative of France has also taken note
of this-that
this is not a situation unique. to France.
Many other countries, including my own, to various
degrees also have arrangements
which give such
powers to the national assembly. We may call them
national assemblies, or in some cases national Icgislative assemblies. In some places they are calied

parliaments. In other places they are called houses of
assembly. But there is a clear differentiation. between
the executive and the legislature in- the relationship
of the two. It is up to the’ constitutions of different
countries, to be worked out in accordance with the
specific aspirations, requirements and conditions of
a particular State.

the French executive has stated its intentions; it has
not undertaken a commitment. There is a difference
between the intention, the policy which a Government
states it wants to follow and expects to follow and then
the commitments it enters into-commitments fo
which parliamentary ratification is generally necessary.

163. But it would be a very difficult situation if the
United Nations could not hold someone responsible.
For example, we cannot have situations where Members commit themselves to do certain things only to tell
us that they are sorry, this is something to which they
made a commitment earlier, but their national parliaments would not go along with them, I would have
thought that the situation would normally be that no one
makes a commitment before knowing that that particular commitment has the support of the people
and Government that he represents.

168. Mr. Salim used the word “commitment”. In
French the word is engagement. And the executive
cannot enter into a commitment concerning territorial
questions except with the approval of Parliament.
The French executive had intentions which were not
ratified. I think that the example of Mayotte is not
very important compared with the far more renowned
examples in which Governments which had entered
into commitments that were non-binding and which
had expressed intentions that were not ratified by
their Parliaments were not able to follow up on the
intentions they had expressed and on which other
Governments had counted.

164. Furthermore, I should like to say that, with
respect to the situation in the Comoros, when the
Comoros was a colonial Territory we could not, when
discussing the question of the Comoros either in the
Fourth Committee, in the Special Committee or in the
General Assembly, start asking the representative of
the French Parliament to come before us and explain
what their position was in regard to the Comoros.
We have to hold Governments responsible for the
positions they defend and express. It is because of that
particular situation that we now hold the French
Government responsible for the situation in Mayotte.

169. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I am sorry about this dialogue, but
I think we are entering into a very important field and ?
I should only like to make the following observations.
/
170. First, when I use the word “commitment”,
I use it in the context of the French Government’s
position as expressed to the United Nations. We have
to take statements made by Administering Authorities )
with respect to the colonial Territories regarding the
type of action that is going to be taken in the colonial
Territories as commitments on the part of those
Administering Authorities. I do not want to argue this
point. But as a matter of academic interest, more
than anything else, I would have thought that before
the French Government proceeded with its intention
or with its commitment to hold a referendum in the
islands, first it should have ensured that that commitment or intention had been ratified by the legislative
or by the National Assembly; I hope the French
example does not create.a precedent, but in the future
we may have all kinds of statements made in the
Organization, all kinds of commitments entered into by
Administering Authorities in the case of the colonial
situation, by responsible Governments, in respect of
decisions arrived at at the United Nations, only to be
told a week or two later: “Sorry, gentlemen, that
statement we made is now zero because it was not
ratified by the proper legislative machinery.”

165. With respect to the free nature of the referendum, we are not questioning whether the referendum
is going to be free or not. What we are saying is that
this referendum is wholly incompatible with the provisionsof the United Nations position, wholly incompatible with the principle of the territorial integrity and
unity’of the country. And if they can, in their generosity, ask the people of Mayotte to decide whether
they want to become part. of the Comoros or part of
France, then why in a similar vein do they ,not ask
the overwhelming majority of the three other islands
whether they want to see their territory dismembered?
That would be fair.
166. After all, when France undertook the referendum at the beginning it was a referendum on an
archipelago-wide basis, taking the results of the whole
Territory as an entity. I think that justice and fairness
demand that the majority should have their say
inasmuch as the minority is being given their say.

171. So I would have thought that before they held
the referendum in December 1974in the Comoros, that
intention-if the representative wants to call it an
“intention” -should have been known to have been
accepted by the French Government and the appropriate. French authorities before the people of the
Comoros were allowed to indulge in an exercise which
is now apparently considered futile and meaningless.

167. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (irtterp&rafion
from French): I will not for a minute-say that there is
not a rather major difference between the position of
the French Government and what is the prevalent
philosophy in the United Nations, as Mr. Salim has
very eloquently stated. I should onlylike to point out to
the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania
that the French Government has expressed intentions,

The meeting

19

rose at 7.45 p.m.

Nutes
’ See Oflcial Rewrds of the General Assembly. Twerw+hth
.._r_.“...~.
Session, Supplement No. 23, chap. XI, annex, appendix Ii.
2 See A/10297, annex 1.

‘.

I

/

3 See.A/102l7 and Comf.
-al3c on icial tiecords of the General Assembly, Thiifieth-Se?A
SbJJ.
-_____.
Plenary Meetings. 2402nd I meeting.
z Ibicl.. Tkvtty-nir%
Session. Supplement Nu. 23, chap. Xt,
annex, para. 32.

:

r

,‘.

:

. .

HOW TO OBTAIN UMTED

NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained From bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairia et ies agences dCpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adresses-vous a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, Neb York ou Get&e.
KAK

IIOJIYqHTh

EIBAAHWI

H3narrmr Oprarrnaanrfa
SHHBX

A

al-‘BHTCTBKX

BO

OPTAHHBAI(HH

OB%E~AH8!ZfHhIX

06zenuxemrzrx

KaseR ~onoio

BCeX

MUpa.

pafiOHaX

HaBORnTe

Kynn~b

HAqHH

8 KKnxKbzX

CnpaBKH

uamebr wiuxsro~
srara3nsre mrri nmmire no anpecy: Oprarrrmaqnff
HartsiR, Ceugell no nponaxe n3puniR,
Hbm-flopx
XnN XeHeBa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

96

HJaaHHXX

waraB

06zenmensrbrx

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y c&s djstribuidotas en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

moo

83-608Ol~MaY

1984-2.200
