United Nations

S/PV.6313

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6313th meeting
Wednesday, 12 May 2010, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2010/234)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-35930 (E)

*1035930*

S/PV.6313

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2010/234)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives Norway and Somalia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Security Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and Marine
Resources of Somalia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.

2

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Uganda to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African
Union
Commission,
His
Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Lamamra.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamamra to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/234, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ould Abdallah. I now give the floor to
Mr. Ould Abdallah.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: During my first presentation
on Somalia to this Council on 17 December 2007 (see
S/PV.5805), I proposed three options for addressing the
situation: business as usual, a total withdrawal from
Somalia, or simultaneous action in the political,
security and development fields. I would like, in that
connection, to thank the Secretary-General and UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for their continued
understanding and support for Somalia. In particular, I
welcome their confidence that the United Nations
should and can move beyond the status quo to really
make a difference in the future of Somalia and to
strengthen the Organization’s image in Africa and
beyond.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

One important example in support of the third
option is the Secretary-General’s engagement with the
Government of Turkey to co-convene next week’s
Istanbul conference on Somalia. Despite some
suggestions that it is either too early or too late for
such a high-level gathering, we should all recognize
that, after years of anarchy, there will never be a right
time in Somalia. We have to act now.
The Istanbul conference comes one year after the
Secretary-General convened the Brussels conference,
at which $213 million were pledged to help the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) make progress
in strengthening their security. During the Brussels
conference, the Secretary-General was able to count on
strong support from the African Union (AU), the
European Union (EU), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the League of Arab States,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and several
countries, in particular Japan, Norway and the United
States. Such support, and that of others, is equally
needed today for a successful Istanbul Conference.
As a follow-up to Brussels, more troops are being
trained inside and outside Somalia. The ongoing
training in Uganda is a joint operation between Africa,
the EU and the United States, with 2,000 troops being
prepared in two batches. In that context, the new
Somali Army Chief of Staff, a well-respected career
officer, needs strong and unwavering support from his
Government and must be helped to organize his work
and his forces without excessive internal or external
interference. His colleagues heading the police force
deserve similar assistance. It the context of training, I
would like to add that I am grateful to France for
having initiated the first training operation with
Djibouti last year.
Likewise, the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which now numbers just under 7,000 and still needs
many more battalions, should be strengthened and, at
the same time, helped to carry out its duties of
protecting federal institutions and assisting the needy.
Where the international community can help is in
providing equipment and salaries, at least for one year,
for those forces that have been properly trained. The
memorandum of understanding signed recently
between the African Union, IGAD and my office in
Nairobi should contribute to facilitating that
undertaking.

10-35930

On the political front, despite working under
difficult conditions, the TFG needs to show strength in
unity, determination in action and a common purpose in
its policies. It should prioritize its actions, concentrating
on those that are essential for the population and leaving
aside less urgent ones. For its part, the international
community can help by implementing its commitments,
especially in the disbursement of pledged resources.
There should be a temporary halt in the spending of
funds and energy on strategies and road maps in order to
allow a re-examination of our achievements.
The TFG has succeeded in reaching out to other
groups committed to peace and stability. An agreement
has been signed with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a — a key
religious and resistance movement — that could
provide a blue print for future agreements. I would like
to reiterate here that the door to peace is open to all
Somalis wishing to end the agony of their country.
A memorandum of understanding signed with
Puntland on piracy-related issues is also of significant
importance. Piracy is a criminal activity that is
increasingly being carried out far from Somalia’s
coastline and is encouraged by the payment of huge
ransoms. The international maritime presence —
Operation Atalanta, NATO and other national navies —
has certainly served to deter some pirates, has succeeded
in arresting others and is most welcome. However, there
is consensus that much more could be done.
First, we need to support, strengthen and
empower the TFG and other authorities, in particular
through employment schemes for youth in affected
communities. Secondly, we should also consider a new
initiative. Those countries known to be fishing in
Somali waters should agree to pay a licensing fee, with
the revenue generated put into a form of escrow
account. The revenue collected would be used by the
authorities after clearance by the account’s Somali and
international management. That approach would
certainly be better for all than the current situation, in
which licensing money is apparently paid to certain
individuals but fails to reach the legitimate authorities.
I invite serious reflection and action on this matter.
Meanwhile, inside Somalia the humanitarian
situation remains horrendous, despite the laudable
work of the World Food Programme and other
agencies, including UNICEF. It cannot and should not
be tolerated. At the same time, we should not ignore
the fact that continued impunity is fuelling this tragedy.

3

S/PV.6313

The humanitarian and human rights situations are part
and parcel of the same problem and should be
addressed simultaneously. Shedding more light on the
humanitarian and human rights crisis is a key
ingredient in the long march towards peace in Somalia.
With all international agencies working together,
harmonizing their thinking and actions, the
international community can integrate its policies and
strengthen its results.
Furthermore, once Governments, development
agencies, business associations and non-governmental
organizations act together, they can help to bring about
a major move away from past practices of managing
the status quo. In that context, the Istanbul Conference
comes at the right time. It shows Somalis and their
leaders that there are persons, countries and
organizations that are genuinely ready and committed
to working with them for peace and stability. Along
with the Secretary-General, I would like once more to
thank the Government of Turkey for its important
initiative.
As I indicated earlier, I have always said that the
peace process is based on three interrelated pillars:
reconciliation, security and development. They should
be addressed simultaneously. In those three areas, it is
widely recognized that one of Somalia’s main assets is
its vibrant business community, both inside and outside
the country. That community can be a force for good,
and we should help it to work constructively. Istanbul
will provide an exceptional opportunity to do so.
The Conference is, first and foremost, a show of
political solidarity with the Somali people, who have
suffered so much and have been taken hostage by
various groups and individuals. The Conference is also
a message of hope to Somalis that they are not alone.
In addition to addressing security issues and global
threats, including piracy, the Conference will also
provide a platform for the Somali private sector,
international business and Governments to launch new
initiatives for reconstruction and job creation.
Those are indeed significant challenges, although
they can be overcome with adequate action. Through
public and private partnerships, we can begin to make
a difference in the international perception and image
of Somalia and, consequently, in the lives of its people.
This is the place to reiterate that if we want to make a
decisive difference, there is no alternative to moving
the international community to Mogadishu to be closer

4

to the victims. Remote control from Nairobi is not
leading to progress.
If we do not make the right commitments and
take the right action in Somalia now, sooner or later the
situation will force us to act, and at a much higher
price. One of the most effective actions we can take in
Somalia is to support the Government in a concrete
manner and, at the same time, ask it to deliver
effectively. On the other hand, those countries and
individuals who behave like salesmen touting peace
conferences for every country in conflict, including
Somalia, can only damage the prospects for peace and
stability by inciting extremists the world over to be
more radical and by granting them veto power over the
future of the peoples.
The Istanbul Conference will provide us with an
exceptional opportunity to show that Somalia has true
friends ready to make a difference. In this year, when
the country celebrates its fiftieth anniversary of
independence, the support of the Secretary-General, the
Government of Turkey and the entire Security Council
is much needed and is very welcome by the
Government, the Somali people and the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries
and Marine Resources of Somalia.
Mr. Ibrahim (Somalia): I would like at the outset
to seize this opportunity to express my profound
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for enabling us to
participate in this discussion on the situation in
Somalia. I would also like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.
It is incumbent upon my Government and my
people to thank the Security Council for its unwavering
support to Somalia’s peace and reconciliation efforts.
The Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, the
immense challenges it faces notwithstanding, continues
to provide the leadership and wisdom required in
advancing peace and stability in the country.
But the Government’s commitment to peace and
dialogue and its determination to rebuild a nation
shattered by a prolonged crisis are being hampered by
a group of terrorists with links to Al-Qaida.
Nonetheless, the Government, with the support of the

10-35930

S/PV.6313

international community, will continue to provide
coordinated, timely and sustained engagement with a
view to countering the insurgency and to bringing
lasting peace and security to the entire nation. The
insurgents’ plan to overthrow the Government of
national unity and their attempt to foment further
destabilization and chaos in the country have been
foiled.
What we are witnessing in Somalia now,
following the successful efforts for the implementation
of the Djibouti peace process, is an inclusive political
process with broad-based support. The President, the
Speaker of Parliament, all the members of Parliament,
the Prime Minister and his cabinet are all operating in
Mogadishu. I am pleased to reiterate to the Security
Council that the leadership of the Government of
national unity in Somalia has succeeded in exercising
its mandate with a great deal of responsibility and
devotion. It has embraced the principles of collective
leadership and has successfully shattered anything that
would potentially elicit differences and undermine
cohesiveness and unity among members of the Cabinet,
on the one hand, and between the Government and
Parliament, on the other. The current discussion that is
now taking place between members of the Transitional
Federal Parliament must not be construed as bickering.
It is an exercise of the democracy that is being
resuscitated in Somalia, which we trust will strengthen
our national institutions and safeguard their political
legitimacy.
Somalia, under the leadership of the current
Transitional Federal Government, has made significant
headway with regard to reconciliation. Important
members of Hizbul Islam have embraced the
Government’s efforts, agreed to support the
Government and joined the cabinet. Moreover, some
prominent Al-Shabaab commanders and their fighters
have
defiantly
denounced
violence
publicly,
condemned the crimes perpetrated by the radical
extremists and subsequently decided to defect to the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
Within the framework of my Government’s
continued attempt to reach out to Somalis who have
remained outside the Djibouti peace process, the
Government signed, on 15 March 2010, at the African
Union headquarters in Addis Ababa, a cooperation
agreement
between
the
Transitional
Federal
Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a. This
agreement provides for, among other important

10-35930

elements, the merging of Transitional Federal
Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a forces to
counter the insurgent menaces. Moreover, most of the
provisions that have been agreed upon by both parties
within the framework of the agreement are being
implemented by my Government.
The Government has succeeded in bringing about
stability peacefully in certain regions of the country. It
has been able to mediate between the leaders in the
Galmudug regional administration, which is located in
the central part of Somalia, and has convinced them to
settle their differences and other contentious issues
peacefully. Following this mediation, the leaders of the
Galmudug regional administration, in the presence of
the President of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, signed an agreement that has successfully
ended their differences through compromises and
concessions.
In my Government’s effort to improve the
security situation in the country, it has been able to
reorganize the armed forces. Private militias and
Government forces have been reintegrated, and are
now part of the Somali national army. The Government
has made the necessary changes in the leadership of the
Somali national security forces to bring about a rapid
transformation in the command and control of these
forces. Likewise, the Government recently nominated
the deputy commander of the Somali national army as
part of the agreement package with Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama’a.
These newly reintegrated forces have been
engaged to carry out their national duties. The
Government forces have recently gained ground, and
this has led to the expulsion of Al-Shabaab from some
of its strongholds in Mogadishu, namely Hodan,
Howlwadaag, and the road that leads to the Bakara
market, also known as Dabka Road — a very famous
road. This successful offensive launched by our forces
against the radical extremists has generated cautious
optimism among our forces and constituted a relief for
the forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which were subject to continuous attacks
launched from those areas.
The international community is seriously engaged
in the training of security forces inside Somalia,
Uganda and neighbouring countries. Also, we very
much thank the French Government, which also took
part in that training. While we appreciate and commend

5

S/PV.6313

the efforts of Uganda and other neighbouring countries
with regard to these training programmes, we believe
that our troops would tend to be more effective if the
training took place inside the country. Despite the
serious engagement of AMISOM and its contribution
to the attainment of peace and stability in Somalia, we
believe that there is a need for the deployment of the
remaining agreed strength of 8,000 AMISOM
peacekeepers. We also believe that the deployment of
adequate United Nations peacekeeping forces with a
clear and relevant mandate and rules of engagement
would contribute to the stabilization of Somalia and
render AMISOM more effective.
My Government contends that peace, stability
and security are a sine qua non for any meaningful
socio-economic development and for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. The United Nations
peacekeepers, if deployed, can achieve this with the
help of the Government and AMISOM forces.
Furthermore,
my
Government
welcomes
the
deployment of forces from the East African Standby
Brigade of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. The military commanders of the Brigade
recently visited Mogadishu to carry out assessments.
We believe that their deployment will certainly
enhance security in the country and contribute to the
reconstruction of certain vital infrastructures.
In terms of the constitution-making process, the
Government has embarked with the relevant
stakeholders on building the capacities of the
institutions that will be involved in the preparation of
the draft constitution. The new members of the
Independent Federal Constitutional Commission have
been sworn in. Various stakeholders are now
brainstorming on the constitution-making process.
Other priorities laid down by the Government
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the crisis
include the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
needy and the internally displaced; the formulation of a
comprehensive national security strategy that would
enable the Government to function more effectively in
the midst of security threats unleashed by international
terrorist groups; the consolidation of good governance,
accountability, transparency and justice in the State
institutions; the rebuilding of the infrastructure of the
country that would ensure a sustainable economic
recovery; the creation of alternative livelihood projects
for the coastal communities and other areas to dissuade
youth from piracy and other criminal activities, which

6

we see as very important; and the strengthening of
good relations, mutual understanding and cooperation
among countries in the region.
I call upon the Security Council to act because we
in Somalia indeed count on it. We thank it for its
unwavering support. Over the past two decades, we
have had reports, missions, statements, assessments,
embargoes and a proliferation of conferences on the
situation in Somalia. We believe that it is high time that
we come up with a paradigm shift that would look at
the situation differently.
It is our belief that, given meaningful
collaboration in the security sector, we will be in a
much better position to talk about and make progress in
other important areas, such as humanitarian assistance,
human rights, the prevention of piracy and the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.
Finally, let me go on record in appealing to
United Nations Members and the Security Council to
take an urgent decision to support, unequivocally, the
Government of Somalia so that it can provide for the
people of Somalia effectively. I am obliged to repeat
that any small, hesitant, half-hearted measures of help
and protracted delays will only increase the
intransigence of the extremist die-hard elements, and
that the converse is true. One may say that there are
challenges and risks in the Somalia situation, but there
are also enormous opportunities. In our view, the
opportunities in Somalia far outweigh the risks. We
hope and pray that we achieve a new momentum.
In that regard, we would like to cordially request
that in future discussions on Somalia, the report of the
Secretary-General be released in good time to enable
all the stakeholders to have ample opportunity to
discuss and consult as widely as possible within the
framework of seeking solutions to the challenges
facing Somalia, the region and, indeed, the
international community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.
Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): I have the
honour and privilege of speaking to the Council on
behalf of the African Union Commission, and I am
very glad to do so under Lebanon’s presidency, a
brother country whose issue contribute qualitatively to

10-35930

S/PV.6313

the economic dynamism of many African countries and
brand the promising exchanges between Africa and the
Arab world with their own brilliance. I thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited me to take part in this
debate on developments in the situation in Somalia, a
country that belongs to the African and Arab groupings
and whose emergence from crisis involves the entire
international community.

While slow and still insufficient in terms of the
urgency and the extent of the needs, the positive effects
of the international community’s multifarious
contributions to Somalia’s institutions and AMISOM
are beginning to be felt. Programmes and projects that
should in time lead to a fundamental change in
Somalia’s political and security landscape are being
created or implemented.

The year 2010 has been declared the Year of
Peace and Security in Africa. It marks the fiftieth
anniversary of Somalia’s accession to independence.
Nothing could better symbolize the success of the
many activities and increasing efforts that the African
Union has undertaken throughout this year than
Somalia’s decisive progress in promoting peace and
reconciliation by fully restoring State authority through
its territory and the ability of its institutions to exercise
their sovereign prerogatives.

In that regard, the development of the Somali
security forces through quality training, the provision
of functioning equipment and the standardized
management of their operation and the careers of their
staff, must receive high priority. At the same time, the
standardization
of AMISOM’s
logistical
and
operational norms and the conditions of service of its
staff must be actively pursued to ensure that its change
of status to a United Nations peacekeeping force is not
unduly delayed for technical reasons.

Nothing would more fully repay the innovative
partnerships that have been established between Africa
and the United Nations, as well as between Africa and
the relevant countries and organizations, than the
significant strengthening of operational capacities and
effective synergies among all the actors and factors
that seek to address all the challenges posed by the
situation in Somalia and their enduring effects on
international peace and security.

The situation in Somalia calls for comprehensive
and agreed strategies so that all contributions will be
complementary and mutually reinforcing. These
strategies should give issues of security in the current
context of Somalia the importance they deserve and
must also include the rebuilding of the State and its
institutions and administrative instruments, as well as
renewed humanitarian action and the implementation
of development projects.

In fact, developments during the early months of
the year show a generally positive trend towards
achieving the goals whose attainment the international
community is ensuring through its support for the
ongoing action of Somalia’s Transitional Federal
Government under the authority of President Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, and the particularly perilous but very
necessary and important work being done by the brave
Burundi and Ugandan peacekeepers deployed within
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

The mobilization of support for all of these
purposes must increase. The follow-up to the Brussels
conference; the Jeddah and Cairo meetings of the
International Contact Group on Somalia which were
facilitated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, my friend Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
to whom I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute for
all that he has done; the regular Addis Ababa meetings
among the African Union, the United Nations, the
troop-contributing countries and international partners;
and the forthcoming Istanbul Conference: these are all
to be welcomed for their importance and usefulness.
The parallel activities on the issue of piracy at sea are
also part of this same context insofar as the developing
international consensus must focus on the elimination
of the underlying causes of piracy, as well as proper
coordination of the considerable naval forces deployed
on the high seas with other forces that are also well
endowed with the capacity to act and deter. AMISOM
must be rapidly provided with such a capacity so that it
can fight piracy and terrorism throughout its area of
activity, including the maritime space of Somalia.

The agreement signed on 15 March between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a movement at the headquarters of the
African Union Commission can quite rightly be seen as
a distinctive milestone in the strategic changes in the
situation in Somalia. The agreement is of a character
and scope that have considerable potential at the
political, military and territorial levels and with regard
to influencing the social, religious and cultural
dynamics in the country.

10-35930

7

S/PV.6313

As it marks its fiftieth anniversary this year,
Somalia is at a crossroads. Much has been done by the
international community and by the Somalis
themselves; just as much remains to be done. The
promotion of peace, security and reconciliation in
Somalia is ongoing, even with imperfect execution and
incompletely met goals. However, we must build on
the progress made and the results achieved and open up
new horizons for the role of the international
community, and especially the role of the United
Nations, in and around Somalia. Relocating the United
Nations and African Union facilities to Mogadishu
would be a significant step in that direction.
For its part, the African Union will continue to
share its vision and to make its contribution to
increasing the effectiveness of our joint action and to
bolster the credibility of our commitments through
concrete results meeting the expectations of the Somali
people and serving the comprehensive goals at stake in
the situation in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome First
Deputy Prime Minister Ibrahim and Commissioner
Lamamra to the Council this morning and thank them
very much indeed for their briefings. I should also like
to thank Mr. Ould-Abdallah, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We greatly
appreciate the efforts of the Special Representative, his
team and all of the United Nations agencies active in
Somalia.
I would, however, like to register our
disappointment that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/234) was issued less than 24 hours before this
meeting; Deputy Prime Minister Ibrahim made this
same point too. Somalia is one of the most complex
issues on the Security Council’s agenda, and late
reports do not help Council members take a considered
view.
The situation in Somalia remains of deep concern,
with a worsening humanitarian situation and continuing
instability. We strongly condemn attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG), the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
people by armed groups, especially Al-Shabaab. We

8

reiterate our support for the TFG and AMISOM. I pay
particular tribute to Uganda and Burundi for their
continuing commitment to this difficult operation.
There has been important progress on a number
of strands over the past few months, as some of the
previous speakers have highlighted. We welcome the
signing of an agreement with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a
in March as an important step forward in terms of
political reconciliation. But as the Secretary-General’s
report highlights, the situation remains fragile. We now
have only 15 months remaining of the transitional
period as defined in the Djibouti Agreement. Important
transitional tasks still need to be completed. It is
crucial that all parties redouble their efforts to achieve
greater progress towards a stable and peaceful Somalia.
The instability in Somalia continues to have a
significant destabilizing effect on the region and
beyond. Somali extremists pose a serious threat to
many countries, including the United Kingdom. We
have seen close links between terrorists in Yemen and
Somalia. Instability in Somalia hinders cooperation in
the region on areas of common interest, promoting
distrust rather than dialogue. Progress towards a
peaceful, stable Somalia would allow the region to
cooperate on the economic development that it so
desperately needs.
But the most serious impact is on the people of
Somalia themselves. They have suffered for far too
long. The humanitarian situation is appalling and
continues to deteriorate. Attacks on aid compounds,
worsening security conditions and the threats by
Al-Shabaab, which led the World Food Programme to
suspend its operations, have all compounded the
problem. We home the World Food Programme can
resume its work safely as soon as possible in order to
deliver the aid which is so desperately needed.
The United Kingdom is committed to supporting
the TFG and AMISOM. Last year the United Kingdom
contributed over £15 million to support AMISOM,
£11.5 million in humanitarian aid and £26 million in
development assistance. That is roughly equivalent to
over $60 million in total.
On piracy, the United Kingdom plays an
important role in the European Union’s (EU) Operation
Atalanta and we, of course, fully support the EU
training mission currently underway in Uganda.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

In looking forward, I would make three points.
First, we need a strong United Nations lead for our
efforts in Somalia. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to review the role of the United
Nations. This should lead to a more dynamic operation
in Nairobi and a growing presence in Mogadishu, as
both Special Representative Ould Abdallah and
Commissioner Lamamra have said this morning. We do
not underestimate the difficulties, but we need all parts
of the United Nations working in an integrated manner
to deliver a single strategy.
Secondly, the United Nations cannot work alone
so the international community needs to regalvanize its
efforts in support of AMISOM and the TFG. We look
forward to the Istanbul Conference on Somalia on
22 May, which we hope will demonstrate the
international community’s continued support to the
TFG and to United Nations leadership in Somalia.
Thirdly, the future of Somalia lies, ultimately, in
the hands of the Somali people. We welcome the
progress made by the TFG over the past few months.
We urge them to continue and intensify their efforts on
dialogue, reconciliation, governance and security
sector reform. We call on all parties fully to support the
Djibouti peace process and join efforts to bring peace
to Somalia. The clock is ticking, and we risk losing the
rare moment of opportunity provided by the Djibouti
Agreement.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me begin by thanking Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his informative briefing. Let me also
welcome Somali Deputy Prime Minister Ibrahim and
Environment Minister Hamza to the Security Council
and commend them for their dedication to the people
of Somalia. I would also like to welcome to the
Council Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, and express our
appreciation for the African Union’s work in Somalia.
The United States continues to view the situation
in Somalia with deep concern. Somalia’s stability
depends on effective governance based on a process of
inclusive political dialogue. As such, we underscore
our support for the Djibouti peace process. The United
States applauds the Transitional Federal Government
for its recent efforts to build political support and
cultivate stability, and we encourage the Transitional
Federal Government to redouble those efforts.

10-35930

The Djibouti peace process should remain the
primary focus. We urge all groups interested in peace
to come to the table. The agreement with Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a is an important step towards this goal. We
welcome similar continued efforts to expand the
Transitional Federal Government’s message of
stability, responsibility and inclusiveness. We also
welcome the recent memorandum of understanding
signed with the “Puntland” administration on counterpiracy cooperation.
We are similarly encouraged by the Transitional
Federal Government’s progress in drafting a new
constitution and its efforts to open new schools,
improve hospitals and renovate police stations. The
Transitional Federal Government must strive to make
even more progress on both its federal and transitional
agendas by providing basic social services, working to
build an integrated security force, extending a
consultative constitutional process, building alliances
and providing political support to regions. We hope it
will also focus on other important goals such as
expanding revenue collection, ensuring that salaries are
paid to its security forces and providing young people
with employment opportunities that offer viable
alternatives to extremism and militancy.
The United States supports the upcoming United
Nations development Conference on Somalia to be
held in Istanbul in May with participation from the
Somali diaspora. We commend the Turkish
Government for its leadership on these critical issues,
and we hope that this Conference will lead to critical
investments in infrastructure and other projects that
will provide Somali-led employment and training
options for the Somali people.
With greater security, the Transitional Federal
Government could make even greater gains. Spoilers
continue to destabilize Somalia and risk its future.
Recently, the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia
listed several of these spoilers for targeted sanctions,
including Al-Shabaab and some of its leaders. We urge
all Member States to effectively implement the asset
freeze, the travel ban and the targeted arms embargo
against the listed individuals and Al-Shabaab. We also
urge all Member States to ensure that the territorial
arms embargo is being fully implemented.
Supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is central to our strategy to stabilize

9

S/PV.6313

Mogadishu and support the Somali peace process.
AMISOM protects key installations in Mogadishu,
offers political space for a Somali-led reconciliation
process and provides security so that humanitarian
assistance can be delivered. We commend Uganda and
Burundi for their generous troop contributions to
AMISOM, including the recent addition of a fourth
Ugandan battalion; the Mission now has a force of
6,200, closer to its mandated strength of 8,000. We
encourage other nations to step forward with additional
contributions.
The United States strongly supports AMISOM
through funding for a logistical support package. Since
AMISOM first deployed in 2007, the United States has
obligated $174 million for logistical support,
equipment and pre-deployment training to its forces.
Both the Transitional Federal Government security
forces and AMISOM have urgent equipment and
training requirements that require donor support. The
international community can express its gratitude to the
troop-contributing countries by fulfilling the
commitments made at the Brussels donor conference,
including pledges to build the National Security
Forces, the Somalia police force and the national
security committee.
The United States is prepared to do its part by
providing pre-deployment training and equipment to
willing AMISOM troop-contributing countries. The
United States also continues to support the
development of a professional, effective national
security force.
The international community must look for ways
to safely make a greater impact within Somalia. We
support the plans of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia to move towards a larger footprint in
Somalia, which we believe will help the Transitional
Federal Government make further progress.
Reports about the more frequent recruitment and
use of children as soldiers in Somalia are appalling and
a cause for great concern. The United States strongly
condemns the exploitation of children by these groups
to pursue violent agendas, and we call upon all parties
to immediately release the children within their ranks
and provide for their proper reintegration into civilian
life. Basic civil liberties such as freedom of speech
must be respected. The recent murder of Sheikh Nur
Mohamed Abkey, a 30-year veteran journalist killed in

10

Somalia this month is a tragic affront. The United
States condemns this crime in the strongest terms.
We also condemn Al-Shabaab’s recent moves to
restrict freedom of speech by ordering radio stations to
stop broadcasting news and music. These moves
demonstrate the increasing isolation of Somalia’s
spoilers, who know that transparent political dialogue
on the airwaves could eliminate their already meagre
support.
Somalia continues to face a dire humanitarian
situation. More than 3.2 million people need both food
and non-food assistance. Several factors — consecutive
seasons which have failed or poor rainfall, ongoing
conflict, rising inflation, displacement and outbreaks of
disease — have combined to severely worsen food
security and drive up rates of acute malnutrition. Lack
of security and stability further worsens the
humanitarian situation.
The United States is committed to meeting the
Somali people’s humanitarian needs. We condemn the
obstruction of access to aid for more than 1 million
Somalis, by Al-Shabaab and other violent extremists.
The deteriorating security situation in southern and
central Somalia has steadily eroded areas in which
humanitarian groups can operate. Targeted attacks on
aid workers and on United Nations facilities as well as
kidnappings and extortion have hampered attempts to
provide life-saving humanitarian aid. We call upon all
parties to ensure the unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance. For our part, the United States
provide more than $150 million in food and non-food
emergency assistance in 2009 to help meet the health,
nutrition, protection, water, sanitation and hygiene
needs of the Somali population.
The United States is committed to seeing peace
and stability take hold in Somalia, for the Somali
people, the region and the world. We encourage the
Transitional Federal Government to keep up its
momentum and to continue to chart a steady course
towards the peaceful and prosperous future that
Somalia deserves.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman A. Ibrahim, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and
Marine Resources of Somalia. I also extend our thanks
to
Mr.
Ahmedou
Ould
Abdallah,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General

10-35930

S/PV.6313

(S/2010/234). I also welcome Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.
Of late, we have observed quite a number of
positive developments in and concerning Somalia. The
signing of the agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a
on 15 March is undoubtedly the most notable. It is an
important achievement and a result of the Transitional
Federal Government’s (TFG) efforts to reach out to all
groups in the country. The full and speedy
implementation of the agreement will be a crucial step,
among others, to confirm what the international
community has been saying: that there is no military
solution to the Somali question, and the only road to a
peaceful future is through the Djibouti peace process.
This message must be repeated and firmly conveyed.
Despite the positive developments, the remaining
challenges facing Somalia are far from negligible.
Insecurity continues to be widespread in the country.
My delegation is disturbed by the fact that attacks on
civilians, human rights violations and acts of cruelty
against women and children are, unfortunately, daily
occurrences. Threats against humanitarian assistance,
especially the blocking of World Food Programme
operations in Somalia, are totally unacceptable.
We commend the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for the crucial role it plays
towards achieving stability in Somalia. We thank all
troop- and police-contributing countries, especially
Uganda and Burundi. We encourage the Department of
Field Support to continue its support to AMISOM so
that it can effectively implement its mandate.
Expeditious deployment of the logistical support
package is undoubtedly vital in that regard, yet one
should not expect AMISOM to provide security alone.
Therefore, it is also of crucial importance that the
Somali security institutions be strengthened.
Successful completion of the transition in
Somalia can be achieved only if the necessary political
and security conditions are created, through targeted
efforts coordinated between the Transitional Federal
Government and the international community. The
Transitional Federal Government, which Turkey fully
supports and which it considers to be the only
legitimate authority in Somalia, should continue its
efforts to become more functional, while assertively
pursuing its outreach policy vis-à-vis the opposition

10-35930

groups. One other critical task that the Transitional
Federal Government should also complete is the
drafting of a constitution. The progress achieved to
date is promising in that regard.
Equally important is the maintenance of the
support provided to Somalia by the international
community. What has been accomplished so far is the
outcome of our coordinated efforts over the past couple
of years. These should be sustained. Turkey believes
that stability in Somalia can be consolidated only if the
gains in the political and security fields are supported
by reconstruction activities.
That said, I would like to touch upon the Somalia
conference which Turkey will host in Istanbul. The
Istanbul Conference on Somalia will be jointly
organized by the United Nations and the Turkish and
Somali Governments, with the participation of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
from 21 to 23 May. The high-level part of the
Conference, which is expected to be attended by a
number of heads of State or Government and Foreign
Ministers, is aimed at demonstrating the commitment
of the international community to the implementation
of the Djibouti Agreement, which envisaged
simultaneous progress in three areas: security, political
cooperation and reconstruction. I want to underline in
particular that this Conference is not being organized
as a donor conference. The third day of the Conference
will provide an opportunity for the Transitional Federal
Government, Member States, the private sector and
international business investors to engage, with a view
to identifying future opportunities. It will also focus on
recovery and reconstruction activities that aim at
attracting direct investment for infrastructure projects
that will strengthen the Somali economy, create
employment and generate revenue. That will boost
local business, lead to socio-economic development
and contribute to the peace process. This is particularly
pertinent when one considers that 3.2 million people —
or 43 per cent of Somalis — still need humanitarian
assistance.
We genuinely want the Istanbul Conference to
make a change: a change in the future of Somalia, a
change in the effective work of the Transitional Federal
Government and a change in the lives of the Somali
people, who have suffered a great deal in the past.
From Istanbul, we hope to send a strong message of
solidarity and to tell them that they are not alone.

11

S/PV.6313

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too are grateful to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, for his briefing on the situation in
Somalia. We listened with interest to the statements of
Mr. Abdurahman A. Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime
Minister of Somalia, and of Mr. Ramtane Lamamra of
the African Union.
Broadly speaking, we agree with their assessment
of the situation in Somalia. We agree also that there has
been some success in the work of the Transitional
Federal Government with respect to the peace process.
The Government’s social base is expanding slowly but
surely as State authority grows stronger. Hence, we
support Somali development by the Somalis
themselves, on the basis of their own efforts.
At the same time, we are concerned about
stability in the country. The irreconcilable opposition
continues to attack Government positions, African
Union troops and Somali forces. This undermines the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
effectively govern the country. Even in the capital the
extent of its influence is narrow, and in the central and
southern parts of the country, extremists are in nearly
total control. United Nations personnel, local people
and humanitarian workers are in danger, which makes
the humanitarian situation even more difficult than it
already was.
The international community must continue to
take agreed measures to provide assistance to the
Transitional Federal Government in the areas of
security and capacity-building, as it seeks to carry out
its governance functions.
In the current situation, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is an important
stabilizing factor in the country. In that regard, we, like
others, want it to be fully staffed and provided with
appropriate logistical support. We believe that,
depending on the political situation and with the
consent of the Somalis, that presence should continue
as the United Nations presence gradually expands.
Along with the Secretary-General, we continue to
advocate coordination of the work of United Nations
agencies in Somalia. We agree that it is necessary to
broaden the United Nations partnerships with other
players and to pool efforts to overcome the security
challenges in the peace process and to advance in the
development process. Here, we welcome the Istanbul

12

Conference on Somalia, to be held this month, which
our Turkish colleague introduced in detail.
We support the Secretary-General’s proposal to
strengthen the Somalia sanctions regime. We believe,
however, that targeted sanctions must be imposed on
the basis of reliable and verified information.
With respect to piracy, Russia continues to be an
active participant in international efforts to repel that
threat. In our view, prosecution of pirates is a difficult
problem. We stress that, as the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General are prepared pursuant to Council
resolution 1918 (2010), they should explore the
possibility of establishing special judicial chambers or
an international tribunal on piracy, taking international
practice into account.
We believe that if there is to be a long-term
solution for piracy the political process must continue
and there must be renewal in Somalia. Russia supports
the efforts of the Somali President and the Transitional
Federal Government to achieve lasting peace and
national reconciliation on the basis of the Djibouti
Agreement, in the interest of strengthening security
and stability in the region. We believe that the
authority of the legitimate Government must be
extended throughout the territory of Somalia,
irrespective of the current political situation in
particular regions.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Abdurahman A. Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime
Minister of the Transitional National Government, for
their presentations. I also welcome the presence among
us of Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, and thank him for
his statement.
I would recall France’s full support for the
Transitional Federal Government. We endorse the
statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union.
The situation in Somalia remains fragile. Whether
we are talking about the humanitarian situation or the
military situation, the attacks of the radical opposition
on the Transitional Federal Government are ongoing.
The Government successfully resisted such attacks, but
the emergence from crisis has been slowed down.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

With regard to the Istanbul Conference, in which
the French minister will participate, should make it
possible to start planning for ways to develop Somalia.
The international community should support President
Ahmed. We hope that the United Nations will be able,
in accordance with the overall strategy overseen by the
Security Council, to provide a permanent presence in
Somalia, led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose coordinating role has been
recognized by the Council.
However, such progress presupposes that the
Transitional Federal Government shall continue, with
the help of the international community, to strengthen
itself militarily. France has contributed to that end by
training a battalion of 500 Somali soldiers. Other
countries, such as Uganda and Djibouti, have done the
same. This month, the European Union, with the
participation of French soldiers, has begun to train
2,000 Somali soldiers in Uganda, in close cooperation
with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and other partners.
In this regard, it is critical to ensure that our
efforts are sustainable and to coordinate them as much
as possible with the activities of AMISOM. The
African Union Mission, strengthened by a fourth
Ugandan battalion and by new police officers,
continues to give the Government indispensable
support. I pay tribute to the courage of its personnel,
and in particular the Ugandan and Burundian
contingents. The support provided to AMISOM by the
United Nations logistical support package, within the
limits defined by the Council, should continue, as
should the support of the major donors, either directly
or through the various funds that have been set up. The
United Nations also has different means for taking
action at its disposal, such as international sanctions.
Following the adoption of resolution 1907 (2009)
last December, the sanctions Committee decided to
place a series of entities and individuals on the
sanctions list, on the basis of resolution 1844 (2008), in
order to signal our determination in a concrete manner.
All these actions will have even greater impact now
that the Transitional Federal Government has been
strengthened by the political momentum it has sparked
in the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement and through the
agreement signed with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a on
15 March. It is all the more urgent that the latter
agreement be implemented and that the transitional
Somali authorities show themselves to be united.

10-35930

With respect to fighting piracy, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/234) shows that the number
of attacks has decreased. We must continue to take
action on the seas, and Operation Atalanta plays a
major role in this effort. But we also have to expand
our action on land, which will require helping the
States of the region that have been victims of piracy to
obtain the legal and financial means to prosecute and
eventually convict and imprison the pirates.
We hail the efforts of the States of the region and
encourage Kenya, Seychelles and Tanzania — as well
as Somalia, of course — to redouble their efforts in this
area, with the support, inter alia, of the Contact
Group’s Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The Fund
has already decided to allocate more than €2 million.
We call on donors to contribute to the Fund. France
welcomes the agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the authorities of Puntland in
this regard. The High Representative of the European
Union, Baroness Ashton, will soon visit the region in
order to raise these and other issues, which the Council
will take up again in late July.
Somalia is experiencing one of the most complex
and dangerous crises ever. I recall in that regard that a
French national has been held hostage there since July
2009. The European Union’s ability to act there is
particularly difficult. We must ceaselessly continue to
work on improving our means of action. Accordingly,
France will closely follow the results of the different
investigations launched following the publication of
the latest report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
(S/2010/91). I would stress that these difficulties make
better coordination between the actions of the
international community and the United Nations all the
more necessary. I welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to that end and
to work for an integrated mission. France looks
forward with great interest to hearing the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on these matters.
Mr. Du Xiaocong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
today’s open debate on the situation in Somalia. We
welcome Mr. Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister of
Somalia. I thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. I also thank Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, for his
statement.

13

S/PV.6313

Since the last briefing by Mr. Ould Abdallah to
the Security Council, there has been no noticeable
improvement in the situation in Somalia. The security
situation there does not allow for optimism, the
humanitarian crisis is worsening, and the political
negotiation process has been difficult and slow. Pirate
activities remain rampant. The situation in Somalia has
thus become a serious threat to security and peace in
the Horn of Africa and to international peace and
security.
It is the view of the Chinese Government that the
ultimate solution to the question of Somalia lies in the
cessation of armed conflict among various factions, the
settlement of political differences, and the achievement
of national reconciliation and reconstruction. China
supports the Djibouti Agreement and welcomes the
agreement recently signed between the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama’a. It is our sincere hope that the political parties
in Somalia will act in the interest of the State and the
nation by laying down their arms, seeking common
ground and participating in the political negotiation
process. We call on all the concerned parties, including
countries of the region, to cooperate in earnest, respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia,
offer support to the TFG, and advance the domestic
political process of reconciliation so that substantive
progress can be achieved as soon as possible.
China condemns all attacks on the TFG, the
civilians of Somalia and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We highly appreciate AMISOM’s
work to improve the security situation in Somalia in
circumstances of extreme difficulty and danger. We
also recognize the contribution of such troopcontributing countries as Uganda and Burundi. We
believe that the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, should play an even greater role
in seeking a solution to the question of Somalia. We
support the idea that the United Nations should
maintain its assistance to AMISOM. We also support
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as soon as conditions permit.
The peace process in Somalia requires the
unflagging attention and support of the international
community. We welcome the upcoming Istanbul
Conference on Somalia. We hope that greater common
understanding can be reached at the Conference on an
appropriate solution to the question of Somalia.

14

To conclude, I would like to thank Special
Representative Ould Abdallah for his tireless efforts
and hard work in promoting peace in Somalia in recent
years. Every time he comes to the Council for a
briefing, he reminds us of the urgency of finding a
solution to the question of Somalia, which, in the
current environment, has become particularly
egregious. I would therefore like to reiterate that the
Chinese Government is ready to make its own
contribution to finding a solution to the question of
Somalia. We shall continue to support Mr. Ould
Abdallah’s work.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Ould Abdallah for his briefing and exemplary work
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
also welcome the presence of and briefings by
Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia (TFG) and Commissioner
Lamamra.
A firm commitment was made by the
international community a year ago at the donors
conference in Brussels to support Somalia and, in
particular, the TFG. One year later, we find that the
situation in Somalia remains highly volatile and
continues to be a source of deep concern. A quarter of
the pledges made at Brussels have not yet been
disbursed. The situation therefore requires a renewed
commitment to translating the political compact into
action.
First, we urge the TFG to continue to strengthen
its efforts for political reconciliation and outreach.
Japan commends the recent agreement between the
TFG and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a, which should be
immediately put into force. We also hope that the TFG
will continue to reach out to opposition groups to
achieve more inclusive administration.
The institution-building effort of the TFG is
crucially important. The training of and financial
assistance to Somali security personnel are essential to
building the Somali security institutions. The TFG’s
capacity for financial management and to provide basic
services is also the basis for its governance. The major
challenge is how to make those efforts persistent and
sustainable. The international community must
concentrate its assistance to the TFG. We must ensure
that we stop any support to groups jeopardizing the
peace process and prevent activities against the TFG.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

The international community, for its part, should
honour its commitment to supporting the efforts of the
TFG. With respect to security, Japan commends the
indispensable role played by the troops of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We are pleased
that the troop level has now reached 7,000 with the
deployment of a fourth battalion by Burundi. Japan
expresses sincere appreciation for the tremendous work
done by the troops of Uganda and Burundi under very
difficult conditions.
The deployment of seven AMISOM police
personnel to train the Somali police in Mogadishu is a
small but positive step. We hope that more police
personnel will be deployed as soon as security
conditions permit. Japan appreciates the valuable
support of the logistical package provided by the
Secretariat
to AMISOM. We
welcome
the
dissemination of balanced information through public
radio. The efforts to train the military and police
personnel of the TFG need to be accompanied by
equipment and infrastructure support.
We hope that the most effective use will be made
of the Trust Funds in support of AMISOM and Somali
security institutions. Japan is pleased with the
contributions that have been made to support these
efforts. I add my voice to the appeal for the remaining
25 per cent of the pledges made at the Brussels
conference to be disbursed as soon as possible.
Humanitarian assistance plays an indispensable
role in the lives of millions of people in Somalia. Japan
condemns the obstruction and intimidation by
opposition groups to hinder the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. It is our strong hope that the
assistance provided through the World Food
Programme will be fully implemented as soon as the
independent review clarifies the allegations of misuse.
We hope that the emergency rehabilitation project at
the Port of Mogadishu, to be implemented by the
World Food Programme with Japanese support, will
contribute to efficient food delivery and customs
revenues for the TFG. It will also be important to
strengthen the cooperation between the TFG, Puntland
and Somaliland with a view to long-term
reconstruction and development throughout Somalia.
To achieve peace and stability in Somalia, the
Security Council endorsed a three-stage incremental
approach to provide support for AMISOM and the
early establishment of a United Nations presence in

10-35930

Somalia. Improvement in security is of course a
prerequisite to making progress in the three-stage
approach. We hope that the TFG will make every effort
to make effective use of international support and to
strengthen its governance.
The issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia is
closely linked to the situation on land. Regrettably, the
incidents of piracy have not decreased in momentum.
Those activities are now expanding East, far from the
shore to the Somali Basin and close to the Seychelles.
The fight against piracy requires a multifaceted and
collective international approach. The efforts of the
TFG, Somaliland and Puntland to coordinate their
counter-piracy actions should be encouraged. The
international community must support the stabilization
of Somalia, capacity-building in neighbouring
countries, and the creation of productive employment
opportunities for young people.
Japan is committed to making active
contributions, including at the upcoming meeting of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I, too, welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim and Mr. Lamamra
to this meeting. I should like in particular to thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his untiring work in
Somalia, and more especially for the clear and
comprehensive briefing that he gave this morning.
It is evident from the briefings we have received
that the situation in Somalia remains dire. In spite of
this, the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) is
making progress. We commend the efforts of the TFG
in spite of these difficulties. The consolidation of the
process in Somalia, however, cannot be deepened in a
situation in which the TFG faces severe budgetary
gaps, the security environment remains volatile and
unpredictable, the humanitarian situation is in fact
worsening, piracy is on the increase and constraining
economic challenges remain. It is in this regard that we
believe that the remaining time before the end of the
transition period will be pivotal and must be seized to
facilitate the return of peace, security and stability to
Somalia.
On the political front, there is a need for more
progress in the drafting of the new constitution, based
on consultations. We commend the agreement reached
on 15 March with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a, which is a
milestone that should foster sustained political
dialogue and the furtherance of the Djibouti

15

S/PV.6313

Agreement. There is also a need to intensify
international support for the TFG in its effort to extend
its authority internally, provide services and confront
the security challenges in the country.
In the economic sector, there is a need to
recognize Somalia’s economic challenges and to
support the TFG’s efforts to generate revenue. I should
like to echo a point made by Mr. Ould Abdallah this
morning regarding the payment of fishing license fees
to the TFG rather than to individuals as a concrete way
to contribute to the generation of revenue in Somalia.
The international community must also focus
attention on Somalia’s economic development needs,
especially job creation. The integration of the Somali
economy into the wider regional economy should also
be encouraged. These efforts should be complemented
by the consistent delivery of humanitarian services.
While we appreciate the immense contributions that
have been made to Somalia, we lend our support to the
Secretary-General’s appeal to Member States to fulfil
their financial pledges to the TFG, especially those
made at the Brussels conference. Let me also add that
we support the Istanbul conference to be convened on
22 May.
Stabilizing the security environment is vital for
the strengthening of the Government and the building
of State capacity and institutions in Somalia. Increased
support is required for Somalia’s security forces
through strategic training, the provision of adequate
resources for the payment of salaries, and the building
of the national security and stabilization plan.
Measures to fight piracy, deter foreign fighters and
protect civilians and aid workers should be enhanced.
The implementation of existing essential measures
should also be improved.
Let me now reiterate our full support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and call
for, first, the full implementation of the AMISOM
support package; secondly, enhanced remuneration for
AMISOM troops to bring it into line with United
Nations rates; thirdly, reimbursement for transportation
and other logistics provisions; and, fourthly, the
establishment of a multilateral peacekeeping force in
Somalia under the aegis of the United Nations and the
African Union.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
operationalize the joint planning unit to ensure the
coherence and coordination of United Nations

16

activities in the country. We look forward to his review
of the implementation of the United Nations strategy
for Somalia, which we hope will take into
consideration the need to integrate the United Nations
system in Somalia.
In conclusion, we salute the gallant men and
women of the military forces of Uganda and Burundi
for their efforts and commitment to the cause of peace
in Somalia. We also salute the dedication of
international aid and humanitarian workers in the
country.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime
Minister of Somalia, and his delegation, as well as
Ambassador Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union. We listened very
carefully to their briefings. We once again appreciate
the valuable information provided by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah. We acknowledge his commitment and
that of his office to carrying out their arduous task.
We are concerned that, in spite of the efforts of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
assisted by the international community, the security
situation in that country continues to be highly volatile.
We commend the efforts of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the commitment of Uganda
and Burundi to deterring attacks by armed groups and
achieving basic levels of stability in key sites around
the country. We are certain that support for the
Transitional Federal Government in comprehensively
reforming the security sector is the only viable way of
ensuring the stability that Somalia and its people so
urgently need.
We commend the work of the Joint Security
Committee on devising a development strategy for the
security sector. We also acknowledge the progress
made in the training of military and police personnel.
Moreover, we agree with the joint security sector
assessment that reforming the sector should be based
on a firm political pillar and include the promotion of
good governance, transparency and accountability.
In that regard, we believe that the agreement
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a political faction that was
signed under the auspices of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia has set an important
precedent for dialogue among all factions and armed

10-35930

S/PV.6313

groups in the context of the Djibouti Agreement. The
Agreement and the conclusion of Somalia’s
constitution-making process are essential steps towards
consolidating and legitimizing the Government.
We believe that the meeting of the Contact Group
held in Cairo in April and the high-level Istanbul
Conference
on
Somalia’s
reconstruction
and
development, which is to be held from 21 to 22 May,
will contribute to efforts to draft an international
community strategy for Somalia that is more coherent
and coordinated and led by the United Nations.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
incremental approach to the deployment of the United
Nations presence in Mogadishu. We commend the
efforts of all the Organization’s agencies involved in
that regard. We trust that efforts in the political and
security sectors will produce the results necessary to
achieve greater progress.
With regard to the issue of combating piracy and
armed robbery, we acknowledge the efforts of the
European Union, NATO, Combined Task Force 151
and the international presence. In coordination with the
Transitional Federal Government, they are confronting
these threats to the economy and security of the region.
We believe that generating coast guard capacity in
Somalia and the countries of the region should
continue to be an essential goal, without ignoring the
clear need and strategic value of prioritizing efforts on
the ground to tackle the root causes of this
phenomenon. In that regard, the dialogue focused on
greater cooperation and cooperation among officials of
the various Somali regions is a great step forward.
With regard to the recent adoption of resolution
1918 (2010), we look forward to the Security Council’s
consideration of options with regard to possible justice
mechanisms with respect to piracy. My delegation
believes that the international community should
endeavour
to prioritize capacity-building
for
international judicial systems so that they can
investigate and try perpetrators of piracy in Somalia.
We also believe that, as an essential tool for combating
piracy, the strengthening of national capacities should
take priority over the establishment of international
tribunals.
We join others in condemning attacks against
AMISOM and the humanitarian workers of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.
Such attacks have led to a reduction in assistance

10-35930

efforts and impede the access of vulnerable groups to
basic needs and the nutrition needed to survive. Given
the serious insecurity we see on the ground and its
regrettable impact on the civilian population, we
reiterate our commitment to full respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
call on the parties to immediately cease attacks, avoid
situations that indiscriminately affect the civilian
population, and allow access to and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
In addition, we are especially concerned about
reports of increased recruitment and use of child
soldiers by armed groups in Somalia. We urge all
parties to free all child soldiers in their ranks and to
ensure that they return to their home communities. We
also commend all the efforts of the Federal Transitional
Government to address this alarming recruitment
situation.
In the context of the sanctions Committee on
Somalia and Eritrea, my delegation reiterates its belief
that, used coherently and incrementally, arms embargos
and targeted sanctions regimens are valuable tools that
can benefit the peace process as a whole. In that
regard, we are pleased to note the willingness
demonstrated by the Transitional Federal Government,
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
country team in Somalia to look into aspects pertaining
to their functions referred to in the annual report of the
Committee’s Monitoring Group (S/2010/91). Both the
Committee and the Monitoring Group are fully
prepared to cooperate with these investigations and
interested in their conclusions.
In the context of this cooperation, I recently led a
visit to the Horn of Africa in my capacity of Chairman
of the sanctions Committee, as recommended by that
Committee. The purpose of the visit was to disseminate
information about the sanctions regime, to facilitate the
work of the Committee’s Monitoring Group, and to
address specific issues related to the arms embargo and
sanctions targeted against entities and individuals,
inviting all involved Governments to cooperate with
the Committee and the Security Council.
In the next few weeks, I will be presenting a
report to the Committee on my visit to the region,
which will be included in the report I submit every four
months to the Security Council. I can state now that the
visit enabled us to establish positive and constructive
dialogue with each of the regional actors, in

17

S/PV.6313

accordance with the Committee’s mandate, as well as
to observe the outstanding work that the United
Nations is carrying out in the field in the face of the
major challenge that Somalia poses for the
international community.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in
welcoming the First Deputy Prime Minister of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, and
in thanking him for his important statement. I further
wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ould Abdallah,
for his extremely useful briefing. Our thanks also go to
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union to the United Nations later today.
We would like to reiterate our full support to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Djibouti peace process, and call upon all relevant
actors to fully implement the commitments undertaken.
Having said this, we would like to emphasize that the
cooperation and assistance of the international
community to the TFG are crucial, and that every
resource should be used to generate the necessary
political and security conditions for the successful
completion of the transition by 2011.
We note with satisfaction the progress in some
key areas identified in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/234), particularly in the field of national
reconciliation, the drafting of the constitution,
capacity-building, the building of national security
forces and expanding political space in the country.
In that context, we further welcome the signing of
the cooperation agreement between the TFG and Ahlu
Sunna Wal Jama’a, and we hope that this change will
contribute to the Government’s capacity to consolidate
its authority and restore order in the country. We urge
all groups outside the Djibouti peace process to join in
as soon as possible.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is concerned about the
security situation in Somalia, especially in the southern
and central parts of the country. We strongly condemn
the continuing indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population, the TFG and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

18

We are deeply concerned by the fact that the
recruitment and use of children in the conflict have
increased in the past year. We therefore urge all parties
to the conflict to fully comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law in order to
protect the civilian population.
Bosnia and Herzegovina further expresses its
concern regarding the alarming humanitarian crisis in
Somalia, which is exacerbated by the severe
difficulties in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
caused by increased violence against humanitarian
workers, ongoing fighting and drought. We hope that
adequate funding of the consolidated appeals process
and the United Nations transition plan for Somalia will
allow for the continuation of critical humanitarian
activities.
Once more, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to commend the African Union and AMISOM troops
for their tireless efforts in stabilizing the situation in
Somalia, despite the extremely difficult environment in
which they are operating. We would like to pay a
special tribute to Uganda and Burundi for the vitally
important contribution they are making to AMISOM.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the important
efforts made by the TFG in preparing its own security
sector assessment report and the national security and
stabilization plan, which are intended to ensure
coherence in developing the security and justice
sectors. In that regard, we encourage the fulfilment of
pledges made at the international conference in support
of Somalia’s security institutions and AMISOM, held
in Brussels on 23 April 2009.
In order to achieve lasting peace and stability, we
urge the TFG to build on this positive momentum and
intensify its efforts, especially in the areas of political
reconciliation and outreach, the constitution-making
process, security, stability and the delivery of services.
Moreover, it is of crucial importance for the
international community to use this window of
opportunity to strengthen the effectiveness of its
presence in the country by further coordinating its
actions.
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the three-phase
incremental approach, as set out by the SecretaryGeneral. We welcome the completion and approval of
the first accommodation facilities in a Bancroft
compound with regard to establishing the second “light
footprint” phase.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

We also welcome the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia to be held on 22 May 2010, and hope that it
will foster political stability, security and reconstruction
in the country.
On the fight against piracy, Bosnia and
Herzegovina shares the position expressed by other
Council members that long-term solutions will come
only through the rule of law and the establishment of
security on the ground.
In conclusion, please allow me to highlight an
issue we deem exceptionally important. Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes important efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service to reduce the dangers of
mines to the civilian population, including mapping
mine contamination throughout southern and central
Somalia and mine risk education sessions in
communities affected by mines and unexploded
ordnance.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Gabon welcomes the initiative of your
country, Lebanon, to organize a debate on Somalia, a
country where the situation remains troubling on the
political, security and humanitarian fronts.
We welcome the participation in this important
debate of His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries
and Marine Resources of Somalia. His informative
statement has of course provided us with useful
information on recent developments in his country. It
strengthens our enduring confidence in the ability of
Somalia to take up the many challenges ahead.
My delegation would also like to thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for the clarity and high quality of
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/234) and for his consistent commitment to
peace and reconciliation in Somalia. I also naturally
welcome the participation of the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, my friend and
brother Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, who has shared with us
the African Union’s views on the matter.
As members know the situation in Somalia is of
the highest concern to Africa and the international
community, which are making tireless efforts to restore
peace and stability there. We are firmly convinced that
regular wide-ranging discussions on the Somali crisis,
such as the one that will take place in Istanbul from
21 to 23 May 2010, can help the Security Council to
10-35930

better assess progress on the ground and the further
initiatives to take in order to best continue restoring the
Somali State.
The Somali crisis is first and foremost political
and institutional in nature. Thus, the country will find a
lasting solution only through further emphasis being
placed on restoring State authority and strengthening
the peace process.
In that regard, my country reiterates its support
for the Djibouti peace agreement, signed on 19 August
2008. Thus, we praise the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government to fully implement that agreement,
as shown by an agreement signed between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunnah
Wal Jama’a resistance movement at the headquarters of
the African Union on 15 March. That outreach initiative
is undeniable progress, greatly welcomed, moreover, by
the International Contact Group on Somalia at its
meeting in Cairo on 21 and 22 April 2010.
The Somali authorities must continue dialogue
with the insurgent groups so as to bring them into the
peace process and to actively seek ways to achieve
reconciliation and a lasting peace. Hence, the Security
Council, and the international community in general,
must continue to support to the Transitional Federal
Government in order to strengthen its authority
throughout the territory.
This is the place to encourage the implementation
of the Trust Fund for Somalia and the full honouring of
the pledges made at the April 2009 Brussels
conference. Along the same lines, we should encourage
a stronger presence of the international community and
greater coordination of its action with the Transitional
Federal Government in Mogadishu.
The signing of a memorandum of understanding
last April by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia seeks precisely to facilitate the
coordination on the ground of the action of the
signatories with regard to protecting civilians, in
particular women and children.
The crisis in Somalia is also a security crisis.
Armed violence must be stopped, in particular the
fighting between the regular army and the insurgents.
In a word, the international community must
participate in securing the country.

19

S/PV.6313

My delegation commends the significant role that
the African Union Mission in Somalia continues to
play, despite the difficult conditions it faces owing
both to the environment and to its operational
capacities. Despite the broad consensus enjoyed by the
Transitional
Federal
Government
within
the
international community, the support provided to
AMISOM, which barely comprises the required 8,000
soldiers, unfortunately has still not enabled its optimal
deployment. The human and logistical resources
necessary for its mission are still lacking.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its hearty
congratulations to Uganda and Burundi, which, despite
those extremely difficult conditions, have agreed to
provide troops to AMISOM. Those congratulations
also go to Djibouti, which last January decided to make
450 soldiers available to the Mission. Lastly, I extend
our gratitude to the other countries which, from near or
far, contribute in various ways to the viability of that
African operation.
However, AMISOM is not forever. I would like to
believe that sooner or later it will be bolstered or
replaced by a true United Nations peacekeeping
operation, whose modalities could be defined in
consultation with the African Union.
Recalling that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, my delegation is convinced
that a larger United Nations presence in Somalia would
help improve the security conditions required for a
successful transition by 2011.
In the medium term, securing the country is a
task that must return to the Somali army. The optimal
discharge of such a mission requires that the troops be
well trained and that the army must be closer to the
communities. Here, the challenge is to form a truly
national army. We welcome the initiative recently
taken by the European Union to establish, in Uganda, a
training programme for the Somali armed forces. Such
initiatives should be duplicated with the help of the
African Union and undertaken as part of a national
action plan developed by the Somali authorities.
In that regard, as indicated in the report under
consideration, we welcome the current efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government to prepare a report to
assess the security sector and the implementation of the
national security and stabilization plan.

20

Acts of piracy against ships at sea are a threat not
only to the security of other States in the region, but
also to international navigation and the safety of
commercial maritime routes. We support all initiatives
seeking to improve the fight against piracy in the
territorial waters of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden and
to bring to justice those guilty of acts of piracy.
Gabon is among those that believe that piracy at
sea is simply a result of the insecurity prevailing on
Somali territory. It is therefore logical to approach this
issue in a comprehensive way and to give high priority
to resolving the internal situation.
I cannot end my statement without mentioning the
humanitarian crisis hitting Somalia, which is one of the
worst that Africa has ever experienced. Some 20 years
of violence and anarchy have caused at least 2 million
Somali citizens to flee for their life. The assistance
provided by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme and other partners, whose indispensability
we recognize and whose work on the ground we
welcome, unfortunately still proves insufficient owing
both to a lack of resources and to security constraints
that make the needy populations’ access to food aid
difficult. It is therefore essential to step up efforts to
support the action of humanitarian organizations on the
ground.
Regarding
Somalia’s
reconstruction,
the
international community’s support must also take into
account the country’s economic development, in
particular restoring infrastructure, providing basic
services, promoting trade and business and creating
jobs.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his briefing. I also welcome the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and
Marine Resources of Somalia, Mr. Abdurahman
Ibrahim, and thank him for updating the Council on the
current developments in Somalia. It is clear that while
much has been achieved so far, many challenges still
remain. Let me also welcome Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, and thank him for his useful statement.
Uganda reaffirms its support for the Djibouti
peace process, as it represents the best opportunity for
lasting peace in Somalia.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

We commend the efforts made by the Transitional
Federal Government towards advancing the political
process in the country, and we support its continued
commitment to reaching out to opposition groups in the
search for lasting peace. The signing of the 15 March
agreement between the Government and Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a was a significant achievement. We
encourage the Transitional Federal Government to
further build on that success towards forming an allinclusive government.
The building of State institutions is critical for
effective governance and for security, as well as for the
stability of Somalia. Uganda commends the efforts of
the Transitional Federal Government towards the
rebuilding of State institutions, including the security
and judicial sectors and the collection of revenue.
However, major challenges still remain within those
and other sectors. It is imperative that the international
community extend more support to the Government to
help it overcome these challenges and extend its
authority over more territory.
The security situation in Somalia remains a
serious challenge. The primary responsibility for
ensuring peace and security in Somalia rests with the
Transitional Federal Government and the Somali
people themselves. For this to happen, the country
requires well trained and well equipped armed and
police forces. Retention of these forces is critical; to
achieve that, the forces need to be remunerated in a
predictable and sustainable way. Other critical areas
that require support include health, education, energy,
fisheries and infrastructure. These need to be addressed
urgently in order to change the situation on the ground.
We call on the international community to assist the
Transitional Federal Government in that regard.
The success of the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government in unifying and reconstructing the
country will depend significantly on the availability of
adequate and predictable resources. We therefore call
upon the international community to continue
supporting the Transitional Federal Government. In
that regard, we welcome the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia, to be held from 21 to 23 May. The
Conference will offer Somalia and the international
community an opportunity to review progress and
challenges in the areas of security, political
reconciliation and the reconstruction of the country.

10-35930

It is also important to continue the efforts towards
bringing the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to its authorized troop level of 8,000, to
enable it fully to discharge its mandate. We appreciate
the support that has been extended to AMISOM
through the logistical support package, the trust fund
and bilateral arrangements. One of the challenges that
remain is to provide reimbursement for all contingentowned equipment. In that regard, we call for
predictable and timely provision of funds and other
resources.
Piracy remains a major challenge off the coast of
Somalia, as evidenced by recent incidents. This
situation remains, in spite of the significant efforts of
the international community to deploy substantial
naval assets off the coast of Somalia to combat piracy.
This is a reminder that, as long as there is instability on
the mainland, the problem of piracy will persist. It is
important that the Transitional Federal Government be
assisted in establishing authority over its territory, as
this will ensure a durable way of combating piracy off
the coast of Somalia.
Finally, we thank Mr. Ould Abdallah and the staff
of United Nations and humanitarian agencies for their
work in difficult conditions. It is important that
arrangements be made for the relocation to Somalia of
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM, the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and other
United Nations agencies based in neighbouring
countries. That will help strengthen the Government
and will also send a clear signal of further support by
the international community to the people of Somalia.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome Mr. Abdurahman
Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Fisheries and Maritime Resources of Somalia, and
thank him for his remarks. I also thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah for his briefing and for his commendable
work as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia. I welcome African Union
Commissioner Lamamra and thank him for his
statement. Through him, I would like to convey our
appreciation to the African Union for its support to
Somalia.
The Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has
been able to withstand fierce armed opposition and to
make progress in some important areas of the Djibouti
process and the transitional agenda. Nevertheless,

21

S/PV.6313

many challenges still remain on the path towards a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Somalia.
The signing on 15 March of the framework
agreement
between
the
Transitional
Federal
Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a was an
important achievement in the reconciliation policy
adopted by President Sharif. We look forward to the
implementation of the agreement and urge other armed
groups to renounce violence and join the Djibouti
process. The decision by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea to list Al-Shabaab and eight individuals should
be seen as a wake-up call to all recalcitrant groups.
Unity within and among the Transitional Federal
Institutions will remain essential to achieving further
progress towards peace and stability.
The security situation in Somalia remains a
matter of great concern, despite progress in
international support for the restructuring of
Transitional Federal Government security forces and
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
My delegation deplores, in particular, the attacks
against that Mission, including the one directed against
its headquarters on 27 April. We once again pay tribute
to the troops from Uganda and Burundi for their
contribution to the stabilization of Somalia. We are
encouraged by the efforts of several Member States to
train, equip and fund AMISOM troops and Transitional
Federal Government security forces. We note, in
particular, the launching of the European Union
training mission to Somalia.
We are encouraged by the progress reported by
the Secretary-General regarding United Nations
activities in Mogadishu. We hope that security and
political conditions will be soon in place to allow for a
more substantive United Nations presence in the
capital.
As the Transitional Federal Government rebuilds
its security forces, steps must be taken to avoid the
civilian population continuing to bear the brunt of the
conflict. Fleeing conflict zones, such as Mogadishu, is
not always a guarantee against violence. We strongly
condemn the taking of a medical compound by armed
groups on 7 May. Blatant disregard for the principle of
distinction was also displayed in the attack against the
mosque in the Bakara market, on 2 May, which killed
and injured scores of innocent people.

22

Against this background, it is disquieting to learn
that World Food Programme operations Somalia
remain suspended in all of south-central Somalia
except Mogadishu and that the World Health
Organization has had to reduce its activities in the
country due to lack of funding. In addition, it is
disturbing to learn that the 2010 consolidated appeal is
only 15 per cent funded.
Resolution 1918 (2010) represents an important
step against piracy. We encourage all stakeholders to
engage with Kenya in addressing its concerns with
regard to its efforts to fight impunity at sea. Brazil also
welcomes the establishment of a regional centre to
prosecute suspected pirates in Seychelles. Not only
States from the region but all affected States, including
flag States and States of the nationalities of victims,
have a common responsibility in tackling the problem.
I should also stress that a comprehensive solution
to piracy off the coast of Somalia will be achieved only
by addressing its root causes on land, as has been
pointed out by many delegations this morning. In this
regard, Brazil is encouraged by the increasing
cooperation on anti-piracy between the TFG,
Somaliland and Puntland noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/234). This could also build
confidence and have a positive influence on other core
issues related to Somalia’s future.
Before concluding, I would like to say a few
words on reconstruction and development. Progress in
revenue collection and the TFG’s renewed focus on
delivering
basic
services
and
rehabilitating
infrastructure are commendable. Tending to the
fundamental needs of the population and fostering
income generation are as important as the restructuring
of security forces. Socio-economic development can
greatly reduce the appeal of the insurgency and the
pirate militias. The TFG should be actively supported
in this regard, including through capacity-building. We
welcome the convening of the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia and look forward to its outcome.
The situation in Somalia is among the most
difficult challenges on the Security Council’s agenda.
The partnership between the TFG and the international
community should be strengthened. It has already
borne some fruit and is the most promising way to
peace and stability in the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ould

10-35930

S/PV.6313

Abdallah for his briefing today. I also highly welcome
the participation in this debate of His Excellency
Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister
of Somalia, and of His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.
At the outset, let me underline that Austria fully
aligns itself with the statement of the European Union
that will be delivered later today.
Austria highly welcomes the fact that, despite the
difficult security and humanitarian situation, Somalis
have made some progress in the Djibouti peace
process. Austria commends the signing of the
agreement with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a. Now the
focus should be on its implementation and further
outreach, with a special focus on a bottom-up approach
taking into account the firmly rooted clan structure of
Somali society.
Austria would like to once again confirm its
support for the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
and the continuation of the political process, which
should be as broad-based as possible. We hope that the
TFG, with the support of the international community,
will be able to assume in unity its responsibilities to
build security and rule of law institutions and to
embark on a reconciliation process.
Let me also underline the important contribution
of African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), its
troop-contributing countries Uganda and Burundi, the
United Nations support package for AMISOM, as well
as the substantial support of the European Union (EU)
to AMISOM in bringing security and stability to the
country. I would also like to highlight that the EU has
decided to step up its engagement to promote peace
and development in Somalia and last month launched a
training mission in Somalia to contribute to the training
of Somali security forces.
We welcome the proposal contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/234) to review the
implementation of the United Nations strategy for
Somalia and are looking forward to the presentation of
the results to the Security Council. It is indeed
important to better coordinate the work of the United
Nations entities on Somalia. We also look forward to
the upcoming Istanbul Conference on Somalia.
We are very concerned about the fragile security
situation and the impact of this environment on the

10-35930

humanitarian and human rights situation. Some
3.2 million people, almost half of Somalia’s
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Food insecurity and restricted humanitarian access
exacerbate the situation. Concerning any irregularities
in the management of humanitarian aid raised in the
report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
(S/2010/91), we consider it of utmost importance that
they be investigated and addressed properly.
Humanitarian deliveries must resume as soon as the
security situation allows. At the same time, I would
like to reiterate Austria’s appreciation for the
dedication and engagement of the many humanitarian
workers who accept high risks in order to alleviate the
plight of the civilian population in Somalia.
The human rights situation in Somalia continues
to be very problematic. We are extremely concerned
about the devastating consequences of the armed
conflict on civilians and the continued impunity for
human rights violations and abuses. We call upon all
parties to ensure the protection of civilians in
compliance with human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We also reiterate our condemnation
of the recruitment of children by armed groups and our
request that they be released immediately. We warmly
welcome the TFG’s measures to focus on the
protection of human rights as an essential element of
the peace process. We are also very encouraged by the
TFG’s intention to ratify the Convention on the Rights
of the Child.
Austria firmly condemns recent terror attacks,
and we are deeply worried about foreign support to the
insurgents. All Security Council resolutions, including
those that impose targeted sanctions and an arms
embargo, must be implemented fully and in good faith.
These measures are directed not against the people of
Somalia, but against those who threaten peace security
or stability.
The security situation for the Somali population
is still unacceptable and does not allow for the
provision of urgently needed help for the people. The
abundance of arms and armed groups is also a root
cause of the surge in piracy. It is important to see
piracy not only as a threat to key international shipping
lanes, but also as a factor further aggravating the
security and humanitarian situation in Somalia. Austria
therefore stresses the importance of determined
activities to curb piracy in the region, such as the EU’s
naval Operation Atalanta.

23

S/PV.6313

Finally, we also hope that in the future the report
of the Secretary-General will be issued within a time
frame that allows it to be fully taken into account in
preparation for the debate.

economic development and the elimination of poverty
in Somalia, and that comprehensive implementation of
the political process remains the key to resolving the
piracy issue.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Lebanon.

On the issue of financial support, Lebanon thanks
the donors that have largely honoured the commitments
they made in Brussels in 2009 and calls on them to go
beyond that assistance in response to the 2010
humanitarian appeal.

Once again, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources of
Somalia, and thank him for his important statement. I
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his thorough
briefing.
Lebanon supports the Djibouti peace process and
welcomes recent positive political developments,
including the signing of an agreement between the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and Ahlu
Sunna Wal Jama’a. We hope that the approach to the
situation in Somalia, where 43 per cent of the
population needs humanitarian assistance, will not be
limited to fighting rebellions and efforts in the area of
security, although these issues are very important, but
will also include the consolidation of institutions and
development aid.
We would like to make the following points. With
respect to security, we are very concerned by recent acts
of violence, militia attacks against the Government and
clashes among the insurgents themselves, which have
resulted in a number of innocent casualties. These
conflicts show that we need to equip and support the
regular army of Somalia as soon as possible in order to
extend State authority throughout Somali territory and
to reintegrate deserters and defectors from the army. We
welcome the Government’s national security plan and
urge donors to approve assistance to build up the Somali
security services and to ensure that they are duly paid.
As to piracy, we condemn all acts of piracy and
armed robbery, which pose a serious threat to trade,
international navigation and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We affirm the importance of
resolution 1918 (2010) and thank the States that have
sent ships into the territorial waters of Somalia and the
Gulf of Aden. We hope that this increased international
presence will uncover new information on illegal
fishing and the dumping of industrial waste along the
Somali coast. We support Mr. Ould Abdallah’s
proposal regarding fishing license fees. We reiterate
that addressing the underlying causes of piracy would
help to establish a firm and lasting foundation for

24

On the humanitarian situation, Lebanon
condemns insurgent attacks on humanitarian workers.
We are concerned over the evidence of children
abducted by armed groups and especially alarmed by
the threats made against journalists.
On the issue of the three-phased incremental
approach, we support the early implementation of the
second phase of that process in order to strengthen the
United Nations presence in Somalia and thereby send a
strong message of support from the Security Council
for the Djibouti peace process.
With respect to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), in the absence of an international
presence we call on donors to contribute to financing
AMISOM, and we praise the contributions of the
African Union and of AMISOM towards establishing
sustainable peace in Somalia. We thank Uganda and
Burundi for their contributions to that end and the
international community for its efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway is a founding
member of the International Contact Group on Somalia
and we chair the Group of Friends here in New York.
The Djibouti process is a Somali process. It is
owned and driven by Somalis. The Transitional Federal
Institutions should be driving the process and should
do so with a unified approach. Norway applauded the
agreement
between
the
Transitional
Federal
Government (TFG) and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a in
March. We also commended the new agreement
between the TFG and Puntland. We are watching a
political transition in Somalia. It is important that the
door remain open to others. However, implementing
agreements is even more important than signing them,
and the TFG should be urged to address this with
seriousness.

10-35930

S/PV.6313

Taking into account the approaching end of the
transition period in August 2011, efforts have to be
redoubled with regard to improving the security
situation, giving impetus to the political process, and
improving the lives of children, women and men in
Somalia. We recognize that the TFG is facing very
serious constraints and challenges, and we also realize
that the international community may not have been as
forthcoming with support and assistance as expected
by the TFG.
Norway has recently and for the first time
transferred a small amount of our support to the TFG
directly through the Central Bank of Somalia. This is
basically a test case to see if it works in a way that
satisfies the rules and regulations that we must observe
when disbursing public funds. In other words, we wish
to see this money create improved services in the city
of Mogadishu. If we do, we will give more.
Although the main aim is to bring an end to the
perennial humanitarian crisis in Somalia, Norway shall
continue to be a major partner with regard to
humanitarian assistance to Somalia. We want to
commend the United Nations for taking steps to
address the allegations in the latest report of the
sanctions Committee’s Monitoring Group on Somalia
(S/2010/91).
We shall also continue our active support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
implementation of the Djibouti process, and the peace
and reconciliation efforts in general, in close
cooperation with the United Nations, as well as with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
Realizing the paramount importance of the
security issue in Somalia, we commend the efforts and
sacrifices of the African Union and others, particularly
the countries contributing troops and police to the
African Union Mission in Somalia — Uganda and
Burundi — in assisting the attempts of the TFG to
stabilize the situation in the country, and we urge other
countries that are in a position to do so to follow their
lead. Peace and stability in Somalia are important not
only to the Somalis themselves, but also to the entire
Horn of Africa and far beyond.
Norway has also been very active in countering
piracy off the coast of Somalia. We have deployed a
frigate to the region and chaired the last meeting of the
Contact Group. Norway is also a substantial donor to

10-35930

the Trust Fund established here at the United Nations.
Encouraging progress has been made and we look
forward to continuing to work with other States and
regional organizations on this matter.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Let me thank you, Sir, for inviting
the European Union (EU) to this timely and important
debate. I also thank His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman
Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia,
for his important statement. He can rest assured of the
EU’s continued commitment to assisting Somalia. I
also offer many thanks to African Union Commissioner
Lamamra and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for
their presentations and very valuable work.
The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey’ the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this declaration.
In the interest of brevity, let me summarize the
main points of the written statement that has just been
circulated. The continued deadly attacks against the
Somalia peace process, the TFG and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are wreaking havoc on
the lives of Somalia’s population. A comprehensive
approach that incorporates reconciliation and outreach,
security and development, human rights and cohesive
governance is essential for tackling the challenges
facing Somalia. The international community must
therefore remain actively engaged.
In 2009, the European Union enhanced its
comprehensive approach to the region by adopting the
European Union Horn of Africa policy. In pursuit of
this policy, the European Union is now stepping up its
engagement in support of the stabilization and
development of Somalia. High Representative Ashton
will shortly visit the region to reaffirm the European
Union’s commitment to the fight against piracy and to
explore the prospect of deepened cooperation with the
countries of the region.

25

S/PV.6313

The European Union welcomes recent efforts of
the TFG and partners within Somalia to join together in
ensuring broad-based stabilization and recovery at the
federal, regional and local levels. The agreement
between the TFG and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a, signed
in Addis Ababa on 15 March 2010, is particularly
significant. The implementation of such commitments
could be the stepping stone towards the completion of
the outstanding transitional federal tasks pursuant to
the transitional federal charter and the Djibouti
Agreement of 2008. The international community
should stand ready to support this process.
Meanwhile, it is important that the TFG continue
its outreach efforts in the framework of the Djibouti
Agreement to enlarge the political base of the
Government. The Transitional Federal Institutions
should continue to work constructively to address the
enormous challenges ahead. As the International
Contact Group has underlined, it is also important to
increase financial transparency and accountability.
I pay tribute to the tireless efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union and their respective
Special Representatives, Ambassador Ould Abdallah
and Ambassador Diarra, to bring peace to Somalia. The
European Union has provided about €90 million to the
African Union Mission in Somalia since its
establishment in 2007. Uganda and Burundi are
playing an essential role in implementing that mission.
Hopefully other countries will join forces with them in
contributing to AMISOM.
On 7 April 2010 the European Union launched a
military training mission in Somalia. The objective of
this initiative, in line with resolution 1872 (2009), is to
support the Transitional Federal Institutions of Somalia
through the training of 2,000 Somali recruits. This
contribution to the sustainable development of the
Somali security sector should help provide a more
secure living environment for ordinary Somalis.
Operating in close cooperation and coordination with
international partners, particularly the United Nations
and the African Union, this training mission will be
carried out in Uganda, where Somali forces are already
undergoing instruction. I would like to thank the
Ugandan Government for its active assistance to the
European Union in this regard. I would also like to
acknowledge the valuable support provided by the
United States in key areas.

26

The European Union is aware that the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia requires
continued and comprehensive engagement. The
European Union welcomes the work of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The
European Union naval operation, Operation Atalanta,
launched in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, is producing positive results, and its
mandate has recently been extended. The forthcoming
General Assembly debate on piracy will provide an
occasion to discuss these initiatives further. Atalanta’s
Operational Commander, Admiral Peter Hudson, will
be one of the speakers. Effective means of bringing
suspected pirates to justice are essential to a
comprehensive approach, and neighbouring countries
are to be commended for the assistance they have
provided in this regard.
It is important that the international approach to
Somalia remain strategic, looking beyond urgent
support to the security sector to also address longerterm development needs. The European Union has
committed €215 million to development aid for the
period 2008 to 2013, making the EU — together with
its member States — the biggest donor to Somalia.
Particular attention is being paid to governance,
security and support to civil society, education, the
productive sectors and rural development. In addition,
the European Union will provide €35 million in
humanitarian aid to Somalia in 2010.
The international Conference on Somalia to be
held in Istanbul at the end of May will offer us a fresh
opportunity to address the various aspects of this crisis.
It should give renewed impetus to international
engagement in Somalia in the political, economic and
social fields. The European Commissioner for
Development, Mr. Andris Piebalgs, is planning to
participate in the Conference. As I said at the
beginning, the Council and Somalia can rest assured of
the European Union’s firm engagement in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Serrano for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, who wishes to make a further statement.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: Thank you, Sir, for
presiding over this meeting and for giving me the
opportunity to speak once again. First of all, I
appreciate your kind words and those of Council

10-35930

S/PV.6313

members addressed to me, my colleagues, my Office
and the Secretary-General.
Secondly, I note with great appreciation the
Council’s renewed and practical interest in the
situation in Somalia and in the progress made, which
needs to be consolidated. We need to continue to
support this Government, whatever difficulties it may
have within the country. Without a Government there
will be no progress.
Thirdly, I would note in particular positive
support for the increased integration of the United
Nations system in order to help it to be better informed
and more effective in delivering its various forms of
assistance. I also note with appreciation the
encouragement for the idea that the international
community has to move back to Mogadishu to be
closer to the victims and to be more effective. We
cannot continue to address Somalia by remote control.
Fourthly, the vast support for the Istanbul
Conference on Somalia is most encouraging and will
strengthen the Government of President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed and his peace efforts with all Somalis
ready to talk stability and to set aside their arms.
Finally, I call on all parties engaged in the
process to help the timely and effective disbursement
of stipends to members of parliament and to soldiers.
Lack of payment is at the root of much of the crisis that
the Government is living through. Regular payment or
the lack thereof has a critical impact on stability within
Somalia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, who wishes to make
a further statement.
Mr. Ibrahim (Somalia): Mr. President, allow me
to thank you once again for your dedication to this
issue, Somalia. I would also like to thank the other
members of the Security Council who also mentioned
everything that is in their hearts about Somalia. I
would also like to offer my heartfelt thanks to those
countries whose taxpayers’ money has gone to
Somalia, in particular, the United States of America,
the United Kingdom, Japan and Norway, as well as the
European Union.
I am also pleased to mention here, on behalf of
my Government, and as stated in paragraph 25 of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/234), that
about $147.6 million in fulfilled pledges has already

10-35930

been received, thanks to payments from Belgium and
the European Union. And, in paragraph 26, we see that
$340,000 was paid to the Central Bank of Somalia.
Council members can therefore see how much of the
money that has been pledged to the Somali people has
actually reached them. My Government would like to
ask the international community what it would like us
to show in the fight against terrorists who have a good
“father” — they get a lot of money — when we are not
getting anything at all. How can we fight against these
terrorists who are destroying our people and our
country, when Al-Shabaab and other groups are getting
their money from their own fathers or their uncles?
I thank Ahmedou Ould Abdallah and my brother
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union. They keep fighting and talking every
day, every single minute, about the situation in
Somalia. And they are trying their very best to say
whatever they can say about Somalia. But, to be frank
and honest, nothing of what they say or what other
friends of Somalia say has actually been perceived by
the Somali people. I am sorry about that.
As to the United Kingdom and the United States,
yes, the United Kingdom is the largest donor to
Somalia, having pledged $150 million to $180 million.
The representative of the United Kingdom earlier
mentioned $60 million as having been pledged to
Somalia. A lot of money has been spent in the name of
Somalia, but none has come to my Government. And I
am responsible for the Somali people. If nobody trusts
us, whom should they trust? The trust and
responsibility of the people of Somalia lies in us. We
should be trusted and held accountable for whatever is
given to us to be distributed to the Somali people. If
not, then we are not responsible parties.
I would also like to express my appreciation for
the reference to the Monitoring Group in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/234). I also thank the
Norwegian representative for mentioning it as well. My
Government has very seriously taken note of the
Group’s report (S/2010/91). We have established a
commission to further investigate the allegations. The
findings will be shared with the members of the
sanctions Committee. In spite of the fact that I myself
have been falsely accused, I would like to assert to the
Security Council that the Commission established by
the Prime Minister will continue its investigations. The
findings will also be shared with the Council. Everyone
who has been accused will be accountable to the

27

S/PV.6313

Commission. But if persons have been accused falsely
or without basis, we would like the Security Council to
take action against those who actually collected false
reports.
Many Somalis are now dying because of the
report. The aid that is supposed to reach the Somali
people is not reaching them. All members of the
Council know that. The report has actually created
quite a mess in my Government and among my people.
Our enemies — Al-Shabaab and other groups — are
laughing at us. They are very happy with what is
coming from the report of the Security Council’s
Monitoring Group. The enemies of Somalia are
actually being helped by the Group’s report. Without
thinking thoroughly or understanding what they were
writing, the Group’s members helped Al-Shabaab and
the terrorists. I would like for them to think carefully
before they act. As the Somali Government, we are
ready to take this issue seriously, to investigate and to
take thorough action.

I would like to thank every member of the
Council who has spoken from the heart about helping
the Somali people. In particular, we will never forget
what Ahmedou Ould Abdallah is doing for the Somali
people. I was one of the first to come from Asmara to
meet with him in Nairobi to say that we would like to
join the peace process. Here before the members of the
Council, I would also like to thank the armed forces of
Uganda and Burundi, whose members are paying with
their own blood to ensure that Somalia can once again
stand on its own feet. We and our children shall also
remember all those who are helping us to achieve that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank His
Excellency the First Deputy Prime Minister of Somalia
for his additional statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

28

10-35930
