A/69/399–S/2014/694

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
23 September 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda items 27, 29, 109, 115 and 120

Security Council
Seventieth year

Advancement of women
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Strengthening of the United Nations system

Peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement by the Pres ident of
the Security Council (S/PRST/2012/29), in which the Council requested me to
report, no later than December 2014, on further progress in United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflict, including the issue of women’s
participation in peacebuilding, with particular emphasis on the impact on the
ground, including lessons learned from United Nations peacebuilding activities in
country-specific contexts. The report builds on my earlier reports on peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict (A/63/881-S/2009/304, A/64/866-S/2010/386 and
A/67/499-S/2012/746) as well as on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(A/65/354-S/2010/466) and reflects on the elements contained in the
aforementioned statement of the President.
2.
The Security Council and the General Assembly have long recognized the
centrality of peacebuilding to United Nations political, security and developmental
efforts in countries emerging from conflict, as well as the complexity of
peacebuilding challenges. Our understanding of peacebuilding has come a lo ng way
since the creation of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in 2005. We
have become increasingly cognizant that peacebuilding is inherently a political
exercise that depends on political leadership and demands sustained international
political accompaniment, as well as a favourable regional environment.
14-61476 (E)

300914

*1461476*

A/69/399
S/2014/694

3.
Peacebuilding represents the sum of our efforts to create the foundations for
sustained peace after conflict. It is carried out by peacekeeping operations, special
political missions and United Nations country teams, consisting of agencies, funds
and programmes. It requires firm and continued support from Member States, and
lies at the very heart of our ambitions in countries emerging from conflict. Avoiding
the relapse into war was the primary motivation for the creation of the
peacebuilding architecture. As mandated by the General Assembly and the Security
Council, Member States will review the peacebuilding architecture in 2015. I hope
that this review will shed light on how we, collectively, can better assist States and
societies to recover from conflict and avoid the calamitous return to violence.
4.
In my last report (A/67/499-S/2012/746), I identified three key priority
directions for the engagement of the United Nations system in peacebuilding,
namely inclusivity, institution-building and sustained international support and
mutual accountability. These priority areas are intimately linked and form the core
of our efforts to promote long-term peace and stability and avoid the recurrence of
violent conflicts. Post-conflict institutions need to be rooted in inclusive political
agreements and systems that make possible meaningful participation by wideranging social groups. Political processes and institution-building require sustained
and long-term international political, financial and technical support.
5.
Building political consensus and social cohesion requires steady investment, as
well as flexible and agile responses to immediate needs. Pea ce agreements present a
critical opportunity for achieving consensus about the key principles on which
institution-building should rest. The political agreements that underlie transition
processes often require strong international support and a favourable regional
environment. The Peacebuilding Commission, which is mandated to promote the
coherence of international efforts in support of post -conflict countries, continues to
play a vital role in facilitating the constructive engagement of international and
regional stakeholders.
6.
Advancing the extension of State authority and rebuilding State institutions in
the aftermath of conflict is crucial to the sustainability of peace. The Security
Council has recognized the centrality of these issues, including the m as priority
tasks in the mandates of numerous peacekeeping and special political missions. The
development of legitimate, accountable and effective institutions that deliver
services equitably is essential for countries to respond to the needs of the pop ulation
and create non-violent channels to manage conflicts. Security sector and rule of law
institutions deserve particular attention as the organs responsible for the protection
of the population and the legitimate defence of State institutions.
7.
Implementing these priorities remains an ongoing challenge. Peacekeeping and
special political missions and the different agencies, funds and programmes that
support the development of critical post-conflict institutions still face difficulties
finding the necessary resources. While much of the capacity for security
interventions and political facilitation is provided as part of Security Council
mandates, the capabilities and resources required for institution -building are often
absent or slow to arrive, leaving political transitions frail and unsupported. Women’s
participation in peacebuilding is often underfunded, undermining their contribution
to stability and recovery. The Peacebuilding Fund partly addresses this gap in the
short term by providing quick funding for critical institution-building, political
dialogue and rule of law initiatives. Ensuring the nec essary longer-term and largerscale support, however, remains challenging.

2/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

II.

Progress update
8.
In the two years since my last report, the United Nations has made significant
gains in assisting countries to consolidate peace after conflict despite far-reaching
challenges. A number of countries, including Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and Tunisia,
which are recovering from recent periods of violent conflict or political crisis, are
now developing more stable institutions and more inclusive political systems. The
closure of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and the Organization’s transition to a country team-only presence at the
end of March 2014 underscores the progress achieved. The eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia, among others, are starting to emerge from
decades of violence and instability. Yet, they face immense challenges developing
institutions and achieving social cohesion. At the same time, the international
community continues to grapple with relapses into violent conflict in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan.
9.
Sierra Leone’s steady progress in consolidating peace since its civil war ended
in 2002 has enabled the country to focus on sustainable development, thereby
solidifying more than a decade of increasing stability. During this period, successive
United Nations missions and the country team adopted an integrated approach
around a joint strategy in support of national efforts. This was bolstered by
collective Member State support and improved relations with neighbouring
countries. The Organization’s strong partnership with successive Governments and
the people of Sierra Leone made possible the withdrawal of UNIPSIL and the
assumption of greater responsibility by the Government.
10. The United Nations contributed broad and multifaceted support to Sierra
Leone’s transition. The inter-party dialogue organized by UNIPSIL, with strong
backing from the Peacebuilding Commission, reinforced confidence in the country ’s
political system by helping to maintain a level playing field and secure the
participation of all political parties in the 2012 elections. Likewise, the United
Nations also supported institutions, such as the All Political Parties Women’s
Association, whose involvement boosted women’s participation and increased
popular trust in the process. Sierra Leone has successfully conducted three peaceful
and credible elections since emerging from war, anchoring democratic institutions
and inclusive politics.
11. Various United Nations entities also assisted with the creation of key Sierra
Leonean institutions, including the National Human Rights Commission, the
National Electoral Commission, the Anti-Corruption Commission and the
ombudsman’s office. These institutions have contributed to the legitimacy of the
State and its public accountability. The National Human Rights Commission, for
instance, investigates complaints and initiates inquiries, such as its notable probe
into alleged gross violations of human rights in Bumbuna, Tonkolili district , in
2012. The United Nations also assisted the Government and national institutions in
tackling longer-term challenges, including management of natural resources, youth
unemployment, security sector reform and conventional weapons and ammunition
management.
12. Significant challenges lie ahead for Sierra Leone, illustrating the need for
sustained support, including from the Peacebuilding Com mission. The United
Nations, with financial backing from the Peacebuilding Fund, will continue to

14-61476

3/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

collaborate with the Government of Sierra Leone on its constitutional review,
security sector reform and the strengthening of human rights institutions, among
other issues. In addition, Sierra Leone’s mutual accountability framework, created in
accordance with the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, provides a
mechanism for aligning donors in support of government priorities, strengthening
national ownership and the coherence of international support.
13. Sierra Leone’s progress stands in stark contrast to the tragic relapses into
violence that we have witnessed in several countries, despite the presence of United
Nations peace operations and extensive international efforts. Lessons must be
learned from the experience in South Sudan, where the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) was mandated to consolidate peace and security in the
newly independent country. In establishing the ne w Mission, the Security Council,
in its resolutions 1996 (2011) and 2057 (2012), stressed the importance of
supporting national peacebuilding priorities and requested UNMISS to provide a
plan for United Nations-system support to specific peacebuilding tasks. A United
Nations peacebuilding support plan was aligned to the South Sudan Development
Plan, using the New Deal Peacebuilding and Statebuilding Goals as a framewor k.
There were visible gains in creating and strengthening public institutions and
processes in the first year and a half following South Sudan’s independence.
Progress was also achieved towards transforming its national police into a more
professional force. The Mission used its good offices to significant effect to help the
Government address emerging threats, including from inter-communal violence and
conflicts along the country’s borders, as well as from landmines and explosive
remnants of war.
14. Despite these advances, significant gaps in the development of political and
security institutions remained. Major outbreaks of violence and the abrupt
contraction of State revenues in 2012, following the dispute with the Sudan over oil
exports, slowed progress and impeded the efforts of the United Nations and the
broader international community to support the extension of State authority and the
expansion of service delivery. Infighting among the political elite, allegations of
large-scale corruption and incidents of violent abuse by undisciplined elements of
the national security forces undermined trust in the political leadership. The severe
shortfall in State resources and continued tension with the Sudan undermined plans
to demobilize and reintegrate former fighters, while national security forces
expanded as regional rebellions were resolved by integrating armed groups into the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army. Notwithstanding international efforts, the
country’s leaders failed to broaden the political space and dialogue, conduct wide
consultation on a national constitution, or ensure a separation of the army from the
ruling political party.
15. Political competition, which involved historical disputes and struggles for
control of State resources, led to a split within the military and police forces and
culminated in the resumption of violent conflict late in 2013. This conflict escalated
with a speed, scope and scale that the United Nations and others did not anticipate.
The intensification of violence, particularly targeted killings, further created deep
ethnic and regional cleavages, which have complicated the search for a settlement.
Gains in institutions development were largely lost when the power struggle
spiralled out of control and led the country back into a devastating conflict.

4/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

16. Although recent developments in South Sudan call for deeper, long -term
reflection by the international community, a few preliminary conclusions can be
drawn. First, there was a need for greater political encouragement, in centives and
pressure to promote advances in the critical areas that could ensure the non -violent
management of political tensions. Secondly, South Sudan illustrates the challenges
that nationally led peacebuilding strategies and priorities face in countri es where
deep political divisions persist and control of the State is contested. In such cases,
support for nationally led initiatives can limit the impact and range of approaches
and strategies. Thirdly, United Nations missions and country teams must adapt their
peacebuilding approaches and strategies more flexibly in response to changes in the
political environment. Lastly, technical and programmatic support for institutionbuilding needs to be grounded in strong and effective political agreements as well as
measures to build social cohesion and ensure the non-violent management of
political tensions. Political settlements also need sustained international
accompaniment to reinforce adherence.
17. The relapse into violent conflict in the Central African Republic highlights
similar issues and underscores the importance of the three priority areas outlined in
my last report, although unlike the state of affairs in South Sudan, sustained
international support was lacking. Despite several national dialogues an d extensive
external political facilitation, the State’s political institutions remained fragile and
lacked inclusivity. The north-east of the country was chronically excluded from
political participation. At many levels, the State remained characterized by corrupt
and predatory behaviour. Government institutions, particularly outside the capital,
have been either non-existent or extremely weak, making violent attempts to gain
access to government resources and State power feasible.
18. Successive United Nations missions and the country team received limited
support for efforts to support the development of the State’s institutional capacity
and improve mechanisms of governance. The limited support was compounded by
fragmented interventions and the absence of a strong and coherent political
framework for their implementation. The initiatives aimed at security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration from 2010 to 2012 were not
accompanied by sustained commitment from different armed gro ups and successive
national Governments. The lack of sustained commitment was compounded by
fragmented security sector interventions from international, regional and
subregional actors, which were inadequately grounded in a national vision for State
reform. Successive attempts at disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
lacked sufficient funding and political support as well as approaches better suited to
the political context.
19. New opportunities have been created with the appointment of transition al
authorities and the engagement of regional actors. In order to avoid replicating the
shortfalls of past attempts to promote long-term solutions, cohesion among
international and subregional interventions will remain particularly important. In
parts of the country, the deployment of peacekeepers has provided a measure of
security. This window of opportunity needs to be seized upon to build a more viable
political consensus and more effective and accountable State, security and public
institutions, which are essential to protect the rights of citizens, perform basic State
functions and defend the State against violent challenges.

14-61476

5/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

20. My Rights Up Front initiative to prevent and end serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law has guided the United Nations
responses in the Central African Republic and South Sudan following the emergence
or relapse of violent conflict. The initiative aims to prevent serious violations , but
where it is too late to do so, it focuses on the protection of civilians. Human rights
violations are good indicators of worse things to come. When mass atrocities are
allowed to occur, they can create cycles of violence and long-term animosities,
presenting serious obstacles to the social cohesion needed to restore peace and
security. The prevention of serious human rights violations is fundamental to the
environment in which peace and development can flourish.
21. Sierra Leone highlights the potential for the strategic integration of United
Nations efforts to consolidate peace. However, continued improvements are required
to better align conflict analysis, political leadership and programmatic support in the
field and in mission planning. The 2013 United Nations policy on integrated
assessment and planning provides for joint analysis and a common United Nations
vision of priorities for peace consolidation in each situation. Its implementation
should help to ensure that mission planning is faster and more strategically focused.
The early stages of mission planning and start-up are often arduous and lack
strategic clarity, as experienced in the Central African Republic and Mali. As noted
in my report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/68/696-S/2014/5),
aligning mission and country team resources and capacity with a strategy for early
institution-building continues to be a significant challenge.
22. Such alignment has progressed in the critical area of rule of law. The joint
global focal point for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in
post-conflict and other crisis situations is helping to link the expertise of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations entities in order to develop and
implement common strategies and programmes. Established in 2012, the global
focal point has already led to increased inter-agency collaboration in Guinea, Libya,
Mali and Somalia. An independent review of its first year of operation n oted that the
focal point holds further promise for the delivery of assistance to the field. Its next
steps include an augmented role in the strategic direction of United Nations rule of
law assistance, including support to mission transition planning and technical
assistance on programme design and implementation.
23. Integration has often been complicated by high transaction costs and different
mandates among various United Nations entities. It has been shown to be effective
when operations are guided by a clear vision, with one set of objectives, together
with a strategy for consolidating peace. We have seen in many cases that the
facilitation and good offices initiatives of my Special Representatives, Special
Envoys and Special Advisers are most effective when complemented by activities of
country teams in the areas of institutional strengthening, dialogue and inclusive
economic development. The Peacebuilding Fund has often been instrumental in
advancing such an integrated approach.
24. During the period under review, the United Nations provided electoral
assistance in a number of post-conflict contexts, including in Guinea and
Madagascar, often combining technical assistance with good offices and diplomatic
support to help ensure that elections contributed to peace consolidation rather than
igniting tensions. One important institutional innovation to improve delivery of

6/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

electoral assistance is the establishment of the first, single, system -wide electoral
roster designed to ensure the rapid deployment of electoral experts by all relevant
parts of the United Nations system.
25. Positioning technical and programmatic support to contribute to larger political
and strategic peacebuilding goals in non-mission settings is also key. The Joint
(UNDP-Department of Political Affairs) Programme on Building National
Capacities for Conflict Prevention seeks to increase the Organization’s capacity to
support national partners in their efforts to attain peaceful and sustainable
development, including through the deployment of peace and development advisers.
For example, peace and development advisers in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan,
building on the efforts made by my regional Special Representative, have supported
cross-border community-level dialogues to address tensions related to the use of
water resources. In Kyrgyzstan, the adviser has supported government efforts to
create local conflict-prevention mechanisms and worked closely with various
government institutions to review proposed legislation for conflict sensitivity. T he
Peacebuilding Fund has, in recent years, increasingly supported this programme in
order to ensure integrated and conflict-sensitive planning and programming.
26. Developing lessons on peacebuilding good practices requires more
comprehensive information on the impact of diverse approaches and programmes.
Experience has shown that quantifiable evidence of peacebuilding impact can
appear elusive. Indeed, what is most important in some contexts, such as rebuilding
societal trust and institutional legitimacy, may be the most difficult to assess. Too
often activities focus on “hardware”, such as equipment and buildings, which are
easy to measure, rather than the more intangible outcomes that target the drivers of
conflict. This has, for example, been the case in security sector reform, where there
is a need to go beyond training and equipping, to investments in improved
governance and oversight of security forces. The main threats to peace and stability
should drive the design of peacebuilding activities as well as the development of
corresponding benchmarks. The United Nations will need to expand and improve its
mechanisms, including the use of surveys, for evaluating and monitoring progress in
these areas.

III. Inclusivity
27. In my last report, I stressed the importance of mechanisms for inclusive
politics in post-conflict transitions. I cannot overstate their importance today.
Promoting inclusivity can involve difficult choices and trade -offs regarding urgency,
representativeness, effectiveness and legitimacy. There are times, for example, when
a peacemaking approach must be limited to the actual belligerents and political
elites. Yet, in order to sustain peace and uphold basic rights of political
participation, subsequent mechanisms for broad participati on need to be embraced,
with the goal of increasing inclusivity over time.
28. The promotion of inclusive politics is also integral to genuine national
ownership of peacebuilding efforts and strategies. Where peacebuilding efforts are
rooted in inclusive societal consultation and efforts to minimize exclusionary
practices, they generate trust and legitimacy in the State and its institutions. By
contrast, the absence of inclusive politics in the wake of conflict all too often
contributes to violent contestation for control of the State. In such environments, the

14-61476

7/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

timing and conduct of elections has to be approached with caution, as contested
electoral processes and outcomes can be destabilizing. Any effort to build
sustainable peace must manage political competition through institutions governed
by law, rather than on the battlefield. At the same time, the development of
mechanisms for inclusive politics and broad participation must take into account the
divisions, fears and perceptions inherent in post-conflict communities.
29. Mechanisms for effective public participation are critical in the reform of core
State institutions. In this regard, Tunisia provides an inspiring example. With broad
participation from political parties and civil society, its political process culminated
in the adoption of a new Constitution. The provision of technical expertise by the
United Nations to all political parties in the Constituent Assembly, as well as the
facilitation of inputs from Tunisian professional and civil society gr oups, were key
to the credibility and success of the process.
30. In recent years the United Nations has used its good offices to advance
inclusive political systems as part of strategies to promote peace consolidation. In
Guinea, for example, my Special Representative for West Africa was instrumental in
facilitating an inter-party agreement for the conduct of parliamentary elections in
2013. The country team developed innovative mechanisms to complement these
negotiations and broaden participation by other key stakeholders, including women.
To buttress the agreement, the United Nations conducted a series of public forums
with local political leaders, which built awareness and trust in the electoral process.
Moreover, the country team collaborated with the main political parties to train
electoral monitors and build electoral management capacity within each party
alliance.
31. These efforts were further supplemented by an initiative — the Women’s
Situation Room — that provided support to a network of local women’s
organizations, enabling women to play a crucial role as electoral monitors with a
rapid response capacity. South-South cooperation between non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in Guinea, Mali and Senegal for technical support and
training provided to the women’s electoral monitors was a key aspect of the
initiative, which was replicated in the elections in Guinea -Bissau in April 2014. The
initiative encouraged confidence in the electoral process while at the same time
strengthening women’s political participation. These collaborative interventions
helped to ensure that the 2013 election took place without the inter-communal
violence that marred Guinea’s first post-crisis elections in 2010.
32. In Burundi the Peacebuilding Commission, together with the country team,
supported the efforts of the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) to foster a
more inclusive political environment in the context of increased political tensions
and human rights violations. My Special Representative worked closely wit h the
Government, opposition parties and civil society organizations to strengthen
political dialogue, including through the organization of a series of workshops,
which spurred the consensual adoption of an electoral road map and a code of
conduct for the elections in 2015. BNUB also supported national stakeholders in
developing a new electoral code, which was adopted by the National Assembly in
April 2014. The emphasis on broad public engagement was intended to safeguard
against electoral violence or contested electoral outcomes. As ongoing violence
related to the youth wings of political parties is of particular concern, my Special
Representative also promoted non-violent engagement of youth in politics,

8/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

including through programmes funded by the Peacebuilding Fund and implemented
by the country team. These efforts were conducted in advance of the withdrawal of
BNUB at the end of 2014 and the deployment of a United Nations electoral observer
mission requested by the Government.
33. The Government of Kyrgyzstan established an agency in 2013 to lead the
implementation of a new government policy, developed with United Nations and
Peacebuilding Fund support, on national unity and inter-ethnic relations. The United
Nations also provided technical assistance for a broad dialogue concerning
multilingual education, minority representation in politics and more inclusive local
self-government. Moreover, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and UNDP provided legal training and
logistical support to the Women’s Peace Committees, which made possible the
monitoring of community-level tensions and improved government response, and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees supported
durable solutions for displaced persons. These activities contributed to a deeper
sense of social cohesion and boosted trust between the population and local
authorities throughout the southern districts of the country affected by the conflict.
Despite areas of ongoing fragility, evaluations have shown that these programmes
also nurtured a heightened sense of security and safety in some areas affected by the
unrest in 2010.
34. UN-Women, with financial assistance from the Peacebuilding Fund, supported
women-run conflict-resolution mechanisms, known as “peace huts” in Liberia.
These mechanisms provided safe communal spaces for women to promote
community dialogue and mediation efforts and are credited with having improved
local security. In some areas, “peace huts” have also become a platform to protest
the illegal exploitation of Liberia’s natural resources.
35. Giving voice to women’s concerns in all stages of peacemaking and
peacebuilding is essential to the development of inclusive politics. Further
advancing women’s participation in post-conflict political and development
processes, as set forth in my Seven-Point Action Plan on Gender-Responsive
Peacebuilding, remains a top priority. Since my report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466), a growing number of women have been
appointed to senior positions as mediators, envoys and members of negotiation
teams. The United Nations has also increased its support to women’s civil society
organizations in accessing peace processes and advancing post-conflict political
participation.
36. Progress is being made in the allocation of funding to support genderresponsive peacebuilding programming, although tracking progress remains difficult
owing to the lack of good data. The Peacebuilding Fund uses a gender marker to
track funding allocations to women’s empowerment and gender equality. The steady
increase in projects funded from the Peacebuilding Fund in which gender is fully
integrated — from 10 per cent in 2008 to 70 per cent in 2013 — reflects a growing
recognition of the relevance of gender issues to all peacebuilding interventions.
Nevertheless, funding allocations for projects whose main objective is to promote
women’s empowerment and gender equality are falling short of the 15 per cent
target. Such allocations amounted to 7.4 per cent in 2013, down from 10.3 per cent
in 2012 when the Fund’s allocation was boosted because of the gender promotion
initiative. A review of over 300 UNDP projects in six post -conflict contexts revealed

14-61476

9/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

that 14 per cent of funding had been allocated to activities that would make a
significant impact on gender equality, while 6 per cent of funding was allocated
exclusively to women’s empowerment and gender equality. This finding highlights
the continuing need for proactive approaches, such as the second gender promotion
initiative that the Fund launched in 2014.
37. Despite some promising developments, gaps remain between the ambitions
expressed in the Seven-Point Action Plan and the Organization’s concrete activities
in this area. In particular, there has been a continued lack of investment in activities
supporting women’s economic empowerment, including in addressing issues of
access, use and control of natural resources. I also encourage Unite d Nations entities
to prioritize women’s access to justice in rule of law programming in post-conflict
environments.
38. The United Nations Peace Fund for Nepal stands out for its multifaceted
efforts to mainstream gender perspectives into its management and programming.
Thirty per cent of monies earmarked for projects during the funding round in 2012
were allocated to addressing the needs of women and girls and/or gender equality.
Projects supporting land reform, conflict prevention, the rule of law and t he
reintegration of child soldiers all included specific provisions to address the needs
of women and girls. Such measures contributed to the implementation of the
Government’s national action plan on Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). One of these projects undertook women’s safety audits to determine
the location of police station deployments in order to improve the security of
women and girls. A project on land issues ensured extensive women’s participation
in consultations on land-use planning, which has traditionally been a male domain.
Developments in Nepal demonstrate that appreciable progress can be made with
targeted funding, leadership and capacities for gender-responsive programming.
39. As I pointed out in my last report, youth should also be part of inclusive
peacebuilding processes to bolster the likelihood of sustained peace. In the ensuing
years the Peacebuilding Support Office, together with other United Nations entities,
NGOs and youth organizations, developed guiding principles on the participation of
young people in peacebuilding. The principles build upon experiences from UNDP,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), which
have adolescent and youth-specific interventions in many conflict-affected
countries.

IV. Institution-building
40. Building strong and effective institutions remains a core element of post conflict peace consolidation and a critical task for the United Nations system.
Effective, legitimate and accountable State institutions that deliver public services
reduce incentives for violent conflict and strengthen the State’s resilience in the face
of possible renewed violence. The capacity of such institutions to respond to
popular expectations is one of the key conditions for sustainable peace. Experience
shows, however, that this goal is neither quick nor easy to achieve and that efforts to
build post-conflict institutions must be conceived of as a long -term undertaking
even under the best of circumstances. In my last progress report on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (A/68/696-S/2014/5), I emphasized the role of

10/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

institution-building at both the political and technical levels, and underlined the
need for a more systematic and coherent response by the United Nations that is
strongly connected to national priorities.
41. Investments in institution-building in the aftermath of conflict must be planned
with close attention to the prevailing political situation. Unresolved tensions and
political competition, as well as popular mistrust in Government, limit the
feasibility of rapid wholesale reforms of public administration in the aftermath of
conflict. Such is the conclusion of a recent United Nations review, which
recommended rapid support to restoring basic functionality and service deliv ery
using existing institutions and systems. The review also emphasized the need to
provide greater support to local governments, which play a critical role in providing
social services and rebuilding the trust in and legitimacy of the Government.
42. We have seen a number of positive examples in recent years that the United
Nations can build on going forward to support institution-building in post-conflict
situations. For example, the UNDP-supported Regional Initiative for Capacity
Enhancement of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, funded by
Norway, helped to address the inability of South Sudan to deliver core public
services from 2010 onwards. By embedding civil service mentors from
neighbouring States in various ministries, the project provid ed rapid, tailored and
cost-effective civil service capacity development. Some embedded mentors have
continued to work despite renewed conflict. Notwithstanding the violence that
erupted in December 2013, the programme can serve as a model in other post conflict settings.
43. The United Nations invested heavily in the revitalization of State institutions
and the improvement of access to justice in the regions of Côte d’Ivoire most
affected by the post-electoral violence in 2011, working with the Government to
redeploy State representatives and refurbish State infrastructure. As the right to
Ivorian citizenship was highly contested during the conflict, initiatives were
launched to simplify birth registration and the issuance of identity papers, which
contributed to better access to services and higher electoral participation, as well as
strengthened social cohesion. Community-led, early childhood development centres,
supported through UNICEF, further helped to build social cohesion by bringing
together women from divergent backgrounds around the common goal of children’s
well-being. With United Nations support, new systems of community-oriented
policing and oversight were also introduced as a means of repairing public trust and
confidence in the police and gendarmerie. These steps, and other measures, have
expedited the return of refugees and displaced persons, as well as the resolution of a
number of local, land-related disputes.
44. Reform of rule of law institutions, including improvements in oversight,
accountability and administration, is often a key priority for post -conflict countries.
In Burundi support to the National Independent Human Rights Commission has
been central to the United Nations strategy to enhance the country’s capacity to
monitor and report on human rights violations. The Commission, which carries out
human rights investigations, has worked to improve the impartiality and
performance of the security forces and to enhance overall respect for human rights
in Burundi. In Liberia the United Nations supported the establishment of the first of
three justice and security hubs, in Gbarnga, with additional hubs under development
in Zwedru and Harper. The hubs, which receive extensive funding from the

14-61476

11/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

Peacebuilding Fund, are a key component of the Government’s strategy for
extending justice and security services beyond the capital. The results of a user
satisfaction survey conducted in 2013 indicated higher levels of appreciation for
security services in counties covered by the Gbarnga hub and credite d it with
reduced levels of violence. Yet, challenges remain, including the generation of
sustainable domestic funding for the hubs and the slow deployment of necessary
staff and services.
45. As in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, expanding the presence of the State into areas
previously controlled by armed groups remains critical to stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Building upon new opportunities created by the surrender of
the March 23 Movement (M23), the United Nations Organization Stabiliz ation
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), United Nations
entities and other partners work within the International Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy to support the State’s ability to re -establish its presence and
functions. The initiative bridges the Mission’s protection and stabilization efforts,
providing logistical and technical support for the deployment of public
administration, police and the judiciary. Within this framework, UNDP and
MONUSCO have supported mobile courts and the deployment of a special police
unit for the protection of women and children, which led to the referral of more than
1,000 cases of sexual violence to the judicial system in 2013 and the first half of
2014. Such efforts are combined with the pro motion of dialogue with local
communities to ensure greater acceptance and greater public accountability of the
new institutions and the peaceful resolution of disputes. Progress in many parts of
the east could be further enhanced by addressing implementation delays, funding
shortfalls and a lack of government employees in areas where the Government has
regained control. The time lapse between military control and the extension of State
authority can undermine the State’s ability to create a stabilizing pre sence.
46. Rapid resumption of social service delivery can also play an important role in
supporting the extension of State authority. The efforts of UNICEF in Somalia, for
example, support the resumption of educational services through the rehabilitation
and construction of schools in areas recaptured from al -Shabaab, helping to restore
confidence in the State. The programme, conducted as part of the three -year interim
education sector strategic plan, involves extensive participation of diverse clans and
communities so as to strengthen social cohesion and ensure broad acceptance.
47. The early availability of funding for institution-building is critical to the rapid
restoration of basic State administrative and service delivery functions. Policy and
guidance tools, reflecting lessons learned from previous undertakings, are also
necessary. To this end, the United Nations and the World Bank have developed a
joint diagnostic tool for re-establishing core government functions in post-conflict
situations. The Central African Republic has already benefited from this endeavour.
A joint World Bank and United Nations initiative for the early payment of salaries to
civil servants bolstered confidence in the Transitional Authorities and helped to
ensure the basic functioning of ministries and security forces in advance of more
comprehensive assistance.
48. Beyond such efforts, generating sufficient domestic revenues to fund
government operations is essential to the development of State institutions. In
Burundi, Liberia and Rwanda the creation of an independent taxation authority and
the revision of tax policies with United Nations technical support have led to

12/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

significant increases in public revenue collection. This is particularly notable
because developing a domestic tax base and collection system is a long-term
endeavour, prompting many countries to rely primarily on natural resources for
State revenue in the years after conflict.
49. Sustainable and transparent management of natural resources is central to post conflict planning since it represents both a critical source of government revenue
and a significant driver of violent conflict where natural resources are not well
managed. Overdependence on such revenues can discourage countries from
developing sustainable tax income, which is critical for long-term growth and
enhancing a social contract. The challenge lies in establishing institutions that
support a sustainable transformation of natural assets into State revenues,
livelihoods and infrastructure without creating new sources of friction or
contributing to long-term environmental degradation.
50. To meet this challenge, the United Nations has established a global partnership
with the European Union on land, natural resources and conflict prevention, which
has assisted several Governments, including in Afghanistan, with the management
of natural resources in ways that minimize conflict. In the Great Lakes region, the
partnership is supporting Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and Uganda to improve natural resource management and promote transparency in
land tenure and mining, in collaboration with civil society groups and the private
sector. In addition, the United Nations and the World Bank have developed a
conflict-sensitive framework to help Governments respond to conflict risks through
key entry points along the extractive industries value chain.
51. In Sierra Leone the United Nations worked to strengthen the capacity of the
Environmental Protection Agency’s long-term resource planning, mine monitoring
and environmental assessment. This has led to improved environmental and social
impact assessments, which, in turn, helped to accelerate investment in the sector.
Impact assessments have provided a mechanism to encourage public participation in
decision-making over natural resource management, reducing tensions with local
communities. In Liberia, where competition for land and control over natural
resources are also sources of conflict, the United Nations is working with the World
Bank to help the Government to better manage natural resource concessions through
strengthened citizens’ consultation and engagement in planning and implementation.
This effort complements the capacity-building and technical assistance provided by
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme to Liberia’s Land Commission,
which is implementing extensive land reforms, as well as engaging in community level, land dispute resolution.
52. Post-conflict States are vulnerable not only to violence and the destabilization
of institutions, but also to infiltration by organized crime. Indeed, transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in drugs and arms, continues to undermine
progress towards sustainable peace in Central America, Central Asia and West
Africa. Under the West Africa Coast Initiative, multi-agency transnational crime
units were established in Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone, to be followed
by Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea later in 2014. While full implementation in Guinea Bissau was delayed by the coup d’état in 2012, the Liberian and Sierra Leonean
transnational crime units have advanced national and international cooperation,
leading to arrests, convictions and substantial drug seizures. The decision by the
Government of Sierra Leone to fully incorporate the units within its national

14-61476

13/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

security architecture and budget demonstrated its deep commitment to the initiative.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) is assisting Malian police and law enforcement institut ions to improve
their capacity to conduct counter-narcotics operations, criminal investigations and
border control.
53. The Ebola outbreak in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone in 2014 has led to
great loss of life and has had severe consequences for people ’s livelihoods and State
institutions in the affected countries. The epidemic has had a particularly
devastating impact on the health-care sector and has placed new strains on the
security and justice sectors and core government functions. The epidemic has
highlighted institutional weaknesses in the affected countries and the need for
sustained support to national frameworks and systems, which are crucial for long term stability.

V. Sustained international support and mutual accountability
54. Post-conflict peacebuilding is a generational undertaking that relies heavily on
predictable financial, technical and political support in the short, medium and long
term. It also requires coherence among a wide spectrum of actors, including
neighbouring countries, regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions and donor countries. The transnational dimensions of many
conflicts, including the cross-border movement of weapons, combatants and illicit
financial and natural resource flows, make regional involvement in support of postconflict stability essential. The annual session of the Peacebuilding Commission in
June 2014 also highlighted the need for greater international and regional
cooperation to help post-conflict States combat illicit financial flows, which deprive
them of critical resources for institution-building and development.
55. The peace, security and cooperation framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region represents a groundbreaking commitment by th e
countries of the region and international and civil society organizations to join
forces around mutual accountability and sustainable peace. The framework, signed
by 13 African States and witnessed by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community, the African Union,
the United Nations and other key partners requires its signatories to implement
policies that foster political stability, justice, security and development. It is a tool
that is essential to ensure greater coherence among international and regional actors
in support of the peacebuilding process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region.
56. Recent experience in the Sahel and central Africa has also illustrated the ne ed
for regional strategies that are multidimensional, addressing political, security and
developmental aspects. Reflecting this need, the United Nations has developed an
integrated strategy for the Sahel that is built around support for inclusive and
effective governance, regional and national security mechanisms capable of
addressing cross-border threats and integrated plans for long-term resilience. As part
of the strategy, the United Nations is partnering with the African Union to support a
regional, ministerial-level leadership platform tasked with boosting security
coordination and cooperation in the region and neighbouring States. This effort

14/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

represents an extraordinary move to advance partnerships among international,
regional and national actors in a comprehensive way.
57. The President of the World Bank and I made unprecedented visits to the Great
Lakes region in May 2013, and to the Sahel, together with colleagues from the
African Union, the African Development Bank and the European Union, in
November 2013. These joint visits drew attention to peacebuilding challenges in two
highly vulnerable regions and provided renewed emphasis on the United Nations World Bank partnership. Our visit underscored the close collaboration between the
United Nations and the World Bank in Mali, where a joint project assesses the
economic and social impact of MINUSMA deployment with a view to maximizing
benefits to the local economy. Simultaneously, the World Bank financial
management assessment of Mali’s security sector will make possible more
transparent management of and greater international support to this sector.
58. The Peacebuilding Commission also has a particular role to play in enhancing
the coherence of regional efforts. This has been a priority for the Commiss ion,
especially recently, with regard to the Central African Republic and Guinea -Bissau,
where the Chairs of the Commission’s respective country-specific configurations
have worked closely with my Special Representatives to engender collaboration
from neighbouring countries and the region.
59. In addition to political support, most countries emerging from conflict require
sustained financial and technical support for essential State functioning and the
development of effective institutions. In this regard, the United Nations is
expanding its partnerships and collaboration with international financial institutions,
including regional development banks, to support post-conflict recovery and
promote coherence and long-term financial assistance. A case in point is the Geneva
Partners Conference organized by the Government of Burundi in October 2012 with
the support of the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configuration, the African Development Bank and the World Bank, which raised
pledges of more than $2.5 billion in support of Burundi’s poverty reduction strategy
paper.
60. In post-conflict situations, pooled financing mechanisms continue to be
important instruments for coherent and sustained international support. They
encourage aid alignment behind government priorities, foster greater coherence of
international responses to complex situations, reduce transaction costs, share risks
and strengthen mutual accountability. The Peacebuilding Fund is one such pooled
financing mechanism. It has been extremely useful in enabling the United Nations to
support peace processes, foster rapid implementation of peace agreements and
invest in early institution-building and the provision of peace dividends. Since its
creation, the Fund has allocated nearly $500 million, with the countries on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission receiving more than half. Pooled funding
instruments have also served to enhance collaboration between the United Nations
and the World Bank. The Somalia development and reconstruction facility, for
example, serves as both a coordination framework and a financing architecture
providing a single strategy and oversight mechanism for trust funds managed by the
World Bank and the United Nations.
61. Compacts between post-conflict States and key international partners around
mutually agreed peacebuilding priorities also have the potential to ensure more
effective and sustained assistance. The New Deal compacts in Sierra Leone and

14-61476

15/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

Somalia have galvanized joint efforts by the respective Governments and their
international partners to identify clear national peacebuilding priorities. In Somalia
the compact was accompanied by the Somalia development and reconstruction
facility, which channels new funding in support of the compact’s priori ties. If their
development and implementation reflect domestic consensus on political and
developmental goals, compacts can provide an opportunity to maintain coherent
international engagement in the longer term and ensure mutual accountability
between countries emerging from conflict and their international partners.
62. Generating sustained international political and financial support is
particularly critical during the drawdown and closure of United Nations missions.
Mission transition and reconfiguration involves the handover of responsibilities to
national Governments, with the country team continuing to play a supporting role.
New guidelines for these transitions, based on realistic timelines and benchmarks, as
well as guidance for comparative advantage analysis, were developed as a
complement to the integrated assessment and planning policy. The guidelines
advanced better planning and coordination in the transition in Sierra Leone, which
was completed smoothly in March 2014.
63. Typically, peacebuilding challenges in post-conflict countries outlast the
presence of United Nations missions. For country teams to continue critical
interventions in institution-building and development, sufficient funding and
capacities must be available. The withdrawal of missions also can limit the
Organization’s ability to provide ongoing political support and facilitation, which
remains critical in some countries. In such cases, the engagement of regional and
subregional organizations together with intergovernmental mech anisms, such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, should be called upon to provide the political
accompaniment required to reduce the risk of relapse.
64. For the United Nations, the peacebuilding architecture created in 2005 remains
a cornerstone of international efforts to support countries emerging from conflict.
The decision by Member States to establish the architecture was a response to the
frequent relapse into violence of countries emerging from conflict and to a
perceived gap in the overall international structure. Within the United Nations, the
architecture institutionalized a mechanism to promote sustained attention and
coherence of international efforts over time. Its centrepiece is the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can bring to bear the collective weight of Member States in
support of peace consolidation, utilizing a longer-term post-conflict perspective.
65. The Peacebuilding Commission has devoted considerable effort to realizing a
strengthened, more flexible and more strategic role as an interg overnmental
mechanism supporting countries emerging from conflict by focusing on its three
core functions: political advocacy; resource mobilization; and the coherence of
international efforts. It has achieved important results, albeit unevenly, through it s
country-specific configurations for the six countries on its agenda. Moreover, the
Commission has addressed broader peacebuilding themes and policy issues aimed at
extracting lessons learned and sharing experiences on cross-cutting issues.
66. The review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2015 will provide an
opportunity to strengthen and clarify the scope and quality of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s engagement and the ways in which it could enhance the broader
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations system and the larger international
community. I urge Member States to shape the kind of Commission that is relevant,

16/18

14-61476

A/69/399
S/2014/694

catalytic and effective. Member States should also consider how best to adapt the
Commission’s working methods to the changing international environment and to
developments within the United Nations and other international organizations since
2005.

VI. Conclusion
67. Countries emerging from conflict face formidable challenges as they seek to
overcome the legacy of war and find the path to peace and security. The United
Nations has made significant progress in its peacebuilding support to such countries,
in several areas and in a variety of contexts. Yet, the Organization has also faced
relapses into violence, which underscore the enormity of the task and compel an
improvement in its strategies and approaches.
68. Going forward, the United Nations, Member States and the wider international
community engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding should collectively focus on the
following priorities:
(a) The international community needs to do more to sustain financial,
technical and political support to post-conflict countries. Continued Member State
engagement through the Peacebuilding Commission and through groups of friends
or contact groups has proven to be fundamental to sustaining international attention;
(b) There are continued gaps in the provision of rapid and coherent financial
support for the extension of State authority and the re -establishment of core public
administration functions. There is also a need to sustain financial support over the
long period required by post-conflict States to establish effective institutions,
including mechanisms for dialogue and the management of tensions. I urge Member
States to continue contributing generously to the Peacebuilding Fund and other
pooled financing mechanisms and to coordinate their funding strategies in support
of national priorities;
(c) Collaboration with the World Bank and regional development banks
should be expanded to support, among other areas, the effective extension of State
authority and the strengthening of public financial management, which are critical in
post-conflict States. Such partnerships could mobilize specific skills and expertise
as well as additional financial resources;
(d) Regional actors and neighbouring countries play a critical role in creating
environments conducive to sustainable peace for countries emerging from violent
conflict. The Peacebuilding Commission, regional and subregional organization s
can support the creation of such environments, in collaboration with United Nations
entities. At the same time, further consideration should be given to how the United
Nations system can better support regional efforts;
(e) Compacts remain an important tool to set national peacebuilding
priorities and align support from the international community. They should be
designed to strengthen political accompaniment of national commitments. I
encourage the involvement of regional actors in these compacts;
(f) The United Nations must also work in a more integrated and coherent
manner. Its efforts must be guided by a political strategy that addresses the principal
threats to peace and stability so that programmatic activities can best support the

14-61476

17/18

A/69/399
S/2014/694

consolidation of peace. Planning processes should ensure that the United Nations
family works towards a clear set of strategic objectives aimed at consolidating
peace;
(g) The development of core political institutions, civilian oversight of the
security forces, public administration and basic services need to be rooted in
inclusive political agreements to ensure the popular legitimacy of the State. The
process of inclusive institution-building often requires continued facilitation from
the United Nations as well as sustained political support from regional organizations
and Member States;
(h) The review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2015 provides an
opportunity to ensure that it better serves the needs of countries emerging from
conflict and that collective efforts to prevent their relapse into conflict are more
successful. I urge Member States to take advantage of the review to make this a
reality.
69. I remain committed to continue learning lessons from our experiences on the
ground in diverse contexts in order to optimize the impact of United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, including in furtherance of my Seven-Point Action Plan on
Gender-Responsive Peacebuilding.
70. I stand ready to report further on the Organization’s progress, experiences and
lessons learned in peacebuilding.

18/18

14-61476
