S/PV.9243

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9243

rd meeting
Friday, 13 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01480 (E)
*2301480*

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

relentless battles, including street fighting, pose a great
threat to the remaining civilian population.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The war in Ukraine is approaching its
one-year anniversary, with no end in sight to the fighting
or the suffering. Throughout the holiday season, the
forces of the Russian Federation continued their strikes
on key Ukrainian cities. Too many Ukrainians spent
what is normally a festive period in bomb shelters. Far
from celebrating, countless families across the country
were mourning the loss of loved ones.
On the morning of 29 December, Russian forces
launched more Ukraine-wide attacks, targeting regions
including Dnipro, Kherson, Kivohrad and Kyiv.
Multiple strikes were reported in the cites of Kharkiv,
Odesa, Lviv and Zhytomyr, as well as Kyiv. Two days
later, on New Year’s Eve, all of Ukraine’s administrative
regions were again under air raid warnings.
The attacks have continued in the new year, despite
the announcement of a possible cessation of hostilities
over Orthodox Christmas, a holy period for both
Russians and Ukrainians. On 6 January, an emergency
worker was killed in an attack on a fire station in the
city of Kherson. The next day, several regions in the east
and south of Ukraine were shelled. Ground fighting has
intensified, especially in the Donetsk region. In areas
of active hostilities, such as Bakhmut and Soledar,
2/23

13/01/2023

In Bakhmut alone, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has
documented 22 civilians killed and 72 injured since
early December. Following the most recent fighting,
OHCHR has verified 18,096 civilian casualties since
Russia’s invasion of 24 February 2022. That total
includes 6,952 people killed and 11,144 injured. The
actual figures are likely considerably higher.
The war has forced millions of people to flee their
homes. We commend the generosity of the countries
hosting approximately 7.9 million people who sought
protection in Europe. We encourage further efforts
to ensure equitable access to rights and services
for refugees in national systems. Approximately
5.91 million people in Ukraine, 65 per cent of them
women and girls, are internally displaced. Fuelling the
displacement is the purposeful, systematic targeting of
critical civilian infrastructure, including energy and
health-care facilities.
Following a request from Ukraine to the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations Development Programme
launched a sector-specific damage assessment, in
collaboration with the World Bank. The assessment,
which aims at identifying the most critical needs for
the restoration of damaged energy infrastructure,
is currently under way, with 90 per cent of the data
collection completed.
The number of recorded attacks on healthcare facilities last year was the highest in the world.
There were 745 incidents as of 4 January. In the most
affected regions in the east and south of the country,
reportedly 15 per cent of facilities are either partially
or completely non-functional, and up to 50 per cent in
Donetsk, Zaporizhzhya, Mykolaiv and Kharkiv.
Inevitably, the war is also leaving invisible scars.
According to the World Health Organization, nearly
a quarter of the population is reportedly at risk of
developing a mental health condition because of the
war. The destruction and closing of schools will also
have a lasting impact on children and young people.
An estimated 5.7 million school-aged children have
been directly affected, including 3.6 million due to
the closure of educational institutions early on in
the conflict.
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In recent months, aid organizations have continued
efforts to expand life-saving operations to previously
inaccessible areas, including in the Kharkiv and
Kherson regions. As of 5 January, humanitarian partners
had provided food to almost 9 million people. The same
number of people have received critical health-care
support across the country. Around 7.3 million people
have been assisted with access to clean water and
hygiene products. Over 3 million people uprooted by
the war or those whose houses have been damaged have
received emergency shelter or critical household items.
In response to the energy crisis, humanitarian
partners have distributed hundreds of generators to
make sure critical services, such as hospitals and
schools, as well centres hosting those displaced, can
continue operating. In all, since 24 February 2022,
almost 14 million people have received assistance
from over 740 partners. That includes 1 million people
in areas not under the control of the Government of
Ukraine. But the humanitarian response is hampered
by severe access constraints, particularly in areas in the
east under Russian control. In line with international
humanitarian law, parties must facilitate the rapid
and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for all
civilians in need.
OHCHR continues to document allegations of
grave human rights violations and to support efforts
towards accountability. Since 24 February, OHCHR
has documented over 90 cases of conflict-related sexual
violence, which fall into two main categories — the
majority as a method of torture and ill-treatment in
detention, predominantly affecting men; and sexual
violence involving rape, including gang rape, of women
and girls in areas under Russian control. It is imperative
that all perpetrators of human rights violations be
held accountable.
On the question of accountability, the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
continues its work in Ukraine, where it has maintained
a presence since May 2022. As the Prosecutor has
indicated in his briefings to the Council, the alleged
targeting of civilian objects and the unlawful transfer
and deportation of civilians, including children, from
Ukraine to the Russian Federation, are the investigative
priorities of his Office.
On a positive note, we welcome the ongoing
contacts and commitment of the parties to continue
exchanges of prisoners of war, most recently on Sunday

S/PV.9243

involving 50 Ukrainian and 50 Russian captives. We
are also encouraged by the meeting hosted in Türkiye
on 11 January between the Russian and Ukrainian
ombudspersons on that issue.
Despite the challenging context, the Black Sea Grain
Initiative continues to make a difference, including by
helping bring global food prices down. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations now
reports a continued decline in its Food Price Index. More
than 17 million metric tons of foodstuffs have now been
moved under the Initiative, reaching, or on the way to
reaching, some 43 countries. Roughly 20 per cent of
that total is for countries categorized by the World Bank
as low-income or lower-middle-income economies.
The United Nations also continues its engagement
with all stakeholders to remove remaining obstacles to
Russian food and fertilizer exports, including ammonia.
Those exports are key to keeping prices down and
mitigating food insecurity, and we urge all concerned
to work to that end.
As the Secretary-General has made clear, Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine is a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law. It has
created a humanitarian and human rights catastrophe,
traumatized a generation of children and accelerated
the global food and energy crises. And yet that grave
damage could pale in comparison with the consequences
of a prolonged conflict.
I said at the outset of my statement that there is no
sign of an end to the fighting. The logic that prevails
is a military one, with very little, if any, room for
dialogue right now. But all wars end, and so too will
this one. Ukraine, Russia and the world cannot afford
for this war to continue. The Secretary-General is ready
to assist the parties to end this senseless, unjustified
conflict on the basis of the United Nations Charter and
international law.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for yet another in-depth briefing on
the situation in Ukraine.
A year has passed, and the situation in Ukraine is
no different. Three hundred and twenty-three days of
an ongoing unjust and unjustified war have resulted in

23-014803/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

devastating damage to the population and the country’s
physical, economic and human infrastructure.
Thousands of civilians have been killed. Approximately
8 million have become refugees. A large part of the
population is suffering from psychological trauma.
Despite worldwide condemnation and rejection, despite
the huge toll on human lives, despite everything, Russia
continues on its course.
Civilians and their families in Ukraine have
been — and are — enduring escalating devastation.
Children continue to be killed, wounded and deeply
traumatized by the violence all around them. Endless
individual dramas tell the larger story. Take the story
of Yaroslav, a 13-year-old boy who was awaiting the
New Year with his family in Nadniprianske when their
home came under Russian fire. Seriously wounded, he
was taken to a hospital in Kherson. But in the first few
minutes of 2023, the Russian army shelled the hospital,
and Yaroslav was evacuated to another hospital, in
Mykolaiv, where doctors continue to fight for his
life, hopefully with success in this case. How many
others — children, boys and girls — have seen their
destiny at the mercy of a war they do not want and do
not understand?
Among myriad disasters inflicted upon Ukraine
there is one that is as particularly striking as it is
painful: there are no more children left in Ukraine.
I am not speaking about those who have been killed
without getting to understand the world they were born
into. I am not speaking about those who were forced
to leave everything behind to flee a war inflicted
by those claiming to be their brothers. And I am not
speaking about those tens of thousands deported and
given for adoption to strangers in Russia. No, I am
speaking about those premature adults of little age in
Ukraine; those who have been forced to grow up years
in a matter of months; those forced to face killing tanks
rather than playing with toy soldiers; those who cannot
attend school because they have been destroyed; those
who cannot sleep from fear of a missile falling on their
roofs and those who have no more tears left to cry for
their misery.
Since the very first day of this war, we and the
absolute majority in the Organization have made a
fundamental distinction: Russia is the aggressor State;
Ukraine is fighting to defend itself, for its survival.
Russia is wrong and nothing can, or will ever, change
that, and no propaganda machine has been able to alter
it. The Ukrainian army and people have defied all
4/23

13/01/2023

expectations. We applaud their heroic resistance and
military brilliance in the face of a brutal invasion. That is
why it has been, and remains, crucial to help Ukrainians
to defend themselves and prevail in restoring their
sovereignty and securing their borders — because any
other result will only increase the Kremlin’s appetite.
Let us not forget that only eight years separated
Russia’s seizure of Crimea and the invasion of Ukraine.
Those who believe they are on a messianic mission
to restore fallen empires will not stop if they are not
stopped; they will just wait until their next move. The
world needs Ukraine within its borders to save the
world order from the current and future transgressors of
commonly agreed rules. Ukraine has been able to show
the world the strength of right against the illusions of
might. In this conflict, it is the courage and resilience
of Ukrainians that represent the hope for a life in peace
for all of us.
Since February of last year, the course of the war has
forced Russia multiple times to define down its military
goals. Russia abandoned the Kyiv area because it was
forced out. Kremlin officials declared that “Russia is
in Kherson forever”, but then was forced out. All the
ground lost in 2022 was not the result of any tactical
retreat, but of outright defeat. The Kremlin has not
changed its goals; it has been contained and stopped.
That is why it is important to continue to support
Ukraine by providing political, military, financial and
humanitarian support and assistance. Ukrainian heroes
fighting for freedom — for all of us and for what we
believe in and stand for — need and deserve modern
weapons to push back their invader. That is even more
evident given the realities on the ground.
For months, we have seen more and more a war
of rage, widescale bloodshed and attrition. As rightly
recalled, Soledar, pounded for months and where
nothing is left standing, now resembles Mariupol, a
hallmark of absolute insanity. Reporters speak of a
meatgrinder, where the Wagner Group uses human
lives as cannon fodder.
It has become a pattern: every time Russia
has stalled and has had difficulty on the ground, it
has deliberately targeted critical infrastructure, in
particular Ukraine’s electricity distribution grid and
power-generation capacity — which, by the way, is a
blatant war crime — including thanks to the extensive
use of Iranian drones, acquired illegally in breach of
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

resolution 2231 (2015), on which we still await clarity
from the Secretariat.
Russia has tried to force Ukraine into submission.
It has failed. Ukrainians may be without electricity,
a water supply and heating, but they have a heart, a
fighting heart for their country, for their freedom and
for the right to be themselves. But let us not forget
that, sooner or later, those responsible for the crimes
committed will have to face up to their acts and pay for
their actions.
Like every other war, this one will end one day.
It should have never started in the first place, but it
is never too late to stop it. Unrealistic and insincere
calls for talks while wreaking havoc on the country,
killing its civilians and annexing its territory by force
will lead nowhere. The crimes committed against
Ukrainian civilians, the rapes and murders, the scale
of the destruction, the sacrifices and the number of
deaths and the persistent imperialist madness have
not broken Ukraine. And we all know it. They have
only strengthened the resolve of Ukrainians to defend
themselves and bar the way to aggressor.
For any meaningful and credible diplomatic path to
materialize, Russia must first withdraw its troops from
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine. That
could lead to an outcome.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing, and First Deputy Foreign Minister
Dzhaparova for joining us today.
On 1 January, as the rest of us were celebrating
and welcoming the New Year, the people of Ukraine
endured three straight nights of Russian missiles and
drone strikes against their cities. Those attacks were
barbaric. They destroyed systems that provide heat
and light to the Ukrainian people during the coldest,
darkest part of winter. They are not the actions of a
country ready to give up on war.
The New Year offers us, along with our new
colleagues on the Security Council, an opportunity
to reflect on the past year. Let us start by reminding
ourselves of the mandate of this organ. The Security
Council is the primary body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
That is a serious, solemn duty. The Charter of the
United Nations and the peace it strives to achieve is in
our hands; it is in our care.

S/PV.9243

Last January, we feared that peace was at risk.
Twelve months ago, the United States first warned of
troubling signs that Russia was planning a massive, fullscale invasion of Ukraine. As Russia amassed troops
along the Ukrainian border, including in Belarus, we
rang alarm bells and pursued every diplomatic avenue
possible to prevent war.
In January 2022, we convened urgent meetings,
including at the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the NATO-Russia Council and
the bilateral United States-Russia Strategic Stability
Dialogue. Our goal was for all sides to resolve their
concerns through dialogue and diplomacy. But Russia
chose a different path. President Putin chose to strike
at the heart of the United Nations Charter. In fact, he
chose war at the exact moment that we were working in
the Council to keep the peace.
Today we are all feeling the direct and spillover
effects of this senseless war. For example, Russia’s war
in Ukraine has dramatically exacerbated the global
food crisis. The World Food Programme estimates that
more than 345 million people are suffering from, or at
risk of, acute food insecurity. Acute: that means they
are in imminent danger of dying. Three hundred fortyfive million people — that is more than double the
number in 2019.
Russia’s attacks and continued blocking of some
Ukrainian ports have decreased Ukraine’s food exports
by approximately 30 per cent. And we thank Türkiye and
the Secretary-General for helping to broker the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which has been critical to feeding
the world’s hungry. But here is the truth: the Initiative’s
operations are not keeping pace with the strong global
demand for Black Sea grain. Due to Russia’s deliberate
slowdown of inspections, dozens of ships are waiting
to depart, and dozens more are waiting for inspections
before they can bring their grain cargo to the world.
That backlog means extra expense and extra delay
for millions of tons of grain, a majority of which is
destined for developing countries. The backlog means
2.5 million tons of grain is just sitting there, waiting
to move, and farmers in Ukraine are waiting to plant.
Some ships have been waiting for over a month. Grain
is moving at just half the rate of the pace back in
September and October. The Initiative should operate
as it was envisioned, moving 5 million tons of food
per month. The world’s hungry deserve nothing less.

23-014805/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Today I ask members of the Council to join us in urging
Russia to scale up cooperation immediately.
As we work to contain the ripple effect of Russia’s
war, we must also be laser-focused on the horrors
happening on the ground in Ukraine. Last week, The
New York Times detailed harrowing accounts from
the Ukrainian Prosecutor-General’s office of welldocumented cases of sexual violence committed against
women, men and children by Russian Federation forces.
I strongly encourage everyone at this table and listening
here today to read that report. The details are too awful,
too sickening, for me to recount here today. Of course,
we do not only have to rely on The New York Times; the
United Nations Independent International Commission
of Inquiry has documented numerous reported cases of
sexual violence and torture.
Just as when we warned the Council last January
that Russia was planning a full-scale invasion of
Ukraine, we also warned the Council more recently
that Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea planned to transfer prohibited materiel to
Russia. They have. Since August, Iran has transferred
hundreds of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to
Russia, in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). Russia
has been using those Iranian UAVs to strike Ukraine’s
energy infrastructure, depriving millions of Ukrainian
civilians of electricity, heat and critical services in the
middle of winter. People in Ukraine today are suffering
and dying as a result of Iran’s support.
We believe Iran is now considering the sale of
hundreds of ballistic missiles to Russia, also in violation
of Council resolutions. We urge Iran to reverse course
and not to take those steps. And we urge everyone who
supports peace to ask Iran to do the same.
Meanwhile, officials of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea said publicly that they would
not support Russia’s war in Ukraine. But they have
since delivered arms to the Wagner Group in direct
violation of Security Council resolutions. Last month,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea delivered
infantry rockets and missiles into Russia for use by the
Russian Federation-backed Wagner Group in violation
of the Council’s sanctions resolution. And we are
concerned that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is planning to deliver more military equipment
to the Wagner Group.
We condemn the actions of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and urge the Democratic People’s
6/23

13/01/2023

Republic of Korea to cease those deliveries and come
into compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. And once again we encourage everyone to
join us in that call.
As we start this new year, the world is tired of war.
The people of Ukraine, who have suffered so much,
crave a return to a normal life. Now is the time for all
countries to stand together and demand that Russia
end this senseless war. We must come together in
defence of the Charter of the United Nations and its
most fundamental principles. We must come together
to achieve a just and secure peace, consistent with
the Charter.
Let us continue to do everything in our power to
contain the ripple effects of Russia’s actions, to help
those who are suffering both in Ukraine and outside its
borders, and hold accountable everyone who violates
international law and supports this illegal, immoral war.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
Since this is the first opportunity for my delegation
to refer to this central issue in the Security Council,
I would like to underscore that, since the beginning
of Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine,
Ecuador has decisively condemned it. This aggression
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine is contrary to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law and has
no place in an international order based on the rule
of law, as stated by our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Holguín Maldonado, in the Security Council open
debate yesterday (see S/PV.9241). In accordance with
the principles of our foreign policy and our vocation as
a peaceful nation, we do not and will not recognize the
acquisition of territory by force.
We express our support to Secretary-General
António Guterres for the efforts to achieve peace in this
conflict — one of the most complex challenges — and
any other that involves one of the permanent members
of the Security Council.
Ecuador regrets the partial application of Article 27,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
which established the veto, but also the obligation of
the parties to a dispute to abstain from voting.
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9243

I also highlight resolution 2623 (2022), by which
the members of the Security Council decided to
convene the eleventh emergency special session of the
General Assembly, which allowed the Members of this
Organization to express themselves decisively.

the dynamics of the Security Council and has had
disastrous consequences that have aggravated food
insecurity in the world. In that regard, we call for the
broadening and deepening of initiatives such as the
Black Sea Grain Initiative.

My delegation recalls the statement by the President
of the Security Council of 6 May 2022 (S/PRST/2022/3)
in which this very organ was united in expressing
its deep concern for the maintenance of peace and
security in Ukraine and recognized that, pursuant to
the Charter of the United Nations, “[a]ll Members shall
settle their international disputes by peaceful means”
(Article 2, paragraph 3). The Security Council and its
members must honour that statement. We therefore call
for an end to the invasion, which is now approaching
its one-year anniversary, and we urge the Council to
consider ways to immediately suspend the hostilities
and restore peace and security in Ukraine, based on
respect for its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.

I remind the Security Council that in just the first
month of the military aggression against Ukraine,
Ecuador had to evacuate nearly 700 Ecuadorian
citizens, in particular students, by means of several
humanitarian flights.

Ecuador is ready to support any initiative that
promotes political dialogue and diplomacy and that
would also bury the spectre of the nuclear threat.
Ecuador deplores the recent escalation of attacks
and bombings in Ukraine that is causing a further
deterioration in the humanitarian situation, which
is worsened by the bombings targeting critical
infrastructure that have decimated access to basic
services. Furthermore, we are concerned about the
risks of accidents and incidents at nuclear power plants.
In that regard, we reiterate our full support for the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the need to
facilitate its work, including on the ground, in a safe
and unhindered manner.
Attacks on energy infrastructure, housing,
hospitals and various education facilities especially
affect vulnerable groups such as children and the
elderly. Moreover, the power outages caused by those
attacks add to the suffering faced by the Ukrainian
population in the midst of a cold winter. Those attacks
also violate resolution 2573 (2021) on the protection
of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population, which was adopted in April 2021. We
emphatically call for the cessation of attacks against
civilians and unconditional respect for international
humanitarian law.
This conflict, which is inflicting pain and
destruction on the people of Ukraine, has changed

Finally, in the humanitarian context, Ecuador
recognizes the leadership and efforts carried out
during 2022 by France and Mexico, the latter having
concluded its valuable work at the end of December.
For this reason, Ecuador will work closely with France
to continue promoting the humanitarian issue in the
Security Council.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her useful and comprehensive briefing. We welcome
the participation at this meeting of other delegations,
in particular Her Excellency Ms. Emine Dzhaparova,
the First Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine, in the
company of our colleague, His Excellency Mr. Sergiy
Kyslytsya, Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations.
In his final address of the year at the end of
December, Secretary-General António Guterres
expressed his cautious hope that the year 2023 would
bring an end to this conflict. It was a hope that we then
wholeheartedly embraced. We note, however, that after
almost a year of armed conflict, the war shows little
sign of abating. The conflict appears to be threading
a narrow path of escalation, as we have heard in the
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo’s briefing.
We are deeply concerned that Europe, a continent
at the origin of two tragic world wars and the epicentre
of a long cold war, is again plunging the world into a
gloomy situation of fear and a food crisis. We are in
this Chamber to encourage that ways of a negotiated
solution to the conflict be explored. We have a genuine
interest in peace and security worldwide as a global
common good.
We wish to remind ourselves that the concept of
collective security — that the security of one is the
security of all — was at the centre of the creation of
the United Nations. It is a concept enshrined in the

23-014807/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Charter and cherished by all peace-loving nations. In
that regard, we can only welcome the efforts of this
body to address the issue.
Mozambique holds the view that there should be an
immediate cessation of hostilities and a return to direct
negotiations between the belligerent parties. Those
negotiations should be conducted in good faith by both
parties in the spirit of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.
We defend that humanitarian work be given a
high priority, in accordance with the relevant rules
of international humanitarian law and practices
of humanity.
We see the need for and importance of shoring up
the platform that led to the Black Sea Grain Initiative
with the support of the Secretary-General’s Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance.
In that context, we encourage the Secretary-General to
continue devoting his efforts, with our support, and his
moral authority to the search for a negotiated solution
to the conflict.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her sober assessment
of the situation. I would also like to acknowledge the
participation at this meeting of the Deputy Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and Poland, Her
Excellency Ms. Emine Dzhaparova and His Excellency
Mr. Wojciech Gerwel, respectively, as well as that of
the representatives of the other delegations.

13/01/2023

law. Switzerland calls for rapid and unhindered access
of humanitarian aid to the entire territory of Ukraine,
including the areas occupied by Russia. We also
condemn the involvement of Belarus in the Russian
military aggression.
In an armed conflict, civilians pay a high price.
Their protection is a humanitarian imperative.
Switzerland stresses that all parties must ensure the
protection of the civilian population as well as of
persons hors de combat, and respect international
humanitarian law and human rights. Since February
2022, thousands of civilians in Ukraine have died or
been injured. The Ukrainian population has been and
is still being subjected to horrific situations, including
acts that the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine has determined constitute war
crimes and human rights violations. Millions of people
have been forced to leave their homes, the vast majority
of whom are women and children. They have often been
exposed to high risks, such as human trafficking and
sexual violence.
In addition, in recent months, there have been
recurring Russian attacks on Ukraine’s energy
infrastructure. Without electricity, the functioning of
essential services such as hospitals and water supply
systems has been hampered.
In view of what I just mentioned, today I reiterate
Switzerland’s call for a halt to all attacks on civilians
and persons hors de combat, on civilian property and
on essential infrastructure.

For the people of Kyiv and many other regions of
Ukraine, this year began as the last one ended: with a
large wave of Russian air attacks. At the same time,
fierce fighting continues, especially in eastern Ukraine.
Our thoughts are with the people suffering from this
war, wherever they are in the world.

We must take a step forward towards peaceful,
just and lasting solutions. That includes a commitment
to diplomatic solutions, making progress in the
reconstruction process, actions for accountability and
victims’ rights, and a redoubling of efforts for nuclear
safety and security.

Russia’s large-scale military aggression against
Ukraine is a serious violation of international
law and the United Nations Charter. Switzerland
strongly condemns this violation and fully supports
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
We call upon Russia to immediately de-escalate the
situation, cease all combat operations and withdraw its
troops from the entire territory of Ukraine, including
the areas declared as annexed, without delay. As the
occupying Power, Russia must respect its obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights

We must not forget that this war has consequences
far beyond the European continent. The burden of more
expensive food, uncertain energy supply and the threat
of a nuclear incident weighs on the whole world. We
share the Secretary-General’s conviction:

8/23

“This is not a time to sit on the sidelines; it is a time
for resolve, determination, and — yes — even hope.”
Switzerland supports the good offices of the
Secretary-General and his unwavering commitment to
peace, including as host State in Geneva.
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We will continue to provide humanitarian aid in
Ukraine, for example by supplying mobile heating
devices. We support justice for victims, including
promoting the documentation and investigation of
crimes committed against them. And we are committed
to a participatory and transparent reconstruction
process under Ukrainian leadership, as set out in the
Lugano Principles.
Last year, war returned to Europe with full force.
As members of the Security Council, we have the
responsibility to do our utmost to ensure that this year is
marked by a just peace, in accordance with international
law, in Ukraine and elsewhere in the world
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
For almost a year, with bravery and determination,
Ukraine has been resisting the Russian aggression
unleashed in violation of international law and the
United Nations Charter. Russia had bet on the rapid
collapse of the Ukrainian army and authorities. Eleven
months later, the offensive on Kyiv have been repulsed,
and the Kharkiv region and the city of Kherson have
been liberated.
With each Ukrainian victory on the ground, Russia
reacts in a cowardly manner by bombing civilian
infrastructure. These strikes have a clear objective: to
terrorize civilians and break the morale of the Ukrainian
people. The Kremlin’s unilateral announcement of
a ceasefire, which Russia and its proxies have not
respected, is further proof of its cynicism.
The Russian strikes violate the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law and
international criminal law. These acts constitute war
crimes, and they will not go unpunished. France will
continue to stand by the Ukrainian courts and the
International Criminal Court.
While its ammunition stocks are dwindling and it
is in great difficulty on the ground, Russia is seeking
to obtain supplies by all means, including by violating
Security Council resolutions. For example, it makes
extensive use of drones supplied by Iran. The United
Nations must investigate these transfers, which violate
resolution 2231 (2015), and report its findings to the
Security Council. To compensate for its many losses,
Russia also does not hesitate to mobilize Wagner Group
mercenaries, which include many criminals.

S/PV.9243

The Russian aggression is having devastating
consequences for global food security, which is being
used by Russia as a weapon of war and an instrument
of blackmail. The Black Sea Grain Initiative has
proved to be effective in lowering food prices and
allowing food to reach those who need it most. Several
million tons of wheat have been exported, most of it to
non-European countries. We expect Russia to ensure
the full implementation of this agreement.
We also welcome the concrete initiatives taken by
Ukraine. France is providing assistance through the
Food and Agriculture Resilience Mission initiative and
the European solidarity corridors.
By continuing its headlong rush forward and
increasing the number of acts of violence, Russia
is repeatedly showing that it does not want peace.
It bears sole responsibility for the continuation of
hostilities. Through the 10-point peace plan proposed
by President Zelenskyy, Ukraine, for its part, is tracing
a path towards a just and lasting peace. This will not be
possible without a total withdrawal of Russian troops
from all Ukrainian territory. That is the only way to
end the suffering of the Ukrainian people, who are
courageously fighting for their freedom.
In that context, France will continue to provide
the Ukrainian people with the support they need to
exercise their right to self-defence and preserve their
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
his New Year’s message, Secretary-General Guterres
stated that in 2023 we need peace now more than ever.
Helping Ukraine and the European region restore peace
and stability is an unshirkable responsibility of the
international community, and of the Security Council
in particular. It is also a goal that we should redouble
our efforts to achieve in the new year.
I wish to make the following four observations.
First, conditions for dialogue and negotiations must be
created. The current situation in Ukraine is the result of
the long-term accumulation and continuous evolution
of deep-seated security imbalances in Europe. Only
when the parties concerned overcome their differences
and sit down at the negotiating table can we find the
fundamental solution to end the war and rebuild the
European security architecture.
The path of peace talks is not a smooth one, but as
long as we do not give up on our efforts and demonstrate

23-014809/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

political determination and wisdom, starting from
small, practical things and gradually building up from
there, the prospect of peace will always be within reach.
The international community, in particular countries
with major influence on the current situation, should
encourage Russia and Ukraine to engage in dialogue
and help open the door to a political solution to the
crisis. Escalating sanctions or providing weapons will
only make it more difficult to turn the situation around
and may even provoke larger-scale confrontations, thus
exacerbating and prolonging the conflict, which must
be avoided at all costs.
Secondly, no effort must be spared in alleviating
the humanitarian crisis. The ongoing conflict and the
cold winter have added to the humanitarian needs.
Many people have to face the reality of shelling, lack
of water and electricity, and family separation, while
ushering in the new year. Parties to the conflict should
effectively uphold international humanitarian law, take
measures to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure
from attacks, and make every effort to reduce the
humanitarian consequences of the conflict. Continued
international humanitarian assistance is indispensable
to helping conflict-affected people survive the winter.
It is imperative to help Ukraine repair damaged energy
infrastructure as soon as possible so that people
can survive the winter and so that a larger-scale
humanitarian crisis can be avoided.
Russia’s 36-hour ceasefire over Orthodox Christmas
allowed people to spend the holiday in peace and
provided favourable conditions for the humanitarian
agencies to deliver their supplies, which should be
welcomed. We hope in future there will be more similar
ceasefire initiatives, so as to create conditions for a
comprehensive ceasefire.
Thirdly, nuclear-security risks need to be
eliminated. The shelling around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant has not ceased, and its safety and
security has been a source of concern. According to
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), all
six reactors at the plant are down, and the last backup
power line to guarantee the plant safety and security
functions was damaged by shelling at the end of
December, with power transmission resumed only last
week. This should not happen again, and all military
operations that could affect the safety and security of
the nuclear power plant should be stopped immediately.
10/23

13/01/2023

China supports the IAEA in its continuous
communication with Russia and Ukraine on the safety
and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable and
viable arrangement at an early date.
Fourthly, the spillover effects of the crisis need to
be contained. The coronavirus disease pandemic, the
conflict in Ukraine and other crises are reinforcing
each other, with devastating impact on the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Developing
countries are suffering from increasingly high inflation
and debt burdens, and, in the last year alone, the number
of people suffering from extreme poverty and severe
hunger increased by several million.
It should be noted that this is not simply about
production and demand, and that the disruption of the
global industrial chain and supply chains by unilateral
sanctions cannot be ignored. Major developed countries
should adopt responsible economic, monetary and
trade policies to avoid negative spillover effects that
exacerbate the economic and livelihood difficulties
of developing countries, not to mention using the
world economy as a political tool or weapon, thereby
undermining the hard-won momentum of recovery.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has brought hope
to people with hunger. China welcomes the continued
implementation of the Initiative and encourages the
United Nations Secretariat to make practical efforts
to remove the obstacles to the export of Russian food
and fertilizer.
The crisis in Ukraine has once again brought the
world to a crossroads, as President Xi Jinping stated,
whether to revert to the cold war mentality, unprovoked
division and confrontation, or to proceed from the
common welfare of humankind and uphold equality,
mutual respect and win-win cooperation. This is a test
of the wisdom of the international community and the
reason of humankind. Facts have proved that conflict,
confrontation, containment and decoupling are against
the trend of the times and therefore are doomed to failure,
while peace, development, win-win arrangements and
cooperation are in line with the expectations of people
and are the pervading trend of the times.
At the beginning of the new year, all parties should
take new actions to actively open up new prospects for
peace. China will continue to uphold an objective and
impartial position and make constructive efforts in its
own way.
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I welcome the First
Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine, Ms. Dzhaparova,
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Gerwel, as
well as the representatives of Lithuania and European
Union, to today’s meeting. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her detailed and
comprehensive briefing, which unfortunately confirms
prevailing sombre expectations. We are sorry to hear
once again that there are no prospects for opening
peace negotiations, while the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate and the number of civilian
casualties increases every day.
Brazil understands that initiatives such as the
temporary ceasefire during Orthodox Christmas
could pave the way for the resumption of dialogue. It
is heartbreaking to see that, even in such moments, it
is impossible to reach an agreement, and yet another
opportunity to build peace has been lost.
We urge the parties to break this senseless dynamic.
At the same time, we expect all countries directly or
indirectly involved to start showing genuine interest in
a dialogue for achieving peace. The exclusive pursuit
of military solutions will inevitably stoke long-lasting
resentments and a post-conflict situation of fragility
and instability.
We regret the disbanding of the Fact-Finding
Mission set up by the United Nations to investigate the
incident of 29 July 2022 in Olenivka, even before it was
able to begin its work. Impartial scrutiny is essential to
contain the proliferation of false narratives and prevent
such atrocities from happening again. We encourage
the parties to increase efforts to ensure the security
of future missions of this nature and the SecretaryGeneral to reconsider the decision.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to the preservation
of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
to a political solution to the conflict that takes into
account legitimate security concerns. We also reiterate
the call for the well-being of the civilian population on
both sides of the front line to be everyone’s priority.
We welcome Türkiye’s renewed mediation efforts
and encourage other members of the United Nations
to engage in initiatives that will allow for the prompt
cessation of hostilities, in order to abbreviate the
suffering of the Ukrainian people.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
comprehensive briefing on the security and

S/PV.9243

humanitarian situations in Ukraine. Ghana appreciates
and remains fully supportive of the crucial work of the
different United Nations agencies aimed at addressing
the several crises generated by the war.
Ten months of the Russian Federation’s war on
Ukraine has left many in fear of the great upheaval that
lies ahead unless the war is brought to end sooner rather
than later. We remain deeply concerned that belligerency
appears to prevail over a reasonable approach, requiring
a move away from the battle front and for the warring
parties to resolve their dispute through dialogue. The
prevailing conditions in Ukraine reinforce the critical
need for the international community to intensify
efforts towards a pacific settlement of the conflict.
Despite the echoing calls by members of the
Security Council and the international community,
the Russian Federation’s actions have demonstrated an
unending disregard for the obligations of international
law prohibiting the use of force as it engages in an
intense fight to capture the city of Soledar and many
other parts of the country.
The multiple impacts of the war on the lives of
Ukrainians, especially women and children, are tragic,
to say the least. The destruction to civilian and critical
energy infrastructure is monumental and requires
extensive resources to be restored, where possible. We
are particularly concerned by recent escalatory rhetoric
and posturing, which carry the risk of a possible
spillover of hostilities that could set the stage for a
wider war, given existing global geopolitical fissures.
While Ukraine has been the centre-stage of combat,
the war has also deepened tensions in the inter-State
relations between some of the most powerful nations
and has elicited responses ranging from the imposition
of sanctions to the provision of military assistance
to Ukraine.
We must also note the continuing impact of the
unfolding war on the world economy. The food, energy
and financial crises provoked by the war have caused
many developing countries to experience receding
economies and heightened chances of instability.
International peace and security are under threat
from the ongoing war in Ukraine. The Security Council
must therefore strengthen peace efforts by drawing
on the tools for pacific settlement provided under the
Charter of the United Nations. We are of the view that
the Council must begin to consider a clear-cut process

23-0148011/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

13/01/2023

involving the parties and all other relevant stakeholders.
Such an effort would require the good-faith commitment
of all members of the Council and must be aimed at
finding pragmatic and mutually acceptable solutions
grounded in the rules of international law and the
avowed values of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
most pressing for the Security Council to find common
ground upon which it can accelerate action for peace
in Ukraine.

With regard to nuclear safety and security, we wish
to underscore the absolute importance for the parties
to take preventive measures, including the delineation
of a demilitarized zone around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant and the other nuclear facilities in
the country. We urge the International Atomic Energy
Agency, in its engagements with parties, to also address
the concerns regarding the physical and mental wellbeing of the staff at the Zaporizhzhya power plant.

As the body mandated to promote and maintain
international peace and security, the Security Council
shares a collective burden to restore peace to Ukraine
and its people. We must, however, point out that a lot
depends on the will of the Russian Federation to abate
its violations of the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We therefore
reiterate our call for an end to this war by the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of the Russian Federation
forces from the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine. We are firmly of the view that dialogue
and diplomacy offer the most viable paths to address
the security and other concerns of the parties in a
comprehensive and mutually acceptable manner.

Finally, let me express Ghana’s unwavering
support for the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We stand ready
to support the efforts of the Council and the wider
international community in finding a comprehensive
and lasting resolution to the conflict between the
Russian Federation and Ukraine and, furthermore, to
address the global challenges resulting from the war.

We continue to be disheartened by the humanitarian
suffering experienced by the people as a result of the
war. Each day the war persists, innocent people pay
the price with their lives and livelihoods. Millions of
people have been displaced from their homes, with
little hope of returning to find them in place. To date,
close to 7,000 deaths and more than 111,000 injuries,
including of children, have been recorded.
Most regrettably, humanitarian workers have also
fallen victim to the war. The deliberate attacks on
civilians and humanitarian workers are unacceptable
and constitute violations under international
humanitarian law. We condemn all such actions and
call on the parties to comply with their international
obligations and to grant humanitarian access to all
impacted areas.
We condemn all abuses and violations of human
rights arising from the war and reiterate our call for
thorough, transparent and independent investigations
into all such reports. We note with regret that the United
Nations fact-finding mission that was to investigate the
killing of prisoners in Olenivka has had to be disbanded
for safety reasons. Despite setbacks, we must maintain
our collective commitment to ensure accountability for
all war crimes and to avoid impunity in Ukraine.
12/23

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): To be frank, we do not fully understand why
today’s meeting was convened. Is it so we can listen to
a briefing by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo based
on the so-called reliable information thoughtfully
provided by so-called independent sources and
independent commissions? Did we hear anything
new from our former Western colleagues today? Did
we hear anything that we have not heard repeated in
various manners over the past year?
There is a novel titled Vanity Fair, written by
British author William Thackeray, who is widely
known in Russia. Meetings on Ukraine that have been
convened by our former Western partners increasingly
remind us of a “Hypocrisy Fair”, where the hypocrisy
of the representatives of the collective West and the
Kyiv regime is assuming the oddest forms.
For example, our Ukrainian neighbours, who
recently threatened us with terrible punishment and
almost threatened to launch an offensive against
Moscow, have today put on the garb of peacemakers. That
is what we took away from yesterday’s meeting from the
remarks of Ms. Dzhaparova (see S/PV.9241) and, before
that, from the initiatives of her boss, Mr. Kuleba. Now
Ukraine is running around brandishing the idea of some
sort of a peace summit, implying in every way that it is
Russia that wants no peace. Clearly, that is an attempt
to strike a chord with a Western audience, which is
asking increasingly inconvenient questions about how
Kyiv spends its allotted money and about why Ukraine
is rejecting all realistic mediation initiatives.
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

At first glance, it seems that Kyiv is holding out
an olive branch. What could be nobler? However, even
with the most cursory examination, it becomes clear
that, behind that lovely facade, there is a rotten inside
and even a hidden agenda. Kyiv does not conceal that
Ukrainian peace means the capitulation of Russia,
which must be endorsed by the international community.
That is why, when making that shallow propagandist
proposal for peace, Mr. Kuleba voiced that Russia is not
expected to take part in such a summit.
The much-vaunted Zelenskyy peace initiative that
our Western colleagues fell over one another to praise
follows the same hypocritical and inherently flawed
logic. For anyone who believed, even for a minute, in the
peaceful intentions of the Ukrainian dictator, I would
like to remind them that, on 30 September, Ukraine
legislatively ruled out the very possibility of dialogue
with our country. Through Decree No. 679, Zelenskyy
literally “noted the impossibility of conducting
negotiations with President of the Russian Federation
Vladimir Putin”. That legislative provocation cannot
be explained, other than by the intention of Kyiv
and Western sponsors to continue fighting until the
last Ukrainian.
By the way, it is difficult to shed the impression
that the Kyiv regime and its most ardent sponsors have
completely forgotten the meaning of the word “peace”.
It is no accident that the European Union is financing
arms deliveries to Kyiv through the European Peace
Facility, without even considering how abominable
that sounds.
The Ukrainian authorities once again revealed their
true — and far from peaceful — colours in March 2022,
when it revoked its own realistic elements for a peace
deal that we were ready to discuss. Whether Kyiv made
that fateful step by itself or was heeding the instructions
of its sponsors in London, Washington, D.C., and
Brussels, is not that important now. What is important
is that precisely then the Kyiv regime — despite
facts and common sense to the contrary — embraced
the illusion that with the increasing direct military
assistance of NATO, Ukraine would be able to defeat
Russia on the battlefield. Ukraine’s dictator still sticks
to that dangerous delusion, even though many Western
leaders have adopted a more sober view of the situation.
Ukraine has basically turned into NATO’s private
military company. Ukraine is provided money, weapons
and intelligence data and is told what to target and

S/PV.9243

where to attack. It is the people of Ukraine, who are
forced to fight for someone else’s objectives, are the
ones who suffer. That was acknowledged yesterday
by the Ukrainian Minister of Defence, Mr. Reznikov,
who said:
“We are carrying out NATO’s mission without
shedding their blood. We shed our blood. That
is why the West should give us more money
and weapons”.
That is the formula of a NATO war by proxy “to the
last Ukrainian”. It cannot be described any better. It also
discloses the cynical confirmation of the true premise
behind any Ukrainian so-called peace initiatives.
I am sure that after my statement many colleagues
will ask the legitimate question: what will it take
for peace to prevail in Ukraine? That is a legitimate
question, especially now that the Kyiv regime and its
Western sponsors are trying to convince everyone
that the goal of Russia’s special military operation in
Ukraine is to destroy Ukraine as a State, almost to
de-Ukrainize it and to force its Russification. We never
declared such goals.
It is important to understand that we are not
fighting against the Ukrainian people. We are fighting
against the criminal nationalist regime, which came
to power in 2014 as a result of a Western-supported
anti-constitutional coup and resolved to remove from
Ukraine everything that is related to Russia and to
glorify Nazi collaborators. That felonious policy
resulted in an 8-year-long deadly war on the inhabitants
of Donbas who opposed the new Government. Putting
an end to that war was the main goal of our special
military operation.
For the people of the Donetsk and Luhansk
Republics, the war has been going on for the entirety
of those eight years. As far as how the population of
that region survived under fire then and now, and what
the people of the Donbas wanted and how they tried to
achieve it, we intend to tell everyone about that next
Friday under an Arria Formula meeting. We believe
that all States, first and foremost the new members of
the Council and everyone interested in this topic, will
find that meeting very useful, as it will provide firsthand accounts by eyewitnesses, foreign journalists and
researchers who were there.
Everything could have ended differently for Ukraine
had Kyiv implemented the Minsk agreements endorsed

23-0148013/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

13/01/2023

in resolution 2022 (2015). However, that did not fit with
the plans of Zelenskyy or his predecessors or — as
we now know thanks to the revelations of Chancellor
Merkel and President Hollande — those of France
and Germany as guarantor countries. Furthermore,
we learned that the Minsk process served only as a
smokescreen for the West, behind which it was secretly
arming Ukraine in order to push it into a conflict
with Russia.

According to the latest United Nations statistics,
this war has already produced more than 6 million
internally displaced persons in Ukraine, nearly
5 million refugees, nearly 7,000 civilian deaths and
more than 11,000 injuries. In addition, there are
allegations of rape and sexual violence, infiltration,
human trafficking, especially of children and women,
including the disruption of schooling for children and
psychological traumas that extend beyond the conflict.

The beginning of the special military operation in
February 2022 undermined those plans. The goal was
to ensure that no threat could emanate from Ukrainian
territory for Russia and that discrimination against
Russian-speaking Ukrainians would end. If that result
can be achieved through negotiations, we are ready
to engage. If not, then we will achieve it through
military means.

The use of weapons of mass destruction, in
particular drones and other explosive weapons with
wide-area effects, as well as cluster munitions and
anti-personnel mines, has greatly increased the toll of
the war in Ukraine. Numerous attacks have targeted
energy, health and water infrastructure, directly
affecting the survival of civilian populations, forcing
them to flee from the emergency and making more
complex the delivery of humanitarian aid to millions
in need. The number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance has increased significantly as temperatures
have fallen.

To date, however, neither the Kyiv regime nor its
Western sponsors have drawn the right conclusions
from the Ukrainian disaster. What is more, with the
tolerance of the collective West, the Zelenskyy regime
has become an authoritarian dictatorship, which in
itself is a significant obstacle to peace. More recently,
in addition to persecuting dissidents and opposition
leaders in Ukraine, we have seen an attempt to destroy
the only canonical church in the country — the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church. That could have very
grave implications for regional peace and security,
which is why we believe that this situation deserves
close scrutiny by members of the Security Council. We
therefore request the Japanese presidency to convene a
separate Security Council meeting on this issue in the
afternoon of 17 January.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing. I welcome the participation in this meeting
of the First Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine, the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, our
colleague the representative of Lithuania and the Head
of the European Union delegation to the United Nations.
Since the most recent Security Council meeting on
the war in Ukraine (see S/PV.9208), there has been no
lull on the ground. There is no respite for the people.
The harshness of the fighting in Soledar and Bakhmut
is a matter of concern. The civilian population is being
subjected to regular bombardments, caught in an
unbearable vice for the control of every inch.
14/23

We commend the outstanding efforts of
humanitarian organizations in Ukraine and in
refugee-hosting countries to provide assistance in the
form of food, cash, medical care, electricity generators,
clean water and other basic services.
We call once again on the belligerents to respect their
commitments under international humanitarian law and
to refrain from using weapons whose indiscriminate
effects inflict atrocious suffering on civilians.
As we approach the critical threshold of 12 months
of relentless warfare, the rhetoric of excessive weaponry
that seems to prevail on both sides bodes well for a
hardening of the fighting. There is every reason to
believe that the coming spring will be like this winter,
a season of even more violent offensives.
It is time for the meetings of the Council to be
considered as, and directed towards, a solution-oriented
outcome. It is time now more than ever for the channels
of diplomacy to be activated to end this deadly war.
My country calls on all parties to put all their
energy into the search for a political solution in order
to end the cycle of suffering and distress. We must use
diplomacy and dialogue to end the war in Ukraine.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her sobering briefing.
I recognize the participation of Her Excellency
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ms. Dzhaparova, First Deputy Foreign Minister
of Ukraine.
The heralding of a new year has struck differently
this year with the people of Ukraine due to the
continuation of Russia’s war of aggression. At the start
of 2023 we must continue to prioritize the prolonged
and intensifying nature of this illegal war, along with
its consequences on Ukraine, its people, Europe and the
rest of the world.
As we continue to witness the systematic targeting
of critical infrastructure, particularly energy and
water distribution systems, we condemn this evident
weaponization of winter, to the severe detriment of
the civilians in Ukraine. Those attacks have led to
widespread blackouts and the disruption of essential
services in Ukraine and constitute a violation of
international humanitarian law, in particular the four
Geneva Conventions and their protocols. We stress
that international humanitarian law and international
human rights law must be respected and upheld at all
times, without exception.
The repercussions of this war on children must
be highlighted. Attacks on civilian infrastructure,
including schools and transportation systems, coupled
with displacement, are having a disproportionate
impact on children, their education and their safety.
Lack of access to basic services is depriving them of
their fundamental rights, and that will lead to longterm consequences that will not be easily reversed.
Furthermore, children have been forcibly moved to
Russia, breaking family ties and placing children in
vulnerable situations, while denying them the right to
family life.
Dire consequences are also a reality for all the
displaced people and refugees. Funding for civil society
organizations, in particular women’s organizations,
must be given priority and all civil society organizations
must be included and participate meaningfully in
coordination mechanisms and decision-making
processes at all levels.
We have heard harrowing testimonies of rape,
torture and trafficking, confirmed by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine. In
that regard, we welcome the Framework of Cooperation
between the Government of Ukraine and the United
Nations on the prevention and response to conflictrelated sexual violence.

S/PV.9243

We urge rigorous and swift action with respect
to
accountability,
investigations,
prosecutions,
compensation, reparations and service provision that
is survivor-centred, rights-based and trauma-informed.
Once again, sexual violence has become a feature of
war. We cannot fail to investigate and prosecute such
crimes. We cannot tolerate impunity for sexual violence
in conflict.
We call for safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access and corridors to anyone in need across Ukraine.
We commend the United Nations, its related agencies
and all humanitarian workers, who are working on
the ground in an extremely difficult operational
environment and taxing conditions.
Over the past few weeks, we have witnessed renewed
and prolonged attacks on Kyiv and other cities. Along
with the suffering inflicted on the civilian population,
we reiterate our concern about respect for international
humanitarian law and hope that those attacks will
cease immediately. The documented provenance of the
unmanned aerial vehicle systems used in those attacks
raises serious concerns that need to be addressed.
Equally, I reiterate that indiscriminate attacks
and attacks on critical infrastructure must stop. It is
the responsibility of the Council and all its members
to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, without exception.
In conclusion, we welcome Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo’s positive update with regard to the
ongoing contacts on prisoners of war and progress on
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, and we call upon the
Russian Federation to cease all hostilities and take
concrete steps towards solving contentious issues
through dialogue and diplomacy in ways that are
consistent with the United Nations Charter.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
also like to join others in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing and extend my
welcome to Her Excellency Ms. Dzhaporova, First
Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine, and His Excellency
Mr. Gerwel, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland, and I thank them for their participation.
Since February, the Council has met over the
war in Ukraine more than 40 times. Our discussions
have covered virtually every reason to abhor modern
warfare — from the threat of nuclear confrontation to
the plight of children in conflict. Each passing day last

23-0148015/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

13/01/2023

year added to the urgency of a cessation of hostilities
and the necessity of a negotiated settlement. Yet one
fighting season has yielded to another as this terrible
war continues.

Russian Federation — that must decide when and how
they begin comprehensive talks. Still, the international
community can and must do more to accelerate
that process.

Today nearly 40 per cent of Ukraine’s population
needs humanitarian aid. The ravages of war have
not spared essential services either, while the onset
of winter compounds civilian suffering, as we have
heard. Donors and aid groups have responded with
urgency, scaling up the delivery of essential services
and providing thousands of generators in order to help
people through the winter. Indeed, my country’s aid
programme has so far sent 2,500 generators as part of
our ongoing humanitarian response to the conflict. But
aid actors have also been caught in the crossfire. On
15 December, a humanitarian worker was killed while
distributing food and, just a few days later, the office
of the International Committee of the Red Cross in
Donetsk was damaged by shelling.

Through active and deliberate diplomacy, we
must collectively work to prevent an escalation and
expansion of the war. That includes minimizing the risk
of a miscalculation. We must also preserve the space
for positive interactions between the two sides, at the
very least, to normalize engagement on key areas such
as the export of grain and fertilizers, nuclear safety and
security and respect for international humanitarian law.
To encourage the parties to the negotiation table, we
should also provide incentives in the form of a post-war
vision that is just and sustainable.

This war has already killed at least 7,000 Ukrainian
civilians and forced 15 million to flee their homes. In
September, the World Bank estimated that Ukraine’s
reconstruction would cost around $350 billion. That
was before the widespread destruction of critical
infrastructure, including power plants and the
electricity grid.
Beyond Ukraine’s borders, the war is contributing to
turmoil in the global supply chain and food and energy
markets and imposing unsustainable costs on countries
in the global south. For low-income developing States,
the conflict added to an already-difficult post-pandemic
global economy, with rising prices and interest rates and
significant inflationary pressures. Nearly 60 per cent of
those countries now face a debt crisis. People far from
the front lines in Ukraine are paying a price for this
conflict. Meanwhile, the international system has had
to confront the twin crises of function and principle.
The war in Ukraine has risked entrenching global
divisions to the point of paralysing multilateralism with
the false choice of “with us or against us.” At the same
time, the challenges to the most foundational tenets of
international law and the United Nations Charter could
not be more explicit.
We all acknowledge that the war cannot go on for
another year of lives lost and immense suffering. The
United Arab Emirates has consistently held that there is
no viable military solution. However, we acknowledge
that, ultimately, it is the parties — Ukraine and the
16/23

In 2023, let us leverage the fact that we share a clear
and urgent interest in bringing this war to a swift and
peaceful end. Equally important, let all of our efforts
drive at an inclusive and robust multilateralism, which is
critical to addressing urgent global challenges, but also
to safeguarding Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, as well as the region’s longterm security, stability and prosperity.
Today we must work for something more
durable — a peace that holds and endures. We must
begin to imagine the day after this war ends.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing and welcoming among us Her
Excellency Ms. Dzhaporova, First Deputy Foreign
Minister of Ukraine, and His Excellency Mr. Gerwel,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
This is our first meeting on Russia’s illegal
invasion of Ukraine since 9 December of last year
(see S/PV.9216). Many of us have spent the time since
then resting, recuperating, celebrating with family
and preparing for the New Year. Russia has spent that
time bombing civilians, attacking Ukraine’s critical
infrastructure and attempting to seize Ukrainian
territory, as it did for most of last year. They have
continued to do that with the assistance of Belarus and
using weapons sourced from Iran and North Korea, in
violation of Security Council resolutions and with utter
contempt for the Council.
Millions of Ukrainians spent the holiday period
sheltering from missile and drone attacks, sitting in
the dark and the cold and living as refugees, displaced
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

persons and prisoners, many of them thousands of miles
away from their homes, families and loved ones.
As the Secretary-General said yesterday (see
S/PV.9241), this war has created a humanitarian and
human rights catastrophe, traumatized a generation of
children and accelerated the global food and energy
crisis. As a result, millions across the world are facing
another year of hunger and hardship.
As many of us have said repeatedly, Russia can
choose to end all this immediately by stopping its
attacks against Ukraine — not just for 36 hours, but for
good — and by withdrawing its forces from Ukraine.
While Russia’s assault continues, however, Ukraine has
no choice but to exercise its right to defend itself. But,
like the rest of us, what Ukraine wants is a just and
sustainable peace. We welcome and support Ukraine’s
initiative to that end.
We join the international community in again
calling for an end to the war that respects Ukraine’s
rights under international law and the United Nations
Charter, so that this year may be a year of peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
It is truly regrettable that we have to repeat what we
and other Member States have said many times before
on various occasions. However, we are compelled to
articulate our position once again.
Japan condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine, which is a clear and
flagrant violation of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations by a permanent member of the
Security Council, which is supposed to bear the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Russia must immediately stop its war of
aggression, withdraw all of its troops and military
equipment from Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, in
accordance with the series of General Assembly
resolutions and the International Court of Justice order
on provisional measures.
We also condemn Russian attacks against civilian
infrastructure and cities across Ukraine. Innocent
civilians in Ukraine, including children, have been

S/PV.9243

exposed to strikes — even during the New Year
holidays. The destruction of energy infrastructure
has seriously aggravated the humanitarian situation in
the harsh winter. Any continuation of those attacks is
completely unacceptable. We recall that indiscriminate
attacks on innocent civilian populations constitute a
war crime. We underline that there can be no impunity
for war crimes and other atrocities, including sexual and
gender-based violence. The international community
must hold to account those responsible in accordance
with international law.
We strongly condemn the transfer of unmanned
aerial vehicles from Iran to Russia. We would support
efforts by the Secretariat to investigate the potential
use of Iranian drones by Russia in its war against
Ukraine, in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015).
We also strongly condemn Russia’s irresponsible
nuclear rhetoric and its seizure and militarization of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We fully support
the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency to
ensure nuclear safety and security at the plant.
Japan reaffirms its commitment to playing its part
in shielding vulnerable countries that are severely
impacted by the repercussions of Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine, as well as its weaponization
of energy and food. We welcome the agreement by
all the parties to continue cooperation on the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and reiterate our respect for the
efforts of Secretary-General Guterres and Türkiye in
that regard. We strongly urge the relevant countries to
continue to steadily implement that initiative.
Unilateral attempts to change the status quo by
force shake the very foundation of the international
order based on the rule of law and must not occur in
any corner of the globe. Member States reaffirmed such
principles at yesterday’s open debate (see S/PV.9241).
Japan renews its full resolve to continue its assistance
to support Ukraine’s defence of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We will stand firmly with Ukraine
for as long as it takes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the First Deputy Foreign Minister
of Ukraine.
Ms. Dzhaparova (Ukraine): I would like to start by
expressing my immense appreciation to everyone who
has expressed support to Ukraine in the fight not only

23-0148017/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

for its existence but also for the existence of the whole
world — based on rules, order, international law and
respect for the most fundamental principles, such as
territorial integrity and sovereignty, as well as human
dignity and freedom.
I regret that evil’s messenger is still here — in the seat
of a permanent member of the Security Council — the
seat of the Soviet Union. Its representatives constantly
poison the discussions held here and cynically lie
to all of us. I reiterate what my country’s delegation
has already pointed out: the legal grounds for such a
presence are more than dubious, if not absent.
Since the Security Council’s previous meeting
on Russia’s war against Ukraine (see S/PV.9208), the
situation on the ground has further deteriorated. The
active front line with Russia is 1,500 kilometres long, and
the total combat line spans 4,000 kilometres. Ukraine
has been turned into the world’s largest minefield,
covering 175,000 square kilometres. The majority of
Russia’s missile and drone attacks — 62 per cent of all
strikes — have been directed at civilian infrastructure.
Thousands of residential buildings, houses, schools,
kindergartens, hospitals, museums, religious buildings,
electricity grids, water grids, railways and markets
have been either destroyed or heavily damaged.
More than 7 million of my compatriots, mostly
women and children, have been roaming all around the
globe, separated from their homes and families. More
than 7 million additional Ukrainians have become
internally displaced persons (IDPs), on top of the
1.5 million people who — like myself when I left my
home in Crimea — had already become IDPs as of 2014.
Today the battle for Donbas is at its height. The
cities of Bahkmut and Soledar are now the major
hotspots of the military action. What happens there
surpasses the most horrific pictures of the First
and Second World Wars. There are ruins instead of
residential buildings, emptiness and dead bodies instead
of joyful crowds, charred tree trunks instead of forests
and moon-like surfaces instead of grain fields. It is our
shared responsibility to restore peace and justice, make
every provision of the Charter of the United Nations
operational and guarantee a safe and prosperous future
for our children, grandchildren and all generations to
come. That is our historic mission and the legacy that
we will all leave together.
My President, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, has initiated
a peace formula to meet the pressing challenges of
18/23

13/01/2023

the world. It consists of 10 points that will enable
us to restore security and justice to Ukraine and the
entire world. The formula, which is quite simple, is
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter.
As we all see, Russia’s war impacts the entire world,
because today our States and peoples are very much
interconnected. When Russia destroys grain fields and
farms in Ukraine, families from many countries in
need suffer from food shortages and poverty. Our peace
formula is therefore aimed at ensuring security in all its
dimensions — with respect to food security, radiation
safety, nuclear safety, energy security and countering
ecocide — and preventing such aggression from being
repeated in the future. We all need to develop enhanced
security guarantees in order to ensure that this tragedy
will never recur. We call on all responsible nations to
facilitate and promote the peace formula plan.
We should also be united in strengthening our
further pressure on Russia to destroy its war machine.
Even though it denies it, the aggressor State has already
felt the impact of sanctions. Its invading army is
running out of modern weapons and ammunition. And
although we have not won yet, Russia has already lost.
For its final defeat and for our democracies to achieve
victory, further joint action is needed. In that regard, my
message is very clear: we need to reinforce sanctions in
sectors of particular economic importance to Russia. A
full oil and gas embargo, as well as the disconnection of
Russian banks from the global financial system, is the
price the aggressor State should pay.
As Russia finds itself in total isolation, it hastily
intensifies its ties with other pariahs, with Moscow
irresponsibly getting them ever-more involved in
its bloody war. We cannot allow those who assist
Russia in committing its horrific war crimes to avoid
responsibility. That also applies to Belarus, which
hypocritically denies its actual participation in the
war, and Iran, which supplies drones to Russia, which
continue to represent an indispensable means for
implementing Russia’s missile-terror strategy.
More than once, Ukraine has officially requested the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat to send experts
to Ukraine to investigate Iran’s supplies of unmanned
aerial vehicles to Russia. Today I reiterate that request
and hope that the mission will be dispatched as soon as
possible, because the delay undermines the credibility
of the Security Council, as well as its ability to ensure
the implementation of its own decisions, in particular
resolution 2231 (2015).
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Our efforts to restore peace and security cannot be
complete without steps to ensure justice. That is why
it is a matter of paramount importance to establish
a special tribunal to hold Russian war criminals
accountable. In almost 11 months, the aggressor State
has already committed more than 64,000 registered
war crimes. And I dread to think how many more mass
graves — like those discovered in Bucha, Izyum and
Lyman — will be discovered after the full liberation
of our territories. Those terrifying crimes would not be
possible without the so-called mother of crimes — the
crime of aggression — which started in my native
Crimea in 2014.
I would like to share with the Council a personal
story of mine dating from March 2014, when I lived
in Crimea and was a journalist travelling the entire
peninsula to collect evidence of Russia’s crime of
aggression. We were to be briefed by the SecretaryGeneral’s special envoy, Dutch ambassador Robert
Serry, and he was not there for two hours. The rumour
was that he had been kidnapped — seized by the socalled self-defence guys. And I was actually the first
one to find him, in one of the cafeterias in the centre
of Simferopol, and I acted as a communicator between
him and the Russian Federal Security Service. He was
given an ultimatum to leave Crimea as soon as possible.
The last thing he relayed to me when we were together
at the airport in Simferopol — because we were taken
there by the Russian Federal Security Service in a
convoy by fully equipped people — was that he would
report all of the details of the issues with his travel
to the Secretary-General, because he was not able to
exercise his mandate.
And that is exactly what has been happening.
While Russia has been declaring its openness to give
full access to international delegations and monitoring
missions — for instance in Olenivka — it has in fact
not opened itself up to monitoring because it dreams
of hiding its own crimes. In the case of Olenivka, for
our part, we have of course given all the necessary
guarantees for such access and a fact-finding mission.
We regret that Russia failed to do so.
The International Criminal Court in The Hague,
which is investigating Russia’s crimes against Ukraine,
does not have sufficient jurisdiction and power to
prosecute Russia’s aggression. We therefore believe
that the only way to restore justice is through the
establishment of an international mechanism or a
special tribunal. The Council’s support of the relevant

S/PV.9243

draft resolution is a sign of hope for every single
Ukrainian whose life has been dramatically affected by
Russia’s war.
My next point is dedicated to defence assistance and
weapons. Air defence systems are still a top priority,
as Russia continues its missile terror across Ukraine.
As a result, almost half of our energy infrastructure is
damaged. Millions of Ukrainians have to spend their
evenings and nights by candlelight, because they have
no electricity.
For its part — even as it is under unprecedented
attack — Ukraine continues to share not only values
and dignity, but also very practical things, such as its
Grain from Ukraine initiative. And I thank the United
Nations and a number of our partners for supporting
that humanitarian initiative of my President.
It is clear that there is no room for compromise
with evil, because if Ukraine stops fighting, it will die.
The world as we know it will die. If Russia stops its
aggression, the war will end. It is as simple as that.
However, even after the victory, there will be
many challenges to address. According to our most
recent estimates, the total amount of damage caused
to Ukraine’s civil and critical infrastructure exceeds
$127 billion. Ukraine’s recovery will be one of the
largest investment projects. Ukraine has now become
Europe’s biggest construction site, providing a wide
range of opportunities for international partners
to implement the best practices in the areas of
engineering, construction and technology transfer. The
sooner Ukraine recovers, the sooner it can again fully
focus, as a reliable partner and active contributor, on
resolving global challenges such as climate change,
food insecurity, poverty, conflicts and many others
that affect the daily lives of hundreds of millions of
people worldwide.
Everyday life for people in Ukraine today looks
exactly like what the United Nations has committed
itself to countering and overcoming: there is war and
insecurity, a lack of access to basic things such as water
and electricity, poverty and environmental degradation.
Life in my country may seem unimaginable for
many — cooking with firewood, saving water in plastic
bottles to drink, wash dishes and flush the toilet, reading
and doing homework by candlelight, doing laundry in
a basin, having to take a healthy walk of 20 floors or
more instead of using the elevator, sleeping dressed in
a coat, hat and gloves, and hiding from bombs in the

23-0148019/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

shelters. Those are problems facing many vulnerable
countries that the upcoming Sustainable Development
Goals Summit and the Summit of the Future are
supposed to address.
I could keep on reflecting on the medieval lifestyle
in Ukraine, but my main point is completely different.
You can hardly find anyone complaining, in my
country. Everyone is like a Ukrainian soldier in the
trenches. We manifest dignity despite all the threats
and inconveniences. We live our lives with dignity,
cherishing our unity and ability to resist, cheering
each other up with words of love and support, sharing
food, clothing and candles, mourning our heroes and
rejoicing over our newborns. And we are happy to see
people in the streets. I even feel happy in a traffic jam.
Can anyone imagine feeling happy in a traffic jam? We
are now becoming experts on generators. And our most
common New Year’s Eve and Christmas Eve wish to
each other was victory.
The victory of Ukraine is not only the greatest wish
of millions of my compatriots who — dare I say — are
standing against neocolonialism and the restoration
of empire and have been fighting for the country’s
independence, with no more fear. It is also the common
goal of those who understand that if a bigger country
attacks a smaller country, no one in this Chamber — and
therefore no one in their respective countries — can
feel secure. However, we can ensure that security by
working together shoulder to shoulder, hand to hand
and heart to heart. We can make it.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Gerwel (Poland): Poland commends Japan
for convening today’s important meeting. Let me
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
statement, and to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing and valuable insights. I also
thank Her Excellency Ms. Emine Dzhaparova for
her statement and testimony about the dignity of the
Ukrainian people, which she so eloquently evoked.
With each and every day of its aggression against
Ukraine, Russia is breaking the most basic rules and
principles of international law enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and other historic documents. We
are obliged to repeat that plain fact over and over again,
even though it falls on the deaf ears of the aggressor.
Today I would like to make three points regarding the
current situation in Ukraine.
20/23

13/01/2023

First, I wish to assure the Security Council that
Poland will continue to act as the assistance hub for
Ukraine as long as it is necessary. We have been
proud to offer our goodwill services to Ukraine and
Ukrainians since day one of Russia’s invasion. In
addition to offering shelter to millions of Ukrainian
refugees, Poland continues to provide and facilitate
transfers of multidimensional aid, in addition to hosting
several hundred humanitarian workers from more than
a dozen of United Nations agencies and international
organizations. We are the main support gateway for
Ukraine, and it is our intention to continue in that
particular role as long as it is required.
Secondly, I would like to inform the Council about
the conclusions of the Lublin triangle summit of the
Presidents of Ukraine, Poland and Lithuania, which took
place in Lviv, Ukraine, just two days ago. In their joint
declaration, the three leaders underlined, among other
things, their full support for the creation, in accordance
with the principles of international law, of an ad hoc
international tribunal for the crime of aggression
committed by the Russian Federation against Ukraine.
The Presidents also voiced their support for the
convening of the global peace formula summit on the
initiative of Ukraine in order to consolidate international
support, as presented by President Zelenskyy. Poland
and Lithuania also reconfirmed their strong advocacy
for Ukraine’s Euro-Atlantic perspective.
Last but not least, my final point is an appeal to
the members of the Security Council and the entire
international community. It is my duty to express in this
Chamber Poland’s concern about the role of Belarus in
the Kremlin’s strategy regarding Ukraine. By now, we
already know that Minsk is politically and practically
supporting Russia’s aggression. Moreover, Russia’s
accelerating military build-up in Belarus, including the
recently announced Russia-Belarus military drills to be
conducted between 16 January and 1 February, should
ring additional alarm bells. I do not have to remind
anybody here that the deployment of Russian troops and
military equipment in Belarus just 12 months ago was
a prelude to the full-scale invasion we have witnessed
since 24 February 2022. The concentration of troops in
our region is a negative development of which we have
taken note. We should therefore make clear to Belarus
that it can still reverse its course and make the right
choice. Minsk has to be conscious that its further active
involvement in the invasion will be met with a firm
response by the international community.
23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Let us make every effort to prevent a further
escalation of the conflict and use all the available tools
to establish the just peace for which Ukraine strives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the Baltic States — Estonia, Latvia and my
own country, Lithuania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing, and the Japanese presidency for the
opportunity to address the Security Council.
Today’s date is symbolic for us because, on
13 January in Lithuania, we commemorate Freedom
Defenders Day. On that day in 1991, the Lithuanian
people, myself included, stood unarmed against Soviet
tanks in order to defend Lithuania’s independence and
freedom. Each year, we the Baltic States commemorate
all the victims who died in the fight for our independence
from the Soviet empire and continue to stand with
Ukraine today, defending not only its freedom but also
our own.
We are fast approaching a morbid milestone: the
one-year anniversary of Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified
and illegal war of aggression against Ukraine. As we
speak, Russian troops continue systematic and massive
attacks on civilians, engage in the deliberate destruction
of Ukraine’s vital infrastructure and commit horrible
war crimes in the country on a daily basis. That clearly
demonstrates the brutality and desperation of Russia’s
regime. If it is not stopped, Russia will continue to
threaten the rules-based international order and pursue
its imperialist and colonial ambitions to retain Ukraine
in its sphere of influence.
If Russia is not stopped, countries around the world
will continue to experience the consequences of the war,
including through acute food and energy insecurity.
We reiterate that Russia is solely responsible for those
hardships given that it started the war of aggression, in
blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and its key principles. Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia
fully support Ukraine’s initiative on the establishment
of the special tribunal for the punishment of the crime of
aggression against Ukraine. There must be no impunity
for Russia’s crimes committed on Ukrainian soil.
We commend the people of Ukraine for their
admirable courage in defending their country, as
well as the international legal order and the Charter.

S/PV.9243

The international community must continue to do
everything possible to help Ukraine to win the war and
get through the winter, including by urgently providing
specialized energy equipment and helping to repair
destroyed energy infrastructure.
The Baltic States will continue to provide support to
address the impact of Russia’s systemic and deliberate
attacks on Ukraine’s energy sector, in addition to other
official assistance. Our countries are among the largest
supporters of Ukraine per capita — together they have
provided more than €1.3 billion in official assistance
to Ukraine since February 2022, excluding private
initiatives. We have assisted vulnerable communities
in conflict-torn Eastern European regions for the past
eight years and, since last February, have scaled up our
assistance to meet the massive and urgent relief and
protection needs of civilians across the Ukraine.
In order to help the Ukrainian people to get through
the winter, our Governments, civil society and private
companies have already sent significant amounts of
equipment to Ukraine, including power generators,
power transformers and spare parts. Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania and the European Union will continue to
take the work forward on the options for using frozen
Russian assets to support Ukraine’s reconstruction and
for the purposes of reparation, in line with international
law. We must ensure that the principle of “the aggressor
pays the damage” is fully implemented in practice.
The Baltic States support all meaningful efforts to
bring Russia’s war of aggression to an end. We welcome
the 10-step peace formula proposed by the President of
Ukraine, which we consider a sound basis for achieving
peace in Ukraine. Any solution to Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine must ensure that Ukraine’s voice is
heard and that its sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders are respected. As the international community,
we must continue to demand every single day that
Russia stop this brutal aggression. Our position is clear:
we will support Ukraine and defend the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations as long as it is
necessary. We are confident that Ukraine will prevail,
as powerfully conveyed to us today by First Deputy
Foreign Minister of Ukraine, Ms. Emine Dzhaparova.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,

23-0148021/23

S/PV.9243

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the potential candidate country
Georgia; as well as Norway and Andorra, align
themselves with this statement.
As everyone else has done, I would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing, as well as you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to say a few words on
this very important topic.
First, I want to acknowledge and pay tribute to the
participation and testimony today of the First Deputy
Foreign Minister of Ukraine. I think that she has
made an incredibly powerful statement about how the
struggle of the Ukrainian people is, and should be, the
struggle of every free country and every Member of the
United Nations.
Russia has decided to violate one of the most basic
principles of international law and launch a fullyfledged war of aggression against its neighbour, a
fellow Member of our Organization. The courage and
resilience of the Ukrainian people in their darkest hour
inspired the world and we came together, including
here at the United Nations, to condemn that unprovoked
aggression and defend the Charter of the United
Nations. In 2023, not even two weeks into the new year,
Russia continues its brutal attacks on civilians and
critical infrastructure in the midst of winter. Therefore,
in response, we must continue to stand together with
Ukraine and in defence of the founding principles of
the Organization. We call on everyone, as members of
the Security Council, to assume their responsibility to
uphold the Charter and to defend international peace
and security.

13/01/2023

Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine.
The EU has intensified its provision of humanitarian
aid and civil-protection assistance and its support for the
restoration of Ukraine’s critical infrastructure in order
to help Ukraine get through the winter. We have also
responded with additional restrictive measures against
Russia, as well as Iran, in response to the delivery of
drones and their deadly deployment in Russia’s war
of aggression.
We again call on Russia to ensure unimpeded
humanitarian access to all areas under its temporary
control, as well as to persons detained by Russia and
those forcibly transferred to Russia. The contamination
resulting from the landmines and remnants of war
left behind by Russia’s armed forces not only poses a
serious obstacle to relief and aid-delivery efforts but
also poses a serious threat to the lives of civilians, in
particular children.
Secondly, there can be no impunity. Russia’s war
has brought death and destruction to its neighbour. The
EU welcomes all efforts to ensure full accountability
for war crimes and the other most serious crimes in
connection with Russia’s war, including ways to secure
accountability for the crime of aggression. Russia
must bear the legal consequences for all violations of
international law, and accountability — in its broadest
sense — must be ensured, including victims’ rights
to truth and reparations, as well as guarantees of
non-repetition.

Today, as Russia’s onslaught against the people
of Ukraine persists, I would like to highlight three
points: first, the need to protect civilians; secondly, the
importance of accountability; and thirdly, our support
for all meaningful initiatives towards establishing a
just peace.

We support the investigations by the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. The EU also reiterates
the order of the International Court of Justice, of March
of last year, for Russia to immediately suspend its
military operations in Ukraine. We call on Russia to
comply with that legally binding order, and we will
continue to support Ukraine in the framework of the
proceedings of the International Court of Justice.

First, the Members of the United Nations are bound
by international law to protect civilians. Russia’s
ongoing campaign of systematic air strikes against
civilian targets and critical infrastructure in Ukraine
must stop. Those cruel, inhumane attacks only aim to
increase human suffering and deprive the Ukrainian
people and emergency services of electricity, heating
and water. Attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure add to the growing evidence that
Russia has committed war crimes, as reported by the

Thirdly, we support all meaningful efforts to bring
an end to Russia’s war. The path to peace is for the
aggressor to withdraw its troops and military equipment
from the entire territory of Ukraine and respect its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We stand ready to
support Ukraine’s initiative for a just peace. To date,
Russia has not shown any genuine willingness for a fair
and sustainable peace in line with the Charter of the
Organization or international law. Russian troops have
continued their relentless air strikes against civilians,

22/23

23-01480

13/01/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

using cold and hunger as weapons of war. It has blocked
any meaningful action by the Security Council to react
to all those crimes.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the EU’s
full support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We will continue to stand with
Ukraine and its people for as long as it takes. We will
continue to increase the collective pressure on Russia,

S/PV.9243

together with our international partners, to end its
war of aggression and to withdraw its troops. And we
will continue to be at the forefront of global efforts
to address all the global consequences of the Russian
aggression. We count on the members of the Security
Council to do the same.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

23-0148023/23
