S/PV.7651

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7651st meeting

Thursday, 17 March 2016, 4.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Meek
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2016/225)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-07616 (E)
*1607616*

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2016/225)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Peru and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/225, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré: I would like to express my gratitude
to Angola, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council, for convening today’s meeting on Haiti and to
all Council members for their continuing support.
(spoke in French)
I also take this opportunity to welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to especially thank all those countries
that contribute troops and police to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), as well
2/29

17/03/2016

as all those Member States that work with us in the
process of strengthening stability in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Following the interruption of the electoral process
that started in 2015, Haiti stands at a critical juncture
in its democratization process. The next few weeks will
be decisive for the short- and mid-term prospects for
Haiti’s democratic consolidation, demanding from all
actors involved a good-faith effort that is guided by the
interest of the Haitian people.
On 25 October, Haiti held the second of the three
electoral rounds planned for 2015, demonstrating
progress towards the renewal of its democratic
institutions and the re-establishment of institutional
balance as enshrined in the Constitution. As a result
of those elections, 14 of 20 Senators and 92 of 119
Lower House members were sworn in, establishing the
country’s fiftieth Legislature and enabling Parliament
to resume on the constitutional date of 11 January,
ending a year of dysfunction and rule by decree.
This positive momentum came to an end with the
postponement of the third electoral round, against a
backdrop of mounting tensions over allegations of
fraud and increasing security concerns. The risk of
yet another governance vacuum was averted by an
agreement arrived at on 5 February between former
President Martelly and the Presidents of the two
chambers of Parliament.
Drawing on the spirit of the Haitian Constitution,
the agreement provided a road map for institutional
continuity following the end of the presidential term
on 7 February. It called for the indirect election, by
the National Assembly, of a provisional President for a
period of up to 120 days, together with the appointment
of a consensus Prime Minister and Cabinet, and the
re-establishment of the Provisional Electoral Council
to complete the 2015 electoral cycle through elections
scheduled for 24 April.
Despite the many efforts deployed by those
responsible for the implementation of the agreement,
tensions continue to run high, with the political class yet
to unite behind a common vision for the political process.
While 14 February saw the swearing in of former Senate
and National Assembly President Jocelerme Privert as
Haiti’s provisional President, for some three weeks an
impasse persisted over the appointment of a consensus
Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Parliament’s vote
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

of confidence in the former’s Government programme.
In that regard, yesterday’s meeting of the Lower House
was adjourned, ostensibly because no agreement could
be reached over the proposed cabinet.
Concurrently, in consultation with the relevant
sectors, steps have been taken to identify the members of
the new Provisional Electoral Council. Their installation
is, however, stalled pending the confirmation of the
Prime Minister and his Cabinet. Continued demands
are being made for the establishment of an independent
electoral verification commission, in respect of
which there is as yet no definition of its mandate or
composition, that would enhance confidence as the
2015 electoral process continues.
The delays accumulating both in the confirmation
of the Prime Minister and in the re-establishment
of the Provisional Electoral Council, coupled with
uncertainty over the verification of the 2015 electoral
process, not only stand to impact the implementation
of the agreement and the conclusion of the electoral
cycle within the specified timeline of 120 days, but
may also prevent a swift return to full constitutional
order, thereby prolonging the period of political
instability that has plagued the country for far too long.
A protracted political crisis may result in deflecting
the attention of all actors, Haitians and international
partners alike, from sustaining the stabilization gains
achieved in recent years. Haiti cannot afford to lose
focus in that regard, as it can ill bear further declines in
economic growth.
The security situation has remained largely
peaceful, albeit fragile, although influenced by the
electoral process and related political tensions during
the past months. The 25 October polls registered a
decrease in security incidents, which is testimony to the
continuously growing capacity of the Haitian National
Police, which was the primary provider of election
security. When I last appeared before the Council (see
S/PV.7530), I testified to the increased capacity not
only of the police but also of the Provisional Electoral
Council and the Government of Haiti to assume greater
responsibility in leading the country’s electoral process.
While the elections on 25 October reflected the leading
role played by those key national institutions, the
continued engagement of the United Nations system
in support of operations, logistics and security and the
ongoing financial assistance from Haiti’s international
partners remain critical to the completion of the
electoral cycle and the stabilization of the country.

S/PV.7651

Equally, in the last year of the implementation of
its 2012-2016 development plan, which is supported
by MINUSTAH, the Haitian National Police has
demonstrated both the commitment and the ability
to provide greater security to the Haitian people.
Further improvement of specialized capacities and
the strengthening of the institution are, however,
necessary in order for the national police to be truly
self-sustaining. That will require a sustained and strong
commitment to the development of the Haitian National
Police, within the framework of the broader rule-of-law
reforms to be undertaken by the Haitian Government,
with the support of Haiti’s international partners.
The country’s economy is showing signs of fatigue,
with public and private investment in drastic decline,
growth waning and inflation increasing, which has
resulted in a reduction in social spending, a drop in
income-generating activities, increased vulnerability to
external shocks, and higher exposure to humanitarian
crises, against a backdrop of decreasing international
funding. Three consecutive years of drought have
resulted in poor harvests, plunging 1.5 million Haitian
people into severe food insecurity and further testing
the resilience of the Haitian people.
In order to tackle those challenges, which impact
the daily lives of millions of citizens, and to implement
long-term reforms, Haiti needs stable institutions
and a capable governance system. There is therefore
no alternative to a return, as soon as possible, to the
path of institutional and political stability through the
completion of the pending elections. A failure to work
towards those objectives will have serious consequences
in the long term and put at risk the well-being of the
Haitian people, who yearn for and deserve stability.
Also, Haiti’s international friends and partners need
assurance that their assistance will continue to have an
impact that promotes the interests of the Haitian people.
A strong spirit of compromise among Haitian
stakeholders and an equally strong commitment to
consensus-building will be key in order for the country
to find a way back to full constitutional order. I continue
to reiterate this message with a sense of urgency and
grave concern to all the actors involved, including to
the provisional President and the leadership of both
chambers of Parliament.
MINUSTAH’s operating environment will be
shaped largely by the manner and the timing in which
the electoral process is completed. It is therefore of the

16-076163/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

utmost importance that the international community
take a firm position in support of a solution that ensures
that Haiti takes resolute action to continue on a path to
democratic consolidation.
As the Council is aware, MINUSTAH has entered
the last year of its conditions-based consolidation, and
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team have
started work on a joint transition plan. That plan will
outline a road map for the progressive disengagement
of the Mission from functions that can be assumed
by the Government of Haiti or other partners, while
identifying areas in which further support is required
from international partners, including the United
Nations, so as to ensure that the stabilization gains of
the past are preserved and that prospects for the longterm viability of key institutions, such as the national
police and rule-of-law institutions, are increased.
That preparatory work on transition will feed into
the strategic assessment that resolution 2243 (2015)
requested the Secretary-General to conduct after the
elections with a view to presenting recommendations
on the future presence and role of the United Nations
in Haiti. In view of the current political uncertainty
in the country, the Secretary-General has proposed in
his report (S/2016/225) that the strategic assessment be
carried out following the completion of the interrupted
electoral process. The Secretary-General intends to
submit recommendations to the Security Council on the
future of MINUSTAH, ahead of the expiration of its
mandate in October, separately and apart from electoral
developments on the ground.
I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication during
this challenging period for Haiti. I also call on all of
Haiti’s international partners to continue to lend their
invaluable support to the country’s political process.
Finally, I call on all Haitian actors at all levels to
be guided, first and foremost, by their responsibility
towards the people of Haiti and to ensure the completion
of the electoral process in a climate of serenity.
The President: I thank Ms. Honoré for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Honoré for her briefing,
which, together with the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/225), clearly outlines the important strides
4/29

17/03/2016

that Haiti has made in the past several years since the
earthquake, as well as the daunting challenges that it
continues to face.
I would like to begin by commending the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for its efforts to promote the political process, strengthen
the rule of law and promote human rights. In particular,
we would like to thank the individual men and women
serving in MINUSTAH, as well as the troop- and
police-contributing countries, for their tireless efforts
on behalf of the Haitian people.
Today, I would like to focus on the immediate
issue that is critical to Haiti’s future — the expeditious
conclusion of the postponed electoral process in Haiti.
Completing the electoral cycle is a critical step towards
not only installing an elected Government that reflects
the will of the Haitian people, but also re-establishing
fully functional democratic institutions in Haiti that can
make Haiti more stable and more secure. Without the
strengthening of democratic institutions and credible
democratic processes, there can be no genuine stability
or sustainable development in Haiti.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral noted in her remarks, a political accord was
reached on 5 February, through a Haitian-led political
process, to hold the second round of presidential
elections on 24 April, followed by the inauguration of a
President on 14 May. In order to adhere to that timeline,
all Haitian political stakeholders need to commit to
swift implementation of the accord. Towards that end,
we welcome the commitment made by provisional
President Privert to advancing towards completion of
the electoral process enshrined in the accord, and we
note the important step that he took on 25 February
by naming a Prime Minister. But, while some positive
steps have been taken towards abiding by the timeline,
time is running short for completing the many tasks
that remain. One critical next step is to reconstitute the
Provisional Electoral Council as soon as possible. We
urge the Parliament to play its role in the implementation
of the 5 February agreement by voting on the Prime
Minister’s Government policies without delay in order
to facilitate the completion of the electoral process.
Some political actors and observers spread a
narrative late last year that included allegations of
widespread fraud in the electoral process, challenging
the credibility of the elections. That narrative does the
Haitian people a real disservice. It was not just unhelpful
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

but harmful, and greatly undermined the efforts of
the Haitian Government, assisted by the international
community, to give the Haitian people the opportunity
to have their voices heard through a democratically
elected Government. I want to note that neither we
nor the international observation missions sent by the
European Union and the Organization of American
States found proof of massive and widespread fraud.
Once the elections are successfully completed, Haiti
can focus its energy and resources on strengthening
democratic processes and institutions in Haiti, which
have been sidelined and overshadowed by the protracted
political crisis. For example, the Haitian Government
needs to urgently address problems in the justice
sector, particularly with regard to prolonged pre-trial
detention. Nearly 70 per cent of the prisoners in Haitian
prisons have not been formally charged.
Haiti now faces increasing challenges, including
drought, a depreciating currency and threats to its food
security, among others. Only an elected Government
can effectively work with Haiti’s many international
partners to confront those and other challenges. The
strengthening of Haiti’s institutions is also necessary
in order to sustain and eventually take over the work
of MINUSTAH and other international partners. As
MINUSTAH prepares to assess the conditions for a
further drawdown or reconfiguration of the United
Nations Mission, we commend the Haitian National
Police on their progress towards improving the country’s
security environment. We note that the Haitian National
Police intends to reach its target strength of nearly
15,000 officers by the end of 2016, and we call for the
completion of the road map for the Haitian National
Police’s growth and professionalization for the next five
years. We also call for the continued assistance of the
international community with those efforts.
The United States supports the strategic assessment
mission on the future presence of the United Nations in
Haiti, as requested in resolution 2243 (2015), which is
to be initiated following the completion of the elections
and the instalment of a new democratically elected
President. We also look forward to the joint transition
plan currently being drafted by MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team, which will outline a
road map for future support by the United Nations,
the Government of Haiti and other international
partners. Along with the strategic assessment mission,
we welcome recommendations from MINUSTAH on
the future presence and role of the United Nations in

S/PV.7651

Haiti, and we emphasize that any reconfiguration of
United Nations presence should be based on thorough,
ongoing analysis of the security situation in Haiti.
Using such evidence-based analysis to inform decisions
on the United Nations configuration will help avoid
hasty changes that could compromise the progress
that the Haitian Government and people, along with
the international partners, have achieved over the
past decade.
The United States has been one of Haiti’s
international partners for a long time. Working together
with the Government of Haiti and the international
community, we continue to support and will continue to
work to strengthen Haiti’s overall security, democratic
development and economic growth. Progress on those
issues is especially hard when political uncertainty
prevails, which underscores the importance of holding
elections within the time frame identified in the
5 February accord. We call on all parties to commit to a
genuine, free and fair electoral process that is peaceful
and uninterrupted, so that Haiti can finally pivot
towards the bright future that it so richly deserves.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank Special
Representative Honoré for her commitment to Haiti’s
stabilization, and I wish to acknowledge the important
work of United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and its contributing countries.
New Zealand is concerned about the recent
political turmoil in Haiti and the continued delays in its
electoral process. We had hoped that this would be the
year in which Haiti would transition from dependence
on external partners towards greater self-reliance. We
had hoped that today we might have been considering
a plan for that transition, one that was the joint product
of MINUSTAH and a new Government. We welcomed
reports that agreement had been reached to hold
elections in the coming months. Sadly, the political
manoeuvring over the past three months, including
overnight, has seriously undermined progress towards
that goal.
It is time for all parties, especially the interim
Government, to commit themselves to providing the
leadership that Haitians deserve. The consequences of
Haiti’s continued political uncertainty are not trivial. As
the Special Representative emphasized in her briefing,
Haiti’s economic growth is being directly affected.
The humanitarian situation has worsened, with severe

16-076165/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

droughts, food insecurity for millions of Haitians and
the continuing cholera epidemic.
The timeline for the consideration of the next steps
for MINUSTAH and for the United Nations operations
in Haiti has also been impacted by the political situation.
New Zealand agrees with the Special Representative
that it makes more sense to undertake the strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Haiti
following the elections, with a new Government in
place. Even so, MINUSTAH can not remain in Haiti
indefinitely. We need to make the best use of the time
remaining to ensure that Haiti is as well-equipped as
possible to manage its own security once the Mission
is gone.
We are reassured that MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team are working on a joint
transition plan. In addition to setting out clear goals
and responsibilities, the plan should consider what
tasks MINUSTAH can complete or discontinue
before its mandate ends. Ensuring close coordination
with national and international partners will be key,
including on what residual functions may need to
be transferred. For a transition to be sustainable, the
plan must have genuine national ownership. Ensuring
that core institutions, particularly the police, have the
capacity to operate effectively without international
support will be a priority. We urge MINUSTAH to
engage the new Government on the joint transition plan
as soon as possible after the elections.
The United Nations must also continue to combat the
ongoing cholera epidemic. We acknowledge the efforts
of the United Nations and its partners, particularly
those that have contributed to the support plan and the
national plan for the elimination of cholera. The United
Nations must continue to support those affected in Haiti
and take appropriate action to help close that chapter
and ensure that the new Government is not left alone to
address the ongoing consequences and political legacy
of the outbreak.
Given Haiti’s cycle of instability and the lessons
that the United Nations has learned from other fragile
States, we must get MINUSTAH’s transition right.
Effective transition planning and capacity-building, as
well as longer-term international support, will be key
to a successful transition. But none of that will produce
long-term benefits, unless the political actors in Haiti
are willing to act responsibly and peacefully, without
violent protests or inflammatory language. We call on
6/29

17/03/2016

the players concerned to set aside personal interests
and rivalries and put the interests of their country first.
Haitians have a right to expect that, and we hope the
Council will remain united in supporting Haiti through
this critical period.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing.
Uruguay associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Peru on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, and my remarks
will therefore focus on aspects that that intervention
does not cover.
Uruguay’s commitment to Haiti has been constant,
both on the ground and here at Headquarters. On
the ground, we have been with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) from
its launch in 2004 to the present, contributing troops
deployed in a joint battalion with Peru, and here at
Headquarters, we have chaired the Group of Friends of
Haiti since 2009. MINUSTAH has been and still is a
very important instrument designed to support Haiti on
its road to stability, but Haiti’s stakeholders, particularly
its political leaders, also have to be committed to
that task.
Haiti’s challenges are huge, ranging across issues
such as poverty, a lack of security, natural disasters,
food insecurity, health problems that include waterborne diseases such as cholera, and internally
displaced persons, as well as a number of others that,
unfortunately, even this list has not covered. It is clear
that when a country is facing such serious situations,
its political leadership is a key element in overcoming
them. However, as the Secretary-General points out in
his report (S/2016/225), the opposite has been true of
the period from August 2015 until now, which has been
one of political uncertainty. In that regard, Uruguay
has been very concerned about developments in the
political process in Haiti, particularly the fact that the
elections originally scheduled for December 2015 have
been postponed once again. We appreciate the fact that
the political agreement reached on 5 February between
the outgoing President, Mr. Martelly, and the presidents
of the two chambers of the National Assembly, was the
result of a clear process of national ownership that was
led, negotiated and agreed to by Haitians. Uruguay
hopes that it will now be respected by Haitians.
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

Resolution 2243 (2015) asked the Secretary-General
to send a strategic assessment mission to Haiti in order
to make recommendations on the future presence and
functions of the United Nations in Haiti, if possible
within 90 days after the new President’s assumption
of office, and ideally after the formation of a new
Government. Given the impossibility of complying with
those provisions of the resolution, given the political
situation in Haiti, the Secretary-General proposes in his
latest report that the strategic assessment mandated by
the Security Council be carried out once the electoral
process has been completed.
Considering Haiti’s history, one has to ask if
having to make the strategic assessment conditional
on the conclusion of the electoral process means that
we will end up with neither one nor the other. The
result could be the indefinite postponement of the
ability to formulate recommendations on the United
Nations presence and functions in Haiti in the future,
as requested in resolution 2243 (2015). We sometimes
get the feeling that, for some Haitian stakeholders,
MINUSTAH’s presence and the assurances that it gives
them are permanent and have resulted in a kind of
addiction and hence in the assumption that the Mission
will always be there, until MINUSTAH ceases to be
part of the solution by becoming part of the problem.
Since we realize that the Council should not allow
Haiti’s political stakeholders to hold MINUSTAH
hostage, we believe that it is therefore essential that,
whether or not the electoral process is concluded, the
strategic assessment should be carried out and the joint
transition plan advanced, with a view to gradually
transferring the Mission’s functions to the Haitian
Government and the United Nations country team. In
our view, the strategic assessment could begin as early
as in May.
Despite the political situation and the MINUSTAH
drawdown, which was decided under the mandate
adopted in October 2014, the security situation has not
been seriously affected, with the crime rate remaining
stable, as the Secretary-General’s report shows,
including in areas from which the Mission has been
withdrawn. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the role played by the Haitian National Police and hope
that the progress that it has made can be consolidated,
thereby enabling the Haitian people to be able to count
very soon on an autonomous force capable of ensuring
security and order throughout the country.

S/PV.7651

Considering the enormous efforts that have been
expended in Haiti by the United Nations, countries of
the region, regional organizations, donors and troopand police-contributing countries, one would hope that
Haiti’s political actors, especially the interim President,
will show respect for the international community
and work constructively to achieve the goals of the
5 February agreement, with a view to concluding
the electoral process and installing a constitutional
Government as soon as possible. After all the support
that Haiti has received, it would be intolerable to see the
country’s political actors working only to find creative
ways to remain in their jobs.
I would like to conclude by saying that Uruguay
would like to express its appreciation to the men
and women of MINUSTAH — many of whom have
lost their lives in the line of duty, including some
Uruguayans — for their dedication and commitment to
restoring stability in Haiti.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/225) and Special Representative Sandra Honoré
for her briefing.
Regarding the political process in Haiti, Spain
echoes the Secretary-General’s call to all Haitian
stakeholders, especially the President and the National
Assembly, to work together and implement the political
agreement of 5 February by the agreed deadlines.
In a political situation as volatile as that experienced
by Haiti, it is particularly relevant that the international
community send this message in a firm and unanimous
manner. In that regard, it is important to point out that
the Prime Minister and the transitional Government
designated by President Privert are not consensual and
have not been confirmed by the National Assembly. The
international community has made significant efforts
to assist reconstruction and stabilization in Haiti,
particularly in support of elections. If those efforts are
not to have been in vain, it is essential that we firmly
demand that Haitian politicians adopt a responsible
attitude as they pursue the electoral process.
Spain has specifically provided political and
financial support to the elections in Haiti, providing
financial and human resources to the electoral missions
of the Organization of American States and the
European Union. In that regard, we deeply regret that
the current electoral process has fallen into the current

16-076167/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

impasse, as Haiti is undermining the consolidation of
its democratic institutions.
I would now like to refer to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Spain
thanks MINUSTAH for its excellent work. Its presence
is a factor for stability and deterrence, and it is
particularly important in the current context of political
uncertainty. We take good note of the intention of the
Secretary-General to submit recommendations to the
Security Council on the future of MINUSTAH before
the expiration of its mandate in October. In keeping
with resolution 2243 (2015), these recommendations
must be based on the strategic assessment mission
to be carried out once the electoral process has been
concluded 90 days after the new President is sworn in
and, ideally, after the formation of a new Government.
Spain stresses that these recommendations, in addition
to being based on the results of the assessment mission,
must address the political and institutional situation
of the country and evaluate their impact on stability
and security in Haiti. Any assessment of the role and
the presence of the United Nations in Haiti once the
mandate of MINUSTAH expires should be part of that
political and security context and take into account the
potential impact of the Mission’s eventual exit.
Finally, Spain aligns itself with the statement
that will be made shortly by the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
comprehensive briefing and offer her our full support
for her efforts and those of her team.
Haiti is at a crossroads in its history. Over the past
few months, the Haitian people have faced immense
challenges at all levels — political, economic and
humanitarian. Despite all those challenges, in 2015
the Haitian authorities were ready to hold presidential
and legislative elections. The political landscape in the
country is not altogether different today, although the
outbreak of violence before the second round of elections
to derail the transitional process and the postponement
of the second round of presidential elections could have
led to a political regression.
But the will of the Haitian people restored the
process to its propr course and demonstrated their
resolve to overcome the current political impasse by
signing on to the transitional plan and agreeing to hold
8/29

17/03/2016

presidential elections, which have been postponed
until 24 April. I note the importance of holding the
postponed presidential elections as scheduled in
order not to send Haiti into a new political crisis with
substantial security, economic and social implications
for the Haitian people.
I commend the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), to
which Egypt has contributed a police component.
MINUSTAH has played a pivotal role in building the
national capacities of Haiti, particularly the security
and judicial entities in view of the coming reports
on the development of the Haitian National Police
addressing the recent violence. In that regard, I appeal
to all Member States and troop-contributing countries
to continue to support the Haitian National Police
and to step up their efforts to complete the building
of national institutions by providing logistic support
through bilateral cooperation with Haiti. Egypt stands
ready to make further contributions in the next phase.
Against that backdrop, we cannot ignore the
humanitarian dimensions of the current Haitian
landscape. Egypt expresses its concern at the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the difficulties
in ensuring funding for the humanitarian crisis. This
adds a further impediment to the efforts of the United
Nations in support of the efforts of the Government
and civil society to alleviate the hardships facing the
Haitian people and the country in implementing the
strategies to end the cholera epidemic and address the
lack of food security for 1.5 million people in Haiti.
Before concluding, I would like to stress the
importance of the joint transition plan prepared by
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team,
which includes areas that require the open and substantial
support of international partners. We also look forward
to receiving the evaluation by the assessment mission
sent by the Secretary-General. Egypt would like to
stress the importance of the joint transition plan and
the assessment of the future needs of Haiti and their
impact on the future stability of the country, and of
addressing the proposals put forward in that regard.
Haitian national stakeholders should also help in setting
priorities, as international strategies and programmes
would support national efforts. In this context, we call
for genuine partnership with the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order
to assist Haiti in a more comprehensive manner and to
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

facilitate the transition from the instability that Haiti
has endured in recent decades.
In closing I would like to express our full support
for the nation of Haiti, while expressing Egypt’s full
confidence in its ability to get through this critical and
sensitive stage.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
thank you for convening this debate on the political
situation in Haiti. We also appreciate the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/225), which was introduced
by his Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms.Sandra Honoré. I congratulate her and the men and
women of the Mission for their ardous work to ensure
the stability and development of the Haitian people.
We endorse the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, of which we are a member.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela continues
to support the people and Government of Haiti in
strengthening their democratic institutions. Recent
violence, which has led to institutional and electoral
uncertainty, was overcome by the firm political will
of all elements of Haitian society, who in a show of
democratic commitment signed the political agreement
for institutional continuity on 5 February. The road map
that has been established according to constitutional
principles has launched what we hope will be a brief
institutional transition, with the appointment of a
President and Prime Minister, in order to complete
the presidential election process in that sisterly
Caribbean nation.
We appreciate the fact that, in this effort to
preserve institutional continuity and advance the
electoral process in Haiti, at the request of the Haitian
Government, the good offices of the United Nations, the
Organization of American States, and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States have been
deployed. The international community should fully
support the decision of the Haitian people to find a
political solution to the current crisis, in strict adherence
to the principles of the sovereignty, independence and
self-determination of that country.
It is also necessary to urge all political and social
actors to continue to participate in inclusive and
constructive dialogue, in the interests of political

S/PV.7651

stability and institutional strengthening in Haiti. The
political tensions of recent months reflect one of the
chronic problems facing that sisterly nation, derived
from the country’s still fragile institutional framework,
the product of a history plagued by foreign intervention,
coups and brutal dictatorships that have kept the
Haitian people in conditions of extreme poverty and
political and social exclusion, and that have perpetuated
destabilization and political instability, all of which
has had disastrous consequences for the stability and
sovereign economic development of that nation.
This situation of political and social instability was
aggravated by the terrible earthquake that struck Haiti,
killing more than 300,000 people and destroying all the
country’s infrastructure and services. In the current
scenario, the grave human impact of the emergence
and spread of cholera since 2010 cannot be ignored.
More than five years after its appearance, hundreds
of cases continue to be recorded each week. In 2015,
322 people died and about 36,000 cases were reported.
So far this year, 54 people have died and 5,452 cases
have been reported. We encourage the international
community to devote more resources to support the
measures put forward in the framework of the national
plan for the elimination of cholera in Haiti from 2013
to 2022, which help affected families to overcome that
public health problem and prevent the disease from
becoming endemic.
Similarly, in the humanitarian field, we are
concerned about the situation of food insecurity
resulting from the drought of recent years, which was
caused by climatic imbalances in the Caribbean region.
More than 1.5 million Haitians are affected by the
consequent decline in crop yields from March to June,
which could exacerbate the humanitarian situation and
stability of the country.
Venezuela recognizes the work that has been
carried out by MINUSTAH in assisting Haitian
authorities during the country’s stabilization and
development process. In that regard, we attach
particular importance to the continued improvement
of the capacities and professionalism of the Haitian
National Police, in accordance with the 2012-2016
strategic plan. The National Police has been highly
successful in containing, deterring and controlling
public demonstrations following the recent political
uncertainty. We believe that, in the light of the current
security challenges in Haiti, including those related to
the ongoing electoral process, any decision regarding

16-076169/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

the future of MINUSTAH should be based on the
security and stability of the country within the process
of building institutional capacity and in coordination
with the authorities of the new Haitian Government.
We appreciate the recommendation of the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/225) to carry
out the strategic assessment referred to in resolution
2243 (2015), after the completion of the electoral process
and the establishment of a newly elected Government,
in order to assess the future presence and role of the
United Nations in Haiti, provided that this process and
new elections do not exceed the established deadline of
120 days.
Venezuela is committed to the democratic
development and political and social stability of a
free and sovereign Haiti. In that regard we consider
it necessary to highlight — beyond the episodes of
violence — the many positive developments taking place
in Haiti, such as the South-South cooperation that has
been implemented in that brotherly Caribbean country.
Examples of good practices with regard to cooperation
in Haiti are many. They have significant social,
economic and nutritional impacts and are intended
to help strengthen the State, with the participation
of the Haitian people. In that context, of particular
relevance are the social programmes implemented with
the cooperation of Venezuela, the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America and PetroCaribe.
They have contributed to the construction of housing,
infrastructure and services and have supplied fuel,
all of which are decisive factors for the stability and
development possibilities of the country.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that Haiti is
more than a neighbour for the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. We are united by historical ties of solidarity
that go back to the struggle for independence in the
nineteenth century, when President Alexandre Pétion
decisively supported the Liberator, Simón Bolívar,
which we will never forget. We are deeply committed
to the present and future of Haiti’s people. Anything
we are able to do will be insufficient if there is no
progress in the building of institutional capacity and
in the creation of economic conditions that would make
it possible to overcome the poverty afflicting country.
In that regard, support and international assistance to
achieve these goals are necessary today more than ever.
We cannot abandon the Haitian people.
10/29

17/03/2016

Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Honoré for her briefing. As she has
made clear today, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti continues to make a welcome
contribution to stability and development in Haiti. It is
a contribution that is clearly helping what is the poorest,
least-developed country in the Western hemisphere.
So, I join others in thanking everyone involved in the
Mission and in the United Nations Country Team for
their ongoing commitment and service.
Today I want to focus on three priorities for
Haiti as we see them: the elections, security and the
humanitarian situation.
First, like others, we welcome the first two rounds
of presidential elections, but it is frustrating that the
political process has not been seen through to fruition.
A democratically elected and fully functioning
Government is essential if Haiti is to address the
serious challenges facing the country and its people.
We recognize the role of former President Martelly and
the presidents of the two chambers of Parliament in
securing a way forward with the political accord last
month. The international community supports Haitian
efforts to implement this agreement. But if it is to
succeed, consensus-building within Haiti is needed.
It is imperative that the current political and electoral
uncertainty is resolved quickly.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/225)
welcomes the efforts made so far by the provisional
president and prime minister. We agree with this.
Now, all stakeholders need to work together in good
faith to complete the electoral process. This is not
a time for political intransigence, for brinkmanship
or posturing. Too much is at stake. To give just one
example, successful development cooperation with
the international community relies on Haiti having
a democratically elected and fully functioning
Government. Without such interlocutors, there is a risk
that we will all be frustrated in our efforts. The people
of Haiti deserve better.
Turning to my second point, we are pleased to see
the continued expansion of the Haitian National Police.
There has been a noticeable improvement in their
capabilities and their independence from MINUSTAH,
as seen by the security they provided for the elections.
But there is still much to do if we are to transition
to Haitian-led efforts countrywide. MINUSTAH’s
continued focus, therefore, should be on developing the
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

professionalism of the Haitian police. Slow progress
in improving the rule of law threatens to undermine
this progress. In particular, reform of the justice sector
remains weak and needs nurturing. Steps must be taken
to ensure there is comprehensive justice for all. This
must include addressing serious human rights abuses,
including the concerning increase in gender-based
violence and rape. All people of Haiti have a right to
protection from such abuses.
Turning to my third point, I want to touch upon
the humanitarian situation. Despite the welcome
recovery since the earthquake and Hurricane Sandy, it
is unsettling that so many of Haiti’s citizens remain in
camps and temporary shelters. These are people who
lost everything and yet, six years later, they still have
nothing. Rehousing them must be an urgent priority
for a new Government. I also want to touch upon the
ongoing outbreak of cholera. That terrible disease is a
scar on Haitian citizens. After all that they have been
through, they cannot afford to face that further assault
on their lives and livelihoods. Efforts to protect the
population and eradicate cholera from the main water
supplies have clearly been ineffective. More needs to
be done to defend the vulnerable people of Haiti against
cholera and rid Haiti of that pervasive disease.
Let me close by looking to the future. Although
challenges remain, we cannot let them distract us
from planning beyond 2016 towards a smaller and
more focused United Nations presence in Haiti.
The development of a joint transition plan by
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team is
a good first step, and we look forward to the results
of a meaningful strategic assessment mission. But it
is becoming increasingly clear that we cannot allow
an open-ended electoral process to delay indefinitely
a real examination of what comes next. While Haitian
leaders need to complete the electoral process, we must
not let the political impasse delay the Council’s own
determination of whether the current deployment is in
the best long-term interest of Haiti. We owe it to the
people of Haiti to get it right.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for presenting
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/225)
and for her substantive briefing on the situation in
the country.

S/PV.7651

We are carefully monitoring the development of the
political situation in Haiti, where the electoral campaign
has once again encountered serious setbacks. As a
result of the worsening inter-party standoff, it proved
impossible to elect a new Head of State within the time
frame laid out in the Constitution. Nonetheless, we
welcome the adoption by Port-au-Prince of a political
solution that enabled the National Assembly to elect an
interim President, Jocelerme Privert, for a transitional
120-day period. We hope that that compromise will
help to ensure institutional continuity, while avoiding
a vacuum in the executive branch and moving toward
a constructive completion of the electoral process. The
electoral marathon for the legislative authorities has
been successfully concluded. The fiftieth anniversary
session of the Haitian National Assembly assumed its
functions in January. The country thereby demonstrated
its ability to overcome significant domestic political
differences and solve the most difficult problems. We
hope that Haiti’s political forces will be able to muster
the necessary will and restraint in order to successfully
elect a President within the established time frame.
Numerous difficult economic and other domestic
problems also remain on the table.
A well-qualified and properly equipped police force
is absolutely crucial for the State to be able to develop
successfully. The latest report of the Secretary-General
notes a slight decrease in the size of the Haitian National
Police. We hope that the reasons for the departure of
qualified members of the police force will be analysed
and eliminated. MINUSTAH’s police contingent
could assist the Haitians in that matter, although it is
undergoing its own difficulties with regard to providing
the necessary personnel. We believe that reaching the
target of 15,000 national police, set by Port-au-Prince,
by the end of the year is still possible.
The economy in Haiti remains fragile. The country
is not demonstrating sufficient economic growth, and
the national currency has fallen in value. We believe
that those difficulties are not of an extraordinary nature.
If there is enough political will, that issue can be fully
resolved, as well as the issues of the food shortages and
drought. We are concerned by the unstable situation
that has resulted from cholera. The number of those
afflicted periodically decreases, only to increase later.
An important role in that problem should be played
by specialized United Nations agencies, international
organizations and donors. Where possible, Port-auPrince should make more significant efforts to inform

16-0761611/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

the population about the disease and how to avoid
contracting it.
We were pleased to learn that, in the coming
months, the remaining 7,000 families that fell victim
to the devastating earthquake of 2010 will move into
permanent homes. That achievement will enable the
people of Haiti to overcome, once and for all, the
difficult legacy left by that natural disaster, while
enabling resources to be directed to other development
projects. In October, we are looking forward to
carefully studying the outcome of the strategic review
and the recommendations of the Secretary-General
with regard to the future of the United Nations presence
in the country. We are convinced that the key role of
continuing the successful development of the State and
concluding the drawn-out electoral process falls on the
shoulders of the country’s national authorities.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Honoré, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her efforts and her
briefing, which has enabled us to better understand
the political, economic and security situation in
Haiti and the activities carried out by United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). At the
core of the Mission, there are police staff from Senegal,
a sign — as if there were a need for one — of Senegal’s
commitment to its brother nation and the attention that
we pay to the ongoing situation there.
We have followed developments in Haiti with
great concern, following the announcement that the
date for the presidential elections that were originally
scheduled for 27 December 2015 with the departure
of President Martelly remains undetermined. For
that reason, we welcome the agreement concluded on
5 February 2016, which enabled Haiti to overcome the
unprecedented political situation of having a vacancy
in the Presidency and established a road map seeking to
ensure institutional continuity. My delegation therefore
calls on all political actors in Haiti to work to ensure
that the transition process takes place peaceably, and
we call on the interim President, Mr. Privert, to take
all measures, within the framework of that process, to
break the current impasse in which the country finds
itself. On that account, it is fitting to commend the
efforts that he has carried out to nominate an interim
Prime Minister, put in place a 15-member cabinet and
revive the Provisional Electoral Council.
12/29

17/03/2016

In order to hasten the implementation of measures
that could lead to the return of constitutional order, we
call on the National Assembly to fully carry out its role
in the implementation of the agreement of 5 February
by proceeding without further delay on the vote for
Prime Minister, in order to facilitate the conclusion
of the electoral process. The successful outcome of
a transparent and credible electoral process seems
to us to be the only way of ensuring the sustainable
restoration of the unity and stability of the country.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/225)
mentions, the security situation in Haiti, though calm
at the moment, remains precarious. While the level of
crime remained generally at the same level as during
the periods covered in the two previous reports of the
Secretary-General, it is nevertheless troubling that
there is a greater number of homicides, which reached
567 for the period from 1 September 2015 to 1 March
2016. The number of reported cases of rape, which
reached 218, is just as troubling.
My delegation welcomes the commendable efforts
carried out by the Haitian National Police to confront
the security situation. We particularly welcome the
support and training that MINUSTAH brings to the
National Police. MINUSTAH must nonetheless further
bolster its work to promote stability in the country, in
particular by supporting the ongoing political process
and strengthening institutions and the rule of law,
with a particular focus on promoting and protecting
human rights.
My delegation echoes the Secretary-General’s appeal
to States for contributions to humanitarian assistance.
We note with concern the increasing difficulties
encountered by the United Nations in supporting the
activities of the Haitian authorities. That is especially
worrisome because, as we all know, the country finds
itself in economic difficulties characterized by low
growth and decreasing investment. The country also
continues to be exposed to such crises as drought, lack
of safe drinking water, poor infrastructure, health care
and sanitation, and endemic diarrhoea.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the progress
made by MINUSTAH and offers its thanks and support
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, Ms. Honoré, as she carries out her
work. My delegation eagerly looks forward to receiving
the Secretary-General’s recommendations on the future
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

of the Mission before the expiration of its mandate
in October.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. China listened
carefully to the briefing by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Honoré.
Thanks to the joint efforts of all parties, the interim
Government of Haiti has been established. The second
round of presidential elections is scheduled to be held
in April, and a new Government is expected to be
formed in May. We hope that this process will create
new opportunities for peace and stability in Haiti.
The recent situation in Haiti has been calm on
the whole, but it is still complex and fragile. The
security situation has deteriorated, and the country
faces difficulties in economic development and a grim
humanitarian situation. It still has a long way to go in
peacebuilding and reconstruction. China hopes that the
international community will focus its assistance on
the following three areas.
First, we must do all we can to facilitate the holding
of elections on schedule. China hopes that all parties in
Haiti will remain united and resolve their differences
through dialogue and consultation in order to maintain
the country’s stability and create conditions conducive to
the holding of the second round of presidential elections
and the establishment of the new Government. We hope
that the relevant regional organizations will continue to
provide assistance and support to the electoral process
on the basis of respect for Haitian ownership.
Secondly, we should help Haiti to accelerate its
economic development and improve its humanitarian
situation. The Haitian Government should take the long
view, strive for development — which is the master key
to solving its problems — formulate its development
strategy in the light of the country’s situation, improve
infrastructure and the investment environment, step up
its efforts in agriculture, tourism and other important
sectors, enhance its capacities in epidemic prevention
and disaster relief, advance the rule of law, increase its
support for the displaced, and enhance social synergies.
The international community should honour its
commitments to Haiti in a timely manner and disburse
funds for humanitarian relief so that the Government
can achieve development as soon as possible.
Thirdly, proper arrangements must be made for
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

S/PV.7651

(MINUSTAH). Under the leadership of its Head,
Ms. Honoré, MINUSTAH has played an important role
in advancing Haiti’s electoral process and maintaining
security and stability in the country, for which China
offers its thanks. Pursuant to resolution 2243 (2015), the
future of MINUSTAH will be placed on the Council’s
agenda following the elections. China hopes that, based
on the full assessment of the country’s security situation
and enhanced communication with the Government,
the Secretariat and the Council will come up with
reasonable and feasible arrangements concerning the
future of MINUSTAH that will ensure stability in Haiti
and the smooth functioning of the new Government.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her comprehensive briefing, and
reassure her of the full support of France for her work
on the ground.
I endorse the statements to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
I will address three points in my statement: our
strong concern over the interruption of the ongoing
electoral process; our desire to revive consideration,
in due course, of the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH);
and France’s support for the development of Haiti.
France is deeply concerned over the interruption
of the electoral process in Haiti and by its resulting
uncertainties. More than ever before, Haiti needs stable
institutions that are vested with democratic legitimacy
so as to be able meet the many economic, social and
humanitarian challenges the country faces. The Haitian
people must also be able to see that the choices they
make through the ballot box are properly reflected
and respected.
France has taken note of the inter-Haitian political
agreement of 5 February. It is a compromise in the
right direction that prevents a vacuum of governance
and lays the foundations of a continuation of the
electoral process. The success of the agreement
remains nonetheless closely linked to the effective
implementation of all its provisions as soon as possible.
We call on all Haitian political actors, including the
Provisional President, to do their utmost to make that
happen and to ensure the restoration of constitutional
order as soon as possible. Everyone must demonstrate

16-0761613/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

responsibility and restraint and comply with the spirit
of compromise of the agreement of 5 February.
It is particularly important that the necessary
measures be taken to enable the conclusion of the
electoral process in accordance with the agreed
timetable. The timely operationaliztion of an inclusive
transitional Government confirmed by Parliament, as
well as the reactivation of the Provisional Electoral
Council, are essential and urgent steps in that regard.
The Election Observation Mission of the European
Union has concluded that, despite some irregularities,
mostly due to the inadequate training of election
officials, there was no significant alteration of the
outcome of the first round of presidential elections.
Nothing therefore precludes the results proclaimed by
the Provisional Electoral Council from forming the
basis for the organization of the second round.
More than 11 years after the creation of
MINUSTAH, the conditions on the ground have
changed significantly, as has the form of the United
Nations presence that the country needs. We have
gradually moved on from a peacekeeping situation
to a context in which the United Nations contribution
is needed in development assistance and the building
of a robust State of law. It is by recognizing this new
reality that we will be able to deliver the most effective
assistance possible to the Haitian people. Long-term
security and stability in Haiti depend above all on the
Haitian authorities shouldering their responsibilities
and on the island’s sustainable development.
France is pleased to note that the security situation
is generally stable. According to the latest statistics
issued by the United Nations system, the homicide rate
in Haiti is now among the lowest in the region. While
the situation remains precarious, due to the political
tensions raised by the interruption of the electoral
cycle, these tensions have been managed competently
by the Haitian security forces. We welcome the
ongoing strengthening of the Haitian National Police,
as demonstrated by its ability to control recent events
successfully and with relative autonomy.
We support the continuation of discussions on the
future of MINUSTAH, based on the recommendations
of the Secretary-General announced in his latest report
(S/2016/225). We look forward to the presentation of
those recommendations before the current mandate
expires in October. To that end, we believe that it is
important to underscore that the resumption of the
14/29

17/03/2016

mission-reconfiguration process cannot be delayed
indefinitely by the current political stalemate, because
that might jeopardize the United Nations capacity to
best respond to the needs of the Haitian people.
France is a longtime friend of Haiti and was one
of its first partners in development assistance, both
bilaterally and through the European Union. The
President of the French Republic recently recalled the
priority of our commitment to Haiti and announced,
during his visit in May 2015 to Port-au-Prince, a
bilateral contribution of €50 million for the education
sector over the next five years.
We remain concerned about the many challenges
facing the country, in particular in terms of child
protection. At the request of the Haitian authorities, the
French President announced in May 2015 the launch
of an ambitious bilateral cooperation programme for
Haitian young people in general and for the Haitian
education system in particular. However, France is
also working to combat food insecurity and sanitation
issues, given the resurgence of cases of cholera in 2015.
On that point, France fully supports the efforts to that
end undertaken by the Haitian authorities with the
support of the United Nations, and has contributed to
several projects on the ground in that area since 2010.
France echoes the call of the Secretary-General for the
international community to strengthen its engagement
on that theme, including financially. We must do more
as an international community to eradicate cholera in
Haiti once and for all.
The support of the international community and
the commitment of the United Nations remain more
important than ever in Haiti. However, our responsibility
in the Council is to do everything to ensure that that
commitment be as relevant and effective as possible.
The challenges that Haiti is encountering and the
expectations of its people mean that we must take the
necessary decisions. Haitian political stakeholders must
be fully aware of that fact today.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her comprehensive
briefing and for her leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Japan welcomes the most recent report (S/2016/225)
of the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH, which
gives evidence of positive signs of progress and
developments in Haiti with regard to the elections, the
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

security situation and the strengthened capacity of the
municipal authorities.
The long-overdue elections in Haiti were held in
a generally calm atmosphere last year in August and
October. We note that, during the electoral process,
MINUSTAH was called upon to intervene only in
a few cases. That attests to the increased capacity of
the Haitian National Police, which is the result of the
tireless work of MINUSTAH. Japan commends the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and the international
community, which have worked and are working
together for the success of the elections. However, the
final round of voting has been postponed several times
and is still pending.
The elections will mark an important milestone
along the path towards stabilization and social and
economic development in Haiti. With that conviction,
Japan contributed $5.5 million to the electoral process
last year. Japan sincerely hopes that the final round will
be carried out in a fair, inclusive and smooth manner, as
scheduled, on 24 April.
I listened carefully to the cautious vision with regard
to the still uncertain political schedule ahead expressed
by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. Japan calls on all the relevant actors in Haiti
to fully cooperate in the formation of a provisional
Government so that the Provisional Electoral Council
can be relaunched officially. That is essential for the
successful completion of the elections as scheduled.
In the 12 years since the establishment of
MINUSTAH, the situation in Haiti has shown some
positive changes. The country’s institutions have
better capacity than before. However, much remains
to be done. As many members mentioned, Haiti now
needs assistance in strengthening the rule of law, the
protection of human rights, further institution-building
and development.
We believe that, when significant progress is
made by an United Nations mission, the mission size
should be reduced and eventually the mission should be
withdrawn in a successful manner. In that regard, Japan
appreciates that MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team are working on a joint transition plan to
transfer the Mission’s functions to the Government of
Haiti or its partners.
Haiti is a very fragile country and still faces
numerous challenges. The gains achieved by the

S/PV.7651

Government, MINUSTAH and other partners must
be maintained and further enhanced. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré
stressed, the international community and the United
Nations system should continue to support Haiti.
We look forward to discussing the future United
Nations presence in Haiti, based on recommendations
of the strategic assessment to be carried out by the
Secretary-General at the most appropriate time.
Japan has contributed more than $200 million
towards the reconstruction and nation-building of
Haiti after the January 2010 earthquake. We have also
deployed 2,200 personnel of our Self-Defence Forces
to MINUSTAH.
In conclusion, I would like to express Japan’s firm
commitment to remain actively engaged in supporting
the efforts of Haiti towards nation-building.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): As mentioned by
earlier speakers, Haiti has seen significant political
developments in recent months, most notably in the
holding of legislative, presidential and municipal
elections in August and October.
I wish to express my appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré for
her briefing, to which we listened intently, and to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/225). Malaysia
believes that the Council’s discussion today is important
in enabling us to take stock of the developments in
Haiti with a view to assisting the country in charting
its future course.
While welcoming the recent holding of elections
in Haiti, my delegation notes that they were beset
by a number of challenges, including the repeated
postponement of presidential elections and allegations
of fraud and vote manipulation. Other challenges, such
as low voter turnout and the general insecurity felt by
the population during the voting exercise and during the
period immediately afterwards, show a lack of political
space for all. Against that background, we commend
the initiative of the Provisional Electoral Council in
having taken certain proactive measures for the October
round of elections. In the light of the lessons learned
from the August round, former President Martelly’s
establishment of the Independent Electoral Evaluation
Commission is also commendable. Looking ahead,
we believe that a revitalized and newly reconstituted
Provisional Electoral Council, free from allegations of

16-0761615/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

bias or manipulations, could contribute positively to the
conclusion of the current electoral cycle. The ability
to organize the next round of elections in a peaceful,
transparent and inclusive manner would certainly help
to restore public confidence in Haitian State institutions
and democracy in the country.
Malaysia commends the Haitian National Police
for its role in maintaining peace and security during
the election process. The fact that the police and
military of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) were only requested to step in
on a few occasions is testament to the national police’s
competence. Undoubtedly, the professionalism and
impartiality shown by the national police must be further
encouraged and enhanced with a view to cementing the
population’s trust. We also pay tribute to MINUSTAH,
especially its police and military components, for
its important role in providing the broader security
blanket during the tense election period. In the light
of the political developments, Malaysia welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for a strategic
assessment of the future presence and role of the United
Nations in Haiti, which should commence after the
inauguration of the new President.
While regretting that the presidential elections
were not concluded by the 7 February deadline,
we are nevertheless optimistic that the provisional
Government, led by Jocelerme Privert and Prime
Minister designate Fritz Alphonse Jean, will be able
the conclude the third electoral round within the agreed
timelines. In reaffirming support for a Haitian-led
and Haitian-owned road map for the swift conclusion
of the current electoral cycle, Malaysia believes that
both the President and the Prime Minister-designate
have a critical role to play in bridging differences and
in galvanizing broad support and consensus across the
spectrum of the political class and the wider public
in moving the political process forward. In noting
that a large portion of elections to the legislature has
been completed, my delegation notes that no woman
candidates were elected to either chamber of the
legislature. We encourage the Government and the
Haitian political establishment to reflect seriously on
this and to consider taking the appropriate measures to
ensure that women’s voices are adequately represented.
We are encouraged by the ongoing efforts of the
Haitian authorities and the United Nations in the
surveillance, rapid-alert and coordinated response to
the cholera epidemic, which has seen the lowest rate
16/29

17/03/2016

since its outbreak in 2010. On a related note and in
the interest of achieving closure and justice for the
victims, we would encourage greater engagement by
the Secretariat with those victims, particularly on the
issue of possible remedies and compensations, where
appropriate. It is important for the continuing credibility
of and respect for the United Nations as a whole that
the Secretary-General exercise and demonstrate
leadership on this issue, including by responding to the
letter of allegations from the Human Rights Council
special procedures.
On the human rights situation of children in
Haiti, our attention is drawn to the situation of some
200,000 children who are vulnerable to exploitation
and to physical, emotional and sexual abuse through
the practice of restavek. We call upon the Haitian
authorities to address this issue and to possibly consider
and implement the recommendations of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child.
Finally, Malaysia reiterates its appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honoré for her leadership and to the entire MINUSTAH
team for their sustained and exemplary contributions
in leading the United Nations and the international
community’s support for Haiti.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing.
Before I turn to the points my delegation would
like to make, I note that Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.
Despite daunting challenges, the Haitian people
have made significant progress towards political
stability after the devastating earthquake of 2010. We
therefore believe in Haitians’ ability to overcome the
political uncertainty at hand and to find a Haitianowned solution so as to bring long-term unity and
stability to the country. Ukraine commends the efforts
of all political stakeholders aimed at finding consensus
and constructive solutions that will conclude the
electoral process in Haiti. The agreement of 5 February,
reached between the ex-President Martelly and the
Presidents of the two chambers of Parliament, reflects
the spirit of the Constitution and provides a road map
for institutional continuity.
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

We welcome the election by the National Assembly
of the provisional President and Prime Minister, as
well as the agreement to complete the presidential,
legislative and local elections by 24 April, which will
give Haiti an opportunity to re-energize its democratic
institutions and to move forward in addressing the
serious social and development challenges. Ukraine
reaffirms its support for credible, transparent and
secure elections that will reflect the will of the Haitian
people and are conducted in accordance with Haitian
law and the Haitian Constitution. In that light, we want
to emphasize that electoral intimidation, the destruction
of property and violence are unacceptable and run
counter to democratic principles, laws and values. In
that regard, we commend the Haitian National Police
for their efforts to contain the violence and to protect
the civilian population, as well as the role played by
MINUSTAH in stabilizing what could potentially
become an explosive situation. We urge all parties to
avoid setbacks, remain calm and refrain from violence.
My delegation would like to underline the
importance of the continued efforts of the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and other
multilateral agencies, as well as Member States, in
supporting Haiti’s critical needs. The increase in
cholera cases in 2015, outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/225), and the ongoing plight
of 59,000 internally displaced persons in the aftermath
of 2010 earthquake are of great concern and require the
continued attention of the international community.
The current fragile situation in Haiti highlights
very clearly that the activities of MINUSTAH remain
of high importance to Haiti. Yet we fully agree that its
composition has to evolve along with the evolution of
the situation in the country. In that context, Ukraine
sees a great deal of merit in carrying out the strategic
assessment envisaged in resolution 2243 (2015), and
looks forward to the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral for the future configuration of the Mission
ahead of its mandate expiration in October.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Angola.
I welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to this
debate, and I commend the work of Ms. Sandra Honoré
and the staff of MINUSTAH for their meaningful
contribution to peace and stability in Haiti.

S/PV.7651

It is an honour for Angola to preside over this
debate on Haiti at a time of renewed hope, as attested
by the latest political developments with the signing
of the political agreement on 5 February by the
country’s executive and legislative branches, followed
by the handover of power. The election by the National
Assembly in February of Mr. Jocelerme Privert as Haiti’s
provisional President marked a crucial development in
the country’s political life by permitting institutional
and political continuity until the completion of the
outstanding third electoral round on 24 April, which
will, we hope, permit the inauguration of the new
President on 14 May. We welcome and congratulate
Mr. Jocelerme Privert and Prime Minister Fritz Jean,
and wish them all the best with the appointment of
a new Cabinet, the revitalization of the Provisional
Electoral Council and the further strengthening of the
inter-Haitian dialogue by involving all national actors
across the Haitian political spectrum.
Even though the overall political and security
environment was primarily influenced by the electoral
process, a surge of protests took place, both peacefully
and violently. The overall level of criminality remains
stagnant despite the withdrawal of the military from
the Cité Soleil and Port-au-Prince departments, which
registered the highest crime and gang-related violence
in the country. The country’s recent developments are
in sharp contrast to the tense political situation of a year
ago when we visited Haiti, when the political deadlock
forced the paralysis of Parliament for several months,
further compounded by its failure to hold the third
electoral round in December 2015, thereby creating a
volatile political climate marred by violent protests and
political unrest, which MINUSTAH played a critical
role in mitigating.
We note with satisfaction the joint work of the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office
for Project Services and other international partners
throughout the electoral process in providing technical
and logistical support, including the training of
electoral staff, outreach and civic education campaigns,
which have had a meaningful impact on the Provisional
Electoral Council’s work.
We also commend the ongoing partnership between
MINUSTAH, the Haitian National Police and other
institutions related to law enforcement. Such longterm partnerships have made a decisive contribution
to the creation of a more secure environment during

16-0761617/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

the unpredictable transition period, with an overall
reduction in violence and improvement in humanitarian
conditions, while paving the way for the successful
implementation of the 2012-2016 national police
development plan.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on the future of MINUSTAH before
its mandate ends. MINUSTAH’s presence will enable
the consolidation of achievements in key areas of
governance, such as the ability of various municipalities
to implement administrative and financial procedures;
recruit, train and accredit key personnel; and develop
and standardize tools and procedures for financial
management and transparency. We would like to
reiterate our total support for the Mission in its efforts
to achieve its priorities, including in the area of security
sector reform, which will ultimately ensure a climate
of stability, a prerequisite for the expansion of direct
foreign investment, and which, after several decades of
economic stagnation, will enable the national economy
to grow.
We take positive note of the current work between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team on
a road map for the Mission’s gradual disengagement,
particularly from those tasks that can be assumed by
the Government or its partners. The joint transition
plan is also aimed at identifying areas in which further
support from international partners, including the
United Nations, is needed. That is crucial to ensuring
lasting peace in a Caribbean country that has been the
victim of several man-made and natural disasters in the
past decade, including the devastating earthquake of
2010. Along with the entire international community,
in the coming months Angola hopes to see further
improvements in the political climate, the accession
of a new, democratically elected President and the
establishment of an enduring environment conducive
to socioeconomic development — all of them decisive
indicators of MINUSTAH’s performance and success
after 12 years in the country.
Similarly, we look forward to the results of the
strategic assessment upon the completion of the
interrupted electoral process, as stipulated in resolution
2243 (2015) and reinforced in the 5 February agreement
between Haiti’s political stakeholders. We stand firm
with Haiti and its political actors, the Security Council
and the international community in ensuring that
MINUSTAH’s withdrawal from the country is carefully
18/29

17/03/2016

planned and a favourable environment is in place when
the Haitians take charge of their country’s destiny.
Finally, we call on all actors across the Haitian
political spectrum to continue working to strengthen
the rule of law, create conditions conducive to social
and economic development and ensure justice and the
protection of the human rights of all Haitians.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Security Council for inviting
the Haitian delegation to comment on the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2016/225) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I
have the honour to convey to the Council the greetings
of the interim President of the Republic of Haiti,
Mr. Jocelerme Privert, who was elected on 14 February
by the National Assembly and whose key mandate,
as he himself defined it in his inauguration address,
is to see the electoral process completed according to
the timetable prescribed in the 5 February agreement.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for their unwavering
commitment to consolidating the rule of law and
democracy in Haiti and their leadership in implementing
MINUSTAH’s mandate.
We have carefully reviewed the report submitted
to the Security Council and taken note of its
recommendations. We commend the Secretary-General
for the report’s precision, objectivity and balance,
which covers the full extent of the political crisis
that led to the interruption of the electoral process in
December and January, while highlighting its economic
and financial repercussions and its implications for the
country’s security and development.
While the report states that in the past few years Haiti
has unquestionably made progress towards establishing
the rule of law, it nevertheless lists its weaknesses and
structural deficiencies and the obstacles in the way of
the people’s full realization of their human rights, as
well as the setbacks and delays we have experienced
in establishing and sustaining democracy and
implementing some essential legal reforms. Above all,
the Secretary-General emphasizes how important it is
that all of Haiti’s stakeholders work to end the electoral
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

uncertainty and overcome the current political crisis by
completing the elections, whose success will be a clear
indication of the country’s progress in terms of political
stability and the entrenchment of a democratic culture.
The next elections, scheduled for this spring, will
undoubtedly function as a test of democracy in Haiti
and its long-term stability and development. Mr. Privert,
the interim Head of State, is well aware of his historical
responsibility in that regard for organizing the free
and transparent elections that are essential to ensuring
the renewal of our institutions and consolidating the
democracy, the rule of law and stability that will be
so vital to our country’s modernization. In that regard,
the Haitian authorities reiterate to the Council and the
international community as a whole their commitment
to ensuring that the outcome of the electoral process
reflects the Haitian people’s expression of their will at
the polls.
For that reason, from the moment the interim
President took office, he has worked systematically to
conduct a dialogue with the country’s political class
and consult with the representatives of the full range
of parties and political opinions in order to tackle the
immediate principal challenge, which is re-starting the
presidential, parliamentary, municipal and local election
process begun in August 2015, in accordance with the
agreement’s stipulations, which since 7 February have
enabled us to circumvent the institutional vacuum and
maintain social peace and public order. The main goal
is to ensure the transfer of power to a president elected
democratically and in a transparent manner by 14 May.
The conditions crucial to ensuring that the electoral
process gets under way are coming together. Since he
took up highest office on 14 February, the President
of the Republic, following broad consultations with
all political stakeholders and civil society, sought to
appoint a new Prime Minister, Mr. Fritz Alphonse
Jean, on 25 February, in line with the amended Haitian
Constitution. A consensus Government was established
and the names of all members of the new ministerial
Cabinet were made public. The appointed Prime Minister
submitted his credentials to the Haitian Parliament on
1 March so that it could rule on his eligibility. He then
submitted his general policy statement to the Chamber
of Deputies on Monday, 14 March. The Prime Minister
is currently waiting for his general policy statement to
be ratified by Parliament.

S/PV.7651

In the context of consultations, the interim
President wrote to different sectors of national life that
had appointed members to the previous Provisional
Electoral Council to ask them to propose eminent
persons who could join that electoral body. Responses
were received from all sectors. On 9 March, the names of
nine members of the Provisional Electoral Council were
made public. Their aim is to re-establish confidence
in the electoral process and to organize exemplary
elections throughout the country. They are to be sworn
into office before the Council of Ministers. To that end,
Parliament must validate the general policy statement
of the Prime Minister and the new Government needs
to take charge of the management of the State.
It is therefore important and extremely judicious
to underscore that the agreement of 5 February for
institutional continuity was signed by the executive
and legislative branches. It is the fruit of constructive,
consensual political dialogue among Haitians. The
agreement enabled a governance vacuum to be avoided,
with all its potential consequences for stability. To that
end, it should be noted that the agreement makes both
signatory parties co-responsible for its application and
implementation. President Privert is working on a daily
basis, in the context of his work and mandate as Head
of State, to respect the agreement and ensure that it is
respected, hoping that nothing will slow down or go
against efforts for the normalization of political life.
Nobody should underestimate the scale of the
task of managing a very complex electoral process
in a relatively short period of time. However, Haitian
institutions have already demonstrated their ability to
assume responsibility for and to conduct the process.
Haitian authorities are convinced that they will be able
to meet the challenge and their mission. Whatever the
case may be, the solidarity and the cooperation of all
of Haiti’s partners, particularly in terms of logistics,
financial and operational issues, will be crucial and
fundamental to assisting the Haitian public authorities
and the Electoral Council, which are firmly resolved to
ensure that the process is successfully concluded.
The support of MINUSTAH for the Haitian
National Police with a view to improving the security
environment is crucial to the success of the process.
The recent street demonstrations that took place in
Port-au-Prince and various provincial towns during the
post-electoral crisis expressed the commitment of the
Haitian people to democracy. They also reflected the
desire and the demands of the people to see through to

16-0761619/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

the end an electoral process that takes into consideration
in full transparency all votes expressed through the
ballot box.
While the success of the forthcoming election is
undoubtedly at the heart of all our concerns, we cannot
fail to mention a number of other large-scale challenges
currently facing Haiti, particularly in the economic,
humanitarian and development sectors. Food insecurity
in particular is already affecting more than 3.5 million
people. It doubled over a six-month period and, in the
light of the ongoing drought, we fear that it may turn
into a disaster if appropriate measures and necessary
assistance are not quick in coming. It is also a matter of
national urgency, to which the Haitian authorities are
responding by turning to the mechanisms of solidarity
and bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
In addition, there is a significant deterioration
in the sanitation and health situation, in particular
following an upsurge in the cholera epidemic and
the emergency of the Zika virus, as underscored in
the report. In that regard, my delegation cannot but
be very concerned about the significant decrease in
influx of official development assistance, as well as
the draconian reduction in humanitarian aid, which, as
the Secretary-General has underscored, plummeted to
from $155 million in 2014 $55 million in 2015. That
has resulted in a significant reduction in the ability of
the Haitian Government to intervene among the most
destitute and affected Haitians while the country faces
serious economic and financial difficulties and a very
delicate political situation. All social appeasement
measures and all efforts required to respond to and
meet the urgent needs of the population are critical. The
Haitian Government therefore invites its international
partners to assess the scale of the challenges and to
assist it by providing rapid and specific responses that
are commensurate with the urgency of the situation.
The report also addresses the question of the
progressive disengagement of MINUSTAH and the
necessary evolution of the Mission after almost 12
years in Haiti. The Haitian authorities support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and his
proposal to undertake a strategic assessment review
following the elections regarding the future role of the
Mission. The authorities assure the Security Council
of their willingness to contribute to this review.
In the meantime, we believe it useful to recall the
fundamental position of Haiti on the outline of the
planned reconfiguration for MINUSTAH.
20/29

17/03/2016

The profile of the future Mission must take fully
into consideration the evolution of the situation on
the ground. To that end, the smooth running of the
forthcoming elections must be a key indicator in terms
of assessing our medium- and long-term needs and
the future support of Haiti’s partners. As the Haitian
authorities have always underscored, what is key is to
ensure the sustainability of the achievements of the past
12 years of the MINUSTAH presence, particularly in
terms of security, and to allow the Haitian institutions
to gradually and effectively assume the functions that
to date have been borne by the Mission.
In any event, with the new proposed configuration,
the Haitian Government is in favour of maintaining and
strengthening the support components of the National
Police and judicial system. It is in favour of continued
support for prison administration and the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security in order to substantially
reduce the number of detainees in prolonged detention
and, at the same time, to improve the conditions of
detention centres in our prisons.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express its gratitude to all friendly
countries, all of Haiti’s cooperation partners and the
United Nations — in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, United Nations Office
for Project Services and MINUSTAH — for their
unwavering commitment alongside national institutions
in the recent electoral process. At this crossroads, the
Haitian authorities would like to be able to count on
their continued support to enable the new Provisional
Electoral Council to quickly get up to speed and carry
out its substantial and pressing mission efficiently
and effectively. The Haitian authorities reiterate to all
partners in the international community their assurance
that they will spare no effort to ensure the success of
the upcoming elections, the credibility, transparency
and integrity of which will guarantee the peaceful
transition and the sustainable stability that the Haitian
people have consistently called for.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the delegation of Angola for
convening this debate and Ms. Sandra Honoré both
for her presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/225) and for her leadership of the United
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
at this crucial stage in Haiti’s future.
The elections scheduled for 24 April in Haiti
are without a doubt the focus of this meeting for all
interested in the future of the country. Although
the two rounds held in 2015 were a reflection of the
significant progress Haiti has made since the 2010
earthquake, the electoral round scheduled for next
month may be the turning point for the consolidation
of a political process. Although it has not been without
its challenges, it promises to provide the Haitian people
with a renewed voice in its governance and to move
forward the restoration of constitutional order. Mexico
calls on all Haitian political actors to enable the speedy
revitalization and renewal of the Provisional Electoral
Council, to act in an appropriately responsible manner,
and to preserve security and stability during the delicate
transition period under way.
As the Secretary-General warns in his latest report,
the progress made so far is fragile and could suffer
setbacks. Violence and other instances of public unrest
linked to the electoral process constitute a latent concern
among members of the international community, and
the country’s vulnerability to humanitarian crises is not
a negligible challenge.
My delegation is particularly concerned about the
short- and medium-term challenges of malnutrition
and the persistence of cholera in Haiti. In 2015 alone,
just over 36,000 suspected cases of cholera were
recorded — 9,000 more than in the previous year.
And according to the Ministry of Health, since its
emergence, the epidemic has cost the lives of more than
9,000 people and infected nearly a million Haitians.
Let us not allow solvable humanitarian challenges to
increase the number of threats to the present and the
future of Haiti. Improved vigilance, rapid alert and a
coordinated response from Haitian authorities and the
United Nations, as well as strategic investment in water
infrastructure, health and sanitation, are essential.
Mexico reaffirms its commitment to continuing to
promote action in priority areas for Haitian development
in the areas of agriculture, health, socioeconomic
development, the environment and education, and
we will continue to assist and strengthen the regional
efforts led by the Organization of American States.
The report presented today by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General could not be
clearer. It provides a detailed analysis of the challenges,

S/PV.7651

risks and opportunities in Haiti. First of all, it shows us
the vital role that MINUSTAH continues to play in the
daily life of the country and the pressing need for their
presence to be maintained for as long as circumstances
require. The role of MINUSTAH in institution building,
national security, promoting the rule of law and
human rights, its humanitarian support and promotion
of development, should be transferred to Haitians
progressively. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General for a gradual reconfiguration of
the Mission, based on the premise of overall stability,
security conditions and strengthened capacity of the
Haitian National Police, which is showing significant
progress, and we welcome the establishment of a unit for
the investigation of sexual and gender-based violence
in the Central Directorate of the Judicial Police. We
also support the proposal that the strategic evaluation
mission for the transition of MINUSTAH be carried out
once the electoral process is completed, and we hope
that the result will reflect a fair balance between the
situation on the ground and assessment of the country’s
real institutional capacities.
History has shown us on many occasions that the
time tables set for peacekeeping operations can be
counterproductive. The accelerated withdrawal of the
Mission could lead to the re-emergence of political
instability, with immeasurable consequences. We
believe that it is a priority to consolidate progress
without compromising security. The success of our
collective mission requires the commitment of all
stakeholders to ensure consensual Haitian solutions to
the country’s problems. That is an essential component
for the unity and stability of Haiti in the long term.
In conclusion I wish to highlight Mexico’s gratitude
for the countries that contribute troops and police to
Haiti, for the Group of Friends, and for all those who
are part of MINUSTAH and continue to work to lay the
foundation for a prosperous and peaceful Haiti.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank Angola for having organized this debate. I
also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sandra Honoré, for her briefing.
Brazil reiterates its respect and unwavering support
for the consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.
I also take note of the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Régis.

16-0761621/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

(spoke in English)
Brazil welcomes the holding of two electoral
rounds last year in Haiti, which enabled the Haitian
Parliament to resume functioning on 11 January. We
also acknowledge the efforts by Haitian institutions
to take corrective measures to address irregularities
and improve the electoral process. While regretting
the postponement of the presidential run-off, we
recognize the importance of the inter-Haitian political
agreement achieved on 5 February, which avoided a
governance vacuum. We expect the political dialogue
that has been promoted by the provisional President,
Jocelerme Privert, to allow for the normalization of
the country’s democratic life with the completion of
presidential elections. Brazil calls on all stakeholders
to engage constructively during the process leading
to the next round of elections. Allow me to recognize,
in that regard, the key role of mediators from the
United Nations, Organization of American States,
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Caribbean Community, who are providing the
necessary space and support for inter-Haitian dialogue.
We acknowledge that there are reasons for concern
in the area of security, including in the context of
the pending round of elections. Despite the enhanced
performance of the Haitian National Police in preventing
crime and controlling civil unrest, there was an increase
in the number of homicides and a peak in violence
in February, as reported by the Secretary-General,
including murder, attacks against police stations and
private property, armed confrontation among rival
gangs and violent demonstrations in Port-au-Prince.
We deeply regret the death of two United Nations police
officers killed by gunshot in December 2015.
We concur with the view of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that the
deterrence provided by troops continues to be essential
to reduce violent demonstrations and crime in certain
areas. Therefore, we support the continued visible
and mobile posture of the uniformed personnel of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We also encourage the Haitian National
Police to benefit from the Mission’s efforts to ensure a
successful handover of responsibilities for security in
critical areas. In that context, it is worth underlining
that the number of staff of the Haitian National Police
is still short of the target set for 2016.
22/29

17/03/2016

In a context of negative economic trends in Haiti,
the country’s resilience was again put to test. The
three years of drought have resulted in crop losses
and an increase in food prices. Recent floods led to
the establishment of additional camps for internally
displaced persons and an increase in the number
of cholera cases in the country. That very difficult
scenario still requires the sustained attention of the
international community.
Brazil notes with concern a sequence of reductions
in MINUSTAH’s quick-impact and community
violence-reduction projects. We believe that those
important mandated tools are crucial to promote a
culture of peace and the rule of law and, ultimately, to
consolidate stability.
In addition to our support for elections in Haiti and
our comprehensive humanitarian cooperation with the
country, Brazil is committed to maintaining its current
special immigration policy for Haitians to ensure an
appropriate entry and dignified welcome to those
migrants in our country.
We concur with the view of the Secretary-General
that the deployment of the strategic assessment
mission should be carried out after the completion
of the interrupted electoral process, ideally after the
formation of the new Government. In that regard, we
underline that the assessment mission should take
into account the concrete situation on the ground and
avoid prejudgments on its outcome. Close and effective
coordination with the Government of Haiti will remain
a decisive requirement in that context.
(spoke in French)
Despite the concern caused by the political crisis
that led to the postponement of the second round of
presidential elections, Brazil will continue to support
the solutions that, we are sure, Haitians themselves will
determine. We hope that a constructive and positive
attitude on the part of Haitian political stakeholders
will lead to the finalization of the ongoing process and
contribute to the achievement of fair and transparent
elections. We urge the Haitian leadership to continue to
work to entrentch the social compact and to strengthen
democracy in the country — a definitive transition is up
to the Haitian people. A transition from the instability
of the past to a future rooted in the origininal Haitian
dream that inspired an entire region to fight for its
independence as a way of ensuring a dignified life of
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

freedom for all. We will continue to support our Haitian
brethren in pursuit of that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honor to speak on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, the United States, France,
Guatemala, Uruguay, Venezuela and my own country,
Peru. I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President
for organizing this debate to discuss the latest report
(S/2016/225) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends welcome the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and thanks her for her
comprehensive briefing and for the intensive work she
is doing.
Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, the establishment of a political culture
that promotes democratic stability and improving
socioeconomic conditions are key elements in achieving
greater security, stability and prosperity in Haiti. The
Group of Friends welcomes the continuing efforts
of the United Nations, other multilateral agencies,
regional organizations and States Members of the
United Nations to support the critical needs of Haiti. In
that connection, the Group expresses its concern about
the continued suspension of electoral rounds and the
political uncertainty that has produced. We note the
agreement lead and reached by Haitians on 5 February,
which avoided a Government vacuum and established
a road map for the continuation of the electoral
process. We call for the prompt implementation of all
the provisions of the agreement in the agreed period.
We would also like to underline the responsibility of
all Haitians in that regard. We call on all Haitians to
contribute constructively, exercise maximum restraint
and work together peacefully to strengthen confidence
in the electoral process. We appreciate the efforts made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in that regard and we encourage her to continue in
that task.
The Group of Friends notes with alarm the
politically motivated violence during January and
February and calls on all political actors to promote a
peaceful climate in full respect of the law. We reiterate
the importance of the commitment of the Haitian

S/PV.7651

Government to strengthen the rule of law and to
make progress in the judicial and security sectors. In
that regard, we welcome the continued strengthening,
professionalization and reform of the Haitian National
Police, and reiterate that police training should continue
to be one of the key tasks of MINUSTAH. We also
note the partial progress in implementing the five-year
development plan for the period 2012-2016.
While recognizing progress in the judicial sector,
it is urgently necessary to reduce prolonged pretrial
detention and eliminate inhumane conditions of
detention, ensure accountability and end impunity,
including for past human rights violations.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. In that regard,
we expect all United Nations personnel to adhere to
the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges all
stakeholders to assume their responsibilities to prevent
such cases, investigate allegations and hold accountable
those responsible.
We note the ongoing work of the Government of
Haiti, MINUSTAH and others to protect members
of vulnerable groups, but also note with concern the
limited national capacity for the protection of human
rights, particularly with regard to vulnerable groups.
That demands the utmost attention of all actors to
prevent and reduce violent crimes, particularly against
women and children, including rape and other sexual
violence. In that regard, the Group supports focusing
on gender issues and child protection, as well as the
continuing violence-reduction efforts to promote the
welfare of youth at risk and vulnerable communities.
The Group also expresses its concern about the
fact that the ongoing political instability diverts Haiti’s
attention from its persistent humanitarian challenges.
Similarly, the Group notes that food insecurity
resulting from three years of drought, which continues
to worsen, is now having an impact on 1.5 million
Haitians, as well as on the country’s stability.
The continued efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic serve to remind us of the importance
maintaining cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Haiti to address the
needs of the Haitian people. We echo the call of the
Secretary-General to support the efforts of the Haitian
authorities in this area, and encourage a greater number

16-0761623/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

17/03/2016

of partners to complement the contributions of current
international contributors.

candidate; as well as Armenia and Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.

The Group notes with concern that the current
political crisis negatively affects development spending
and, along with the drought and the concomitant decline
in agricultural production and the decreasing flows
of donor contributions, is also affecting the country’s
economic growth.

Haiti is experiencing a sensitive political period.
The European Union is concerned about the interruption
in the electoral process following the disputed results
of the elections held in August and October last year.
Finalizing the elections is a necessary condition for
political and institutional stability. It is urgent that
Haiti complete the process in order to deal with the
many economic, social and environmental challenges
it faces. Haiti cannot afford a new major political and
security crisis. It must safeguard the progress made
following the devastating 2010 earthquake, even as
new challenges emerge, especially related to drought
and malnutrition.

There can be no genuine stability or sustainable
development in Haiti without strengthening democratic
institutions and credible democratic processes. In that
context, we emphasize the importance of completing the
electoral cycle without further dela in order to ensure
that Haiti can count on fully functioning democratic
institutions. We recognize the principle of ownership
and the primary responsibility of the Government and
the people of Haiti over all aspects of stabilizing the
country. We also underscore the responsibility that falls
to MINUSTAH in that effort, according to its mandate.
The Group reaffirms its solidarity and commitment
with the people and the Government of Haiti in their pursuit
of stability, reconstruction, recovery, socioeconomic
development and democratic consolidation.

The European Union calls on all Haitian actors,
including interim President Privert, to make every
effort to ensure the stability and security of the country,
the success of the pending electoral process and the
democratic consolidation of the country. The European
Union remains a loyal partner of Haiti and continues to
be committed to supporting the country in this critical
phase, in coordination with other partners.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/225), and the Special Representative for her
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

The European Union strongly supported the
holding of elections in August and October 2015 along
two tracks, namely, through a financial contribution
of €5 million to the trust fund managed by the United
Nations system and by sending an election observation
mission, as requested by the Haitian authorities and
agreed by them. The mission, in full independence
and following a methodology and a code of conduct,
observed all stages of the process in line with regional
and internationl electoral obligations as well as
Haitian law. The mission concluded that, despite some
irregularities, mostly due to inadequate training of
election officials, there was no significant disturbance
of the result of the first round of presidential elections.
The European Union regrets the interruption of the
electoral process following the deterioration of the
security environment and threats that weighed on the
process. The results announced by the Provisional
Electoral Council should be the baseline for the
organization of the second round.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Stabilization
and Association Process country and potential

We should pay tribute to the Haitian people, who,
in extremely difficult conditions, devoted themselves
to ensuring the holding of elections, which is the only
way to allow the Haitian people to choose their leaders.

Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti recognizes
the important role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability
and security in Haiti and expresses its support and
appreciation for the women and men who make up
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support recovery and stability in Haiti.
I also wanted to make several comments in my
national capacity, but given the lateness of the hour, I
shall stop here.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.

24/29

16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7651

The European Union takes note of the agreement
of 5 February between the executive and the legislature
branches aimed at ensuring institutional continuity,
as a compromise whose implementation will avert a
governance vacuum and ensure both the stability and
continuity of the State and to allow for the continuation
of the electoral process initiated in 2015, including
the organization of the second round of presidential
elections on 24 April. The European Union calls
for the implementation of all the provisions of the
agreement, in particular avoiding the transition to be
extended illegitimately or that the electoral process
is carried forward or suspended de facto in violation
of the agreement. Everyone must show responsibility,
restraint and a spirit of compromise in that regard.

largely independently. The European Union stresses
that the support of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (M1NUSTAH) remains important
in the current context. The European Union believes
that the presence of MINUSTAH, and in particular its
support for election security, while always respecting
and protecting human rights and the principle of
sovereignty, remains useful to ensure the continuation
of the process, as well as peace and stability in the
coming months. The European Union supports — when
conditions permit — undertaking a review on the future
of MINUSTAH, based on the Secretary-General’s
recommendations. The European Union encourages
Haitian stakeholders to assume their responsibilities in
concluding the pending electoral cycle.

The electoral process should continue in accordance
with the principles of peace, inclusion, transparency
and legality and on the basis of the agreement. It
is essential to achieve the early functioning of an
inclusive transitional Government that is confirmed by
the Parliament and the Provisional Electoral Council
in order to take the necessary measures to allow
the electoral process initiated in 2015 to take place
transparently and in compliance with the new agreed
timetable. The European Union is ready to continue
to support that process, including through its electoral
observer mission.

In conclusion, the European Union remains
committed to supporting the efforts of the Haitian
authorities, the United Nations and the international
community to ensure a better future for the entire
Haitian people.

The European Union has long been a supporter and
a friend of Haiti. It remains one of its main donors of
emergency assistance funds and development aid. That
financial support, however, is subject to compliance
with democratic principles, including the right of
people to choose their Government democratically
through the ballot box, and not through mobilization in
the streets. Conditionality clauses are an integral part
of the Cotonou Agreement, which links the European
Union to the countries of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific regions, including Haiti. Institutional stability
is essential for European assistance to be effective and
able lto produce lasting effects for the benefit of the
population. It is therefore both urgent and necessary to
put in place freely elected and legitimate institutions to
address without delay the huge economic and structural
challenges the country faces.
While the security situation remains generally
stable, it has nevertheless been affected by the tensions
in the electoral climate. The European Union welcomes
the professionalism of the Haitian National Police,
which managed the recent events successful and

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala welcomes the holding of this
debate on the situation in Haiti. I take this opportunity
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his report
(S/2016/225). I also thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for her
briefing as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Guatemala aligns itself with the statement made by
the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti.
We take note of the efforts of MINUSTAH to
carry out its mandate, including establishing a secure
and stable environment, assist in monitoring and
restructuring, support the political and constitutional
process and contribute to the task of organizing and
overseeing free and fair municipal, parliamentary
and presidential elections. Guatemala is proudly
contributing to supporting the stabilization of the
country. At the same time, however, we stress the
importance of public officials continuing to work to
promote political and social stability, which Haitians
very much deserve.
With regard to free and fair municipal, parliamentary
and presidential elections, Guatemala notes that recent

16-0761625/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

events that led to the postponement of presidential
election, which provoked an institutional crisis, do not
help the country to regain the much-needed democratic
path Haiti. We are concerned about such acts, which
promote greater instability in the country.
We welcome the agreement reached among the
parties that provides the necessary structures to
preserve institutional continuity in Haiti and a road
map for the swift conclusion of the ongoing electoral
cycle. We emphasize the importance that the parties
comply with the agreement of 5 February, which aims
to protect Haiti’s constitutional continuity, so that the
final round of elections can take place on 24 April and
a new presidential term can begin on 14 May.
We also support the view of the core group
of the international community based in Port-auPrince — made up of Brazil, Canada, France, Spain, the
United States, European Union and the Organization
of American States — with regard to the need to
underscore the importance of completing the electoral
process within the agreed time frame. In that regard,
we welcome the election, on 14 February, of an interim
President in order to safeguard institutional continuity
and continue the electoral process in Haiti. At the
same time, it is important that all the parties maintain
a constructive dialogue to guide the country towards
a stable and democratic future, which is essential to
addressing the challenges facing Haiti and taking
measures aimed at promoting calm and stability. It is
important that the political sector continue contributing
and carrying out its task in order to achieve the political
stability that the country so badly needs, which will
contribute to its development.
In another vein, we note with concern the dire
humanitarian situation in the country, including the
24 per cent increase in the number of cholera cases
from 2014 to 2015.
In conclusion, we welcome the fact that security on
the ground in the framework of the electoral processes
have been mainly handled by the Haitian National Police
(HNP) and that only twice was MINUSTAH called on
to assist — a clear example of the strengthening of
the HNP.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Special Representative
26/29

17/03/2016

of the Secretary-General Sandra Honoré for
presenting the report (S/2016/225) of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We acknowledge her work
and the results achieved, which are contributing to
strengthening dialogue and Haiti’s institutions. Let
me also acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis, and
his active delegation. We also thank the new Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Ajax Porto Pinheiro,
and Commissioner Serge Therriault.
When the Security Council considered the situation
in Haiti in October (see S/PV.7530), the electoral
process was under way and the presidential elections
were still on the horizon. Althogh the October elections
took place in relative calm, allegations of irregularities
and the tensions that were generated with regard to
the process of reviewing the results forced successive
postponements, until the indefinite suspension on
22 January. Despite those incidents, which hindered
the transition process again, fortunately it was possible
to achieve a parliamentary agreement that enabled the
establishment of a provisional Government after the
end of the mandate of President Martelly. Like other
countries in the region worried about the future of Haiti,
Argentina is closely following the process and hopes
that the Haitian people can achieve the normalization
of the political situation by concluding the electoral
process and installing a legitimate Government that can
consolidate greater stability.
With regard to the report of the Secretary-General,
Argentina is concerned about the increasing violence
in the course of the electoral process during the last
months of 2015 and early this year. We remain confident
that the work of the transitional Government can help
both to reduce violence and to successfully conclude
the electoral process.
Argentina deeply regrets that situation, although it
cannot help but recall that, when the extension of the
mandate of MINUSTAH was decided by resolution
2180 (2014), with the consequent downsizing, we,
along with other countries of the region, supported the
need to maintain an increased military presence until
the electoral process could be considered successfully
completed. Nevertheless, we should highlight the
performance of MINUSTAH personnel, who continue
to make great efforts, while prioritizing certain areas in
order to fulfil thir mandate due to a reduction in staff.
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7651

With regard to policing, Argentina recognizes
the work done on capacity-building for the Haitian
National Police under the development plan for the
period 2012-2016. We note, however, that, 10 months
from the end of that span, the level of compliance is
60 per cent, as well as the need for greater commitment
from the international community to strengthen both
the police component and to promote the reform of the
security sector. In that regard, Argentina looks forward
to the next report of the Secretary-General in order
to learn more precisely about the levels achieved. At
the same time, we are confident that the report will
make it possible to assess the situation with regard to
the election process and the recommendations to be
made by the Secretariat to the Council with regard to
the future of MINUSTAH. In that connection, I would
like to reiterate the need for the full participation of
the Haitian Government in decisions about the United
Nations presence in the country.

The security environment continued to be
influenced by the electoral process. We are especially
concerend about the escalation in violence in the days
leading up to the signing of the political agreement of
5 February. That made it necessary to deploy the full
potential of the Haitian National Police and the important
support of the United Nations Stabailization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). We hope that the Haitian National
Police witll meet its strategic development plan for the
period 2012-2016.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm Argentina’s support
for the people and the Government to Haiti in their
efforts to strengthen the democratic process, security
and economic and social development of the country.

With regard to the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH,
we note the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to carry out the strategic assessment called for in
resolution 2243 (2015), once the electoral process is
completed. We reiterate that, as a matter of principle, that
process should properly take into the views of the troopcontributing countries. It is positive that the Mission and
the country team advance in the consolidation of tasks
that will be undertaken by the Haitian Government
under the principle of national ownership.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the briefing of Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Haiti Sandra Honoré.
Chile associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Peru, Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
As other delegations have noted, we too are
concerned about the political situation in Haiti. It is
essential to maintain and strengthen the space for
dialogue that led to the agreement on 5 February,
which all actors should undertake with responsibility.
The provisions of the agreement must be implemented
with the aim of concluding without delay the electoral
process begun in 2015. Given the transitional nature of
the current Government, we must bear in mind the need
to return to the appropriate institutional channels. The
political context must improve, given the repercussions
in areas that affect the entire Haitian society, such as
economic and social development, the security situation
and the humanitarian spehere.

The political crisis diverted the attention
required by humanitarian crisis and had an impact on
development spending, which is more complex in a
context of declining international funding. We reiterate
our particular concern about the situation of food
insecurity. We hope that the efforts to eliminate cholera
will continue and, in that regard, there is a need for
a long-term perspective, especially in connection with
providing clean water and sanitation.

Notwithstanding the current difficulties, we must
not lose our perspective. Haiti has made tremendous
progress in various areas and has overcome tragedies
such as the 2010 earthquake, during which the Haitian
people displayed commendable resilience. In that,
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, through its agencies, funds and programmes,
and MINUSTAH, has played a fundamental role. The
challenge now is to maintain the progress achieved.
In conclusion, we reiterate the commitment of
the Government of Chile to the strengthening of
the institutions and development of Haiti and its
people, which has been reflected in our close bilateral
cooperation and participation in MINUSTAH since its
beginning, as well as in other forums for South-South,
regional and international cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.

16-0761627/29

S/PV.7651

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate on the situation in Haiti and also thank
Special Representative Sandra Honoré for her proven
commitment and leadership at the head of the Mission.
Colombia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
Colombia underscores once again the invaluable
work undertaken by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to ensure the sustainable
well-being of the Haitian people. My country thanks
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/225) and
wishes to highlight a few aspects of it.
Although the number of cases of, and deaths from,
cholera in 2015 was a cause for concern, we are pleased
to note that the last quarter of 2015 had the lowest
number of cases since the epidemic began. We hope
that trend can be maintained.
We are concerned about the repeated violations of
children’s rights mentioned in the report, especially
the cases of child trafficking for labour and sexual
exploitation. We regret all the acts of sexual violence
against women; however, we recognize the progress
achieved by the community violence reduction
programme, which has provided assistance to 1,919
vulnerable women. Particular consideration is given
in the report to the more than twofold increase in the
number of Haitians affected by food security issues as
compared to the figures reported six months ago.
We reaffirm the need to create institutions both
for the justice and prison systems in Haiti, since both
scenarios present humanitarian challenges given the
conditions in which people are detained in prisons in
the country. We acknowledge MINUSTAH’s support to
local Governments in preparing newly elected mayors
and municipal councils to take office appropriately.
However, we note with concern the absence of women
elected in the elections on 25 October, in disregard
of the country’s Constitution, as well as what was
stated in resolution 1325 (2000) on the importance of
increasing the representation of women at all levels of
decision-making in national institutions.
My country has indicated that the central
responsibility in the Haitian process corresponds to the
Government and its leaders. That is why we appreciate
the joint work carried out between MINUSTAH and
28/29

17/03/2016

the United Nations team in Haiti to define a transition
plan for the country aimed at strengthening national
ownership, in particular for its contribution to the
progressive drawdown of the Mission’s functions,
which will then need to be assumed by the Government
of Haiti.
We note with concern the repeated postponement
of elections in Haiti. In that regard, we are confident
that corrective measures are being taken to ensure the
holding of the second round of presidential elections
free of the violent incidents and irregularities that took
place in previous rounds.
We welcome the agreement achieved to avoid a
vacuum of governance in Haiti, and we reiterate that the
next democratically elected President should assume
as part of his policies a security and development
approach, which will enable the country to overcome
its current difficulties.
We highlight the observation made by the
Secretary-General in his report with regard to the need
for Haitian stakeholders to be able to overcome the
current climate of political uncertainty. That will make
it possible for the country to make important advances
in terms of political stability and lay a foundation for a
democratic culture.
Haiti must continue with its efforts to strengthen
its institutions and the police force in the country.
MINUSTAH must protect its achievements at all costs.
We must have a coherent sustainable results-oriented
framework and ensure a successful and peaceful
transition to the next Government.
I want to conclude by reiterating the support
of Colombia to the invaluable work carried out by
MINUSTAH in ensuring the sustainable well-being
of the Haitian people. My country remains committed
to continuing to contribute to the strengthening and
training of the Haitian National Police by supporting
training and advisory activities for officers, as well
as through the involvement of Colombian police in
MINUSTAH. I am pleased to announce that, in the
first week of April, a contingent of 24 Colombian police
officers, including four women, will reach Port-auPrince to join the Mission with the aim of strengthening
the rule of law, good governance and the level of
security and well-being in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
16-07616

17/03/2016

The question concerning Haiti

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I have the honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM welcomes and appreciates the
comprehensive briefing of Ambassador Sandra Honoré.
We note with interest her comments on developments in
Haiti, especially as they relate to the electoral process.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/225).
CARICOM is very concerned that the current
political uncertainty in Haiti is such that the completion
of the electoral process may not take place as outlined
in the 5 February agreement. Recognizing that the
people of Haiti must be in the forefront and at the
centre of arriving at homegrown solutions, we urge
the international community to provide support in
identifying Haitian-owned consensual solutions to
the stalled process. In our view, all that can be done
must be done to ensure that the electoral process is
completed in a timely fashion and in a manner that is
transparent, free and fair, and free from fear. Elections
are important for a democracy, and therefore a condition
for the sustainable development of democratic States.
Haiti is already vulnerable to humanitarian crises
compounded by drought, insufficient water, health and
sanitation infrastructure and the presence of cholera,
to name a few. Thereofre, the country cannot afford
political instability. In that regard, CARICOM is
pleased that, during recently concluded thirty-fourth
session of the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization Regional Conference for Latin America
and the Caribbean, held in Mexico City, the CARICOM
Ministers of Agriculture made a commitment to work
together in addressing the issue of chronic hunger,
poverty, food and nutrition security of the people of
Haiti. In addition, CARICOM continues to express
its gratitude to all States that have made financial
contributions to the fund administered by the United
Nations Development Programme to aid the electoral
process in Haiti, including the contribution of the

S/PV.7651

Government of Trinidad and Tobago of $1 million to
the project.
MINUSTAH,
under
the
leadership
of
Ambassador Honoré, must be commended for its
continued stewardship in Haiti, where it has assisted
the Haitian authorities not only with matters relating to
the conduct of elections, but also the strengthening of
the rule of law, the promotion of justice and the training
of the Haitian National Police in order to ensure that
it would be in a position to assume total control of
policing activities in that State in the very near future.
As we continue to commend the Haitian authorities
and MINUSTAH for their efforts at stabilizing
Haiti during this transformative period, we are also
mindful that the members of the Council need to act
with prudence in doing all that it can to ensure that
the electoral process is completed as stipulated in the
agreement of 5 February. Any further erosion of that
process will curtail progress and cause a reversal of the
gains that Haiti has made thus far.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré
to respond to the comments and questions.
Ms. Honoré: I would like to thank you, Sir, the
members of the Security Council, all Member States
and multilateral and regional organizations and
the Group of Friends for their observations and for
their continued support for the democratization and
stabilization process in Haiti. I also thank them for the
guidance they have provided for the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I
have been particularly attentive to their expressions of
concern about the interruption in the electoral process
and to their recommendations on next steps. But even
more, I have been attentive to their remarks to all the
Haitian actors, on whose shoulders rests the primary
responsibility to move forward resolutely to overcome
the current impasse. On behalf of the men and women of
MINUSTAH — military, police, civilian, international
and national — as well as United Nations Volunteers,
I thank them all for their appreciation of our service.
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

16-0761629/29
