General Assembly-Fifth Session
to the General Assembly of the United Nations concerning the discharge of his functions. The Commissioner may consult with the Interim Committee of the
General Assembly with respect to the discharge of his
functions in the light of developments and within the
terms of the present resolution. \t\ihen the transfer of
authority has been completed, he shall so report to the
General Assembly and submit to it the text of the Eritrean Constitution;
B. Authorizes the Secretarv-Ceneral, in accordance
with established practice:
1. To arrange for the payment of an appropriate remuneration to the United Nations Commissioner;
2. To provide the United Nations Commissioner with
such experts, staff and facilities as the Secretary-General
may consider necessary to carry out the terms of the
present resolution.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly, to assist it in making the
appointment of the United Nations Commissioner in
Eritrea,
Decides that a Committee composed of the President
of the General Assembly, two of the Vice-Presidents
(Australia and Venezuela), the Chairman of the Fourth
Committee and the Chairman of the /}d Hoe Political
Committee shall nominate a candidate or, if no agreement can be reached, two or three candidates, for the
post of United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea.
316th plenary nieetinq.
2 December 1950.

*

*

*

The Committee established by the General Assembly
under !he above rc.w/uiiun to J101:1inute a rnndidate or
candidates for the office of United Nations Commissioner
in Eritrea agrcrd to nominate tlzr following candidates:
Mr. Victor Hoo ( Assistant Secretary-General);
Justice Aung Khine (Burma);
Mr. Eduardo Anze Matienzo (Bolivia).
The General Assembly, at its 325th plenary meeting on
14 December 1950, elected by secret ballot Mr. Eduardo
Anze Matienzo to the of!ice of United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea.

391 (V). The appropriate adjustment of the
frontiers between Egypt and the former
Italian colony of Libya, with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Annex XI of
the Treaty of Peace with Italy
The General Assembly,
. Decides to defer to its sixth session consideration of
item 59 of the agenda of its fifth session entitled "The
appropriate adjust~ent of the frontiers between Egypt
and the former Italian colony of Libya, with particular
reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Annex XI of the
Treaty of Peace with Italy".
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.

392 (V). Procedure to be adopted to delimit the
houndaries of the former Italian colonies in
so far as they are not already fixed by international agreement
The General Assembly,
l II accordance with its resolution 289 C (IV) adopted
on 21 November 1949, in which the General Assembly
callell upon the Interim Committee "to study the procedure to be adopted to delimit the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies in so far as they are not already
fixed by international agreement, and report with conclusions to the fifth regular session of the General Assembly",
Having ta!?en note of the memorandum,° prepared at
the Interim Committee's request by the Secretariat,
giving information relating to the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies not already fixed by international agreement, and having taken into consideration
the views of the interested governments,
1. Recommends:
(a) With respect to Libya,
That the portion of its boundary with French territory not already delimited by international agreement
he delimited, upon Libya's achieyement of independence, by negotiation between the Libyan and French
Governments, assisted on the request of either party
hy a third person to be select<:'d by them or, failing
their agreement, to be appointed by the SecretaryCenl'ral;
( !, ) With respect to the Trust Territory of Somali/and,
That the portion of its boundaries with British
Somaliland, as well as with Ethiopia, not already delimitvd lJv international agreement be delimited by
bilateral 11egotiations between the United Kingdom
Covernrnrnt ancl the Administering Authority, in respect of the boundaries with British Somaliland, and
between the Ethiopian Government and the Administering Authority in respect of the boundaries with
Ethiopia;
In orclcr to resolve any anrl all differences arising in
the coursc> of such negotiations, the respective parties
to each bilateral negotiation agree, on the request of
either party, to a procedure of mediation by a United
Nat ions Mediator to be appointed by the SecretaryCe11eral and, further, in the event of the inability of the
parties to accept the recommendations of the Mediator,
to a procedure of arbitration;
2. Recommends, further, that, with respect to any
other boundaries not delimited by international agreement, the parties concerned seek to reach agreement by
negotiation or b_v arbitration.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
393 (V). Assistance to Palestine refugees
The Cen!'ral Assembly.
F::ccal!inq its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949,
f-!ai,ing examined the report'° of the United Nations
Relief ar;d W arks Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
9 See doct1rnents A/AC.18/103, NAC.18/103/Corr. 1 and
Al AC.18/103/Corr. 2.
1o See documents A/1451 and A/1451/Corr.1.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee

Near East, and the report 11 of the Secretary-General
concerning United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees,
I. N ates that contributions sufficient to carry out the
programme authorized in paragraph 6 of resolution 302
(IV) have not been made, and urges governments which
have not yet done so to make cycry effort to mzikc voluntary contributions in response to paragraph 13 of that
resolution ;
2. Recognizes that direct relief cannot he terminated
as provided in paragraph 6 of resolution 302 (IV) ;
3. Authorizes the Agency to continue to furnish direct
relief to refugees in need, am! considers that, for the
period 1 July 1951 to 30 June 1952, the equivalent of
approximately $20,000,000 will be required for direct
relief to refugees who are not yet reintegrated into the
economy of the I'\ car East;
4. Considers that, without prejudice to the provisions
of paragraph 11 of Ger1eral Assembly resolution 194
(Ill) of 11 December 1948, the reintegration of the
refugees into the economic life of the Near East, either
by repatriation or resettlement, is essential in preparation for the time when international assistance is no
longer available, and for the realization of conditions of
peace and stability in the area;
5. Instrucls the Agency to establish a reintegration
fund which shall be utilized for projects requested by any
government in the Near East and approved by the
Agency for the permanent re-establishment of refugees
and their removal fron, relief ;
·
6. Considers that, for the period I July 1951 to
30 June 1952, not less than the equivalent of $30,000,000
should be contributed to the Agency for the purposes
set forth in paragraph 5 above;
7. Authorizes the Agency, as circumstances permit,
to transfer funds available for the current relief and
w:orks programmes, and for the relief programme provided m paragraph 3 above, to reintegration projects
provided for in paragraph 5 ;
8. (a) Requests the President of the General Assembly to appoint a Negotiating Committee composed of
seven or mor_e memb~rs for the purpose of consulting, as
soon as possible dnrmg the current session of the General Assembly, with Member and non-member States
as to the amounts which governments may be willing to
contribute on a voluntary basis towards :
(i) The current programme for relief and works for
the period ending 30 June 1951, bearing in mind the need
for securing contributions from l\fernher States which
have not yet contributed ;
(ii) The programme of relief and reintegration projects as provided for in paragraphs 3 and 4 above for the
year ending 30 June 1952;
·
( b) Authorizes. the Negotiating Committee to adopt
procedures best smted to the accomplishment of its task
bearing in mind :
'
. ( i) The need for securing the maximum contribution
m cash;
. ( ii) 1:he ?esirability of ensuring that any contribution m kmd 1s of a nature which meets the requirements
of the contemplated programmes ;
(!ii) The importance of enabling the United Nations
Rehef and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
11

See document A/1452.

23

Near East to plan its programmes in ad".ance and to
carry them out with funds regularly contributed;
(iv) The degree of assistance which can continue to
he rendered by specialized agencies, non-member States
and other contributors;
( c) Rcq11csts that, as soon as the N ego!iating Committee has ascertained the extent to which Member
States are willino- to make contributions, all dekgations
lw 11otif1ecl acconlingly by the Secretary-General in order
that they may consult with their governments;
(d) Decides that, as soon as the Negotiating Committee has completed its work, the Secretary-~eneral
shall at the Committee's request arrange, during the
cmrent session of the General Assembly, an appropriate
mectina of Member and non-member States at which
Memh;rs may commit themselves to their national contrilmtions and the contributions of non-members may be
made known;
9. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, to advance funds, deemed to be
available for this purpose and not exceeding $5,000,000,
from the \Vorking Capital Fund to finance operations
p11r~11ant to the present resolution, such sum to be repaid not later than 31 December 1951;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to utilize to the fullest extent the Agency's
facilities as a point of reference and co-ordination for
teclmical assistance programmes in the countries in
which the Agency is operating;
11. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
fntcrnational Children's Emergency Fund, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultt:ral Organization, the International
Refugee Organization, the International Labour Organisation and the Food and Agriculture Organization
for the assistance which they have rendered, and urges
them to continue to furnish all possible assistance to the
Agency;
I 2. Commends the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies, and the
American Friends Servi.:e Committee for their invaluable services and whole-hearted co-operation in the distribution of relief supplies until those functions were
taken over by the Agency ;
13. Expresses its thanks to the numerous religious,
charitable and humanitarian organizations whose programmes have brought much needed supplementary
assistance to the Palestine refugees, and urges them to
continue and expand, to the extent possible, the work
which they have undertaken on behalf of the rcZugees;
14. Extends its appreciation and thanks to the Director and staff of the Agency and the members of the
Advisorv Committee for their effective and devoted
work. ·
315th plenary meeting,
2 flecember 1950.

*

*
*
In accordance ,.e~·th the terms of the above resolution,
the President of the General Assembly, at the ?I8th
ple11arv meeting on 4 Dreember 1950, announced th~t he
had appointrd a Negotiating Committee composed of the
f ol!o,oing States lv! embers: CANADA, EGYPT, FRANCE,
INDIA, UNITED KINGDO.'.\f OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND. UNITED STATES OF AMf:RICA AND URUGUAY.
