S/PV.7452

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7452nd meeting

Thursday, 28 May 2015, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Laro
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ried
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/368)

15-15464 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1515464*

S/PV.7452

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) (S/2015/368)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/368, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014).
Before giving the floor to Ms. Amos, I would like
to take this opportunity, since this will be her final
briefing to the Council as Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to thank her for her exceptional service.
The Council wishes her every success in her future
endeavours.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: As this is my last briefing to the Council,
it is many ways fitting that it is on Syria, as during my
time as Emergency Relief Coordinator it is this crisis
that has taken more of my time and attention, and those
of this Council, than any other crisis in the world. It
is the Syria crisis and its consequences that have led
me to the belief that the Council and the international
community more broadly, needs to do more to protect
civilians and ensure greater accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law.
I have been proud to serve in the United Nations as
I have a strong belief in the values of the Organization
2/6

28/05/2015

and the principles underpinning the Charter, and feel
that in today’s unpredictable and deeply troubled
world, we need the United Nations more than ever.
As I have watched the huge rise in the number of
people around the world affected by conflict and
natural disasters — an estimated 70 million in 2010,
when I started, and 114 million today — it is clear
that there needs to be a major rethink of humanitarian
response efforts — who does what, who pays for it
and greater investment in conflict prevention, disaster
preparedness, peace and State-building.
In my time in this role, I have seen the very worst
of what people are capable of and also the very best
of humanity — the countless Syrians who, despite
the gravity of their situation, have not given up hope
and refuse to buy into the rhetoric that the country’s
problems can be solved through violence. It is found in
the bonds forged between strangers who do everything
they can to help their fellow countrymen and women
survive. It is reflected in the generosity of families in
Syria and neighbouring countries sheltering, feeding
and clothing the displaced without asking anything in
return.
It is embodied in the staff and volunteers of the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), the first responders and the staff
of hospitals and clinics throughout the country who do
not let narrow political interest cloud their commitment
to doing everything they can to safeguard the wellbeing of ordinary Syrians. And it is demonstrated in the
thousands of staff of the United Nations on the ground
who carry out their duties day in and day out, despite
petty political pressure and, in some cases, violence
and intimidation from the parties to the conflict.
For more than four years, we have watched Syria
descend into deeper depths of despair, surpassing
what even the most pessimistic observers thought
possible. The situation throughout the country is by
any measure extremely grave and deteriorating by the
day. In the past weeks, we have seen more and more
heinous acts, and innocent men, women and children
killed, maimed, displaced and subjected to a savagery
that no human should have to endure. For example, at
the end of April, a market in Darkoush, in rural Idlib,
was subjected to aerial bombing that killed between
40 and 50 people and wounding over 100 civilians. The
same market was again hit last week, with reports of
20 more people being killed. Reports have emerged
of the killing of civilians by the Islamic State in Iraq

15-15464

28/05/2015

The situation in the Middle East

and the Levant (ISIL) following its capture of Palmyra
in the past week. Such blatant disregard for the most
basic rules of international humanitarian law — the
distinction between civilians and combatants — must
be condemned in the strongest terms.
In February of last year, the Council came
together to adopt resolution 2139 (2014). It was clear
in what it demanded of the parties — that they end the
violence, comply with international law, and ensure
that obligations to facilitate humanitarian access to
people in need were met. Yet, for the past 15 months,
the Secretary-General has systematically reported
on the continued non-compliance with the Council’s
demands. While the cross-border deliveries enabled
by resolutions 2165 (2014) (2014) and 2191 (2014) have
allowed the United Nations to extend its reach and
complement the enormous efforts of our NGO partners,
the parties to the conflict have ignored practically all
aspects of the resolution.
The use of chlorine continues to be reported, killing,
injuring and terrorizing civilians. Indiscriminate attacks,
although prohibited by international humanitarian
law, continue with no regard for the protection of
civilians. Schools and hospitals continue to be attacked.
Physicians for Human Rights recorded more attacks
on medical facilities in April than it had in any month
since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014). Some
422,000 people — nearly twice the number as when
resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted — are under siege.
If I had reported this at the beginning of the conflict, I
am sure that Council members would not have believed
it possible; today, we take it for granted. The United
Nations and our partners were not able to reach any
besieged locations in April.
People are trying to survive day by day without the
basic necessities of life, such as water and electricity,
and parties to the conflict continue to cut services,
collectively punishing entire villages and cities in the
process. Restrictions on the delivery of aid continue.
The Government’s introduction of new rules and
regulations, which result in delays and distractions,
are preventing us from delivering assistance, including
surgical supplies, to people in desperate need. Of the
48 inter-agency convoys requests submitted since
December, 5 have been completed, 9 have been
approved in principle by the Government of Syria and
are at various stages of preparations, and a further
11 have been put on hold due to insecurity. Nineteen
more are awaiting a reply.

S/PV.7452

ISIL’s advance brings with it new depths of depravity
to Syria, with indiscriminate killing and maiming,
raping and destroying. It has forcibly recruited children
and made the delivery of humanitarian assistance more
and more difficult in areas under its control. In addition
to the restriction of operations to deliver food and
other supplies, aid workers have been prevented from
vaccinating children in areas of the country under their
control.
Today, more than 12.2 million people are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance in Syria — an increase
of almost one third compared to when resolution
2139 (2014) was adopted. Many of those who were
previously able to care for themselves are now in need
of help. Fewer than half of the country’s hospitals are
fully functioning. Two million children in Syria are
out of school. The social, economic and human costs
of this tragedy are profound. It may take generations
for Syria to recover. An additional 540,000 people have
been displaced this year alone, adding to the 7.6 million
already displaced. Another nearly 4 million people have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries, placing host
countries and communities under unbearable pressure.
I thank Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey for their significant
efforts in this regard. Desperation means that more and
more people are prepared to make the perilous journey
to Europe by sea.
The Security Council can demonstrate its leadership
and uphold its responsibility for international peace and
security by taking the following measures.
First, it should ensure the protection of civilians.
Secondly, it should ensure that the parties to the conflict
abide by their international legal obligations and
Security Council resolutions to facilitate humanitarian
access to all people in need throughout the country,
without discrimination. Thirdly, it should bring an
end to the sieges, which collectively punish people.
Fourthly, it should consider all possible avenues to
ensure accountability, thereby sending a clear message
to those responsible for violations of international
law, as well as their victims, that the international
community will not tolerate such action in Syria or
elsewhere. Fifthly, it should step up financial support
for the humanitarian response effort; and, sixthly, it
should respect the non-political nature of humanitarian
aid and give aid workers the space they need to carry
out their work free of political pressure.
I know that there are no easy answers or quick
fixes. But I also know that we cannot let the difficulties

15-154643/6

S/PV.7452

The situation in the Middle East

prevent us from upholding our responsibility to act on
behalf of the people of Syria. We cannot leave Syrians
abandoned to hopelessness and further despair. The
Security Council is entrusted with considerable power
and responsibility. For the sake of Syria and its future
generations, the Council must set aside its political
differences and come together to find a solution to
what appear to be intractable problems. We saw in the
adoption of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014)
what can be done when the Council acts together and
speaks with one voice. I very much hope it happens
again.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this important meeting on the humanitarian
situation in my country.
We have repeatedly stated in this Chamber and
beyond that the humanitarian crisis in Syria cannot end
if we do not deal with the root of the problem, which
is the spread of foreign-backed terrorism. That has
to accompany a Syrian-Syrian dialogue under Syrian
leadership, without foreign intervention. That is the
substance of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), Kofi Annan’s six-point plan and what we
achieved at the Geneva II talks, as well as the first
and second Moscow conferences. It is the only serious
path to ending what is called the crisis in Syria and
to improving the humanitarian situation in a tangible,
genuine and sustainable manner.
The people’s suffering cannot be completely
alleviated simply by providing some humanitarian aid
in one region or another, although we are fully aware
of the importance of providing such assistance and of
alleviating the suffering in the areas concerned. Recent
developments have proved us right, since despite
the fact that six humanitarian response plans were
adopted in cooperation with the Syrian Government,
taken all together they have still been unable to end
the humanitarian crisis. In fact, we have seen new
humanitarian crises develop in some previously safe
areas in the wake of the incursions by some terrorist
groups, such as we have seen in Palmyra, Idlib, Jisr
Al-Shughur and today in the city of Ariha, in Idlib.
That has resulted in the killing or displacement of a
large number of innocent Syrians and robbed them of
their livelihoods and dignity. It confirms once again
4/6

28/05/2015

that the humanitarian crisis, including the issues of
internal displacement and refugees, has occurred only
in areas entered by armed terrorist organizations.
It is therefore crucial that the Security Council’s
resolutions on fighting terrorism be implemented,
particularly resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and
2199 (2015), along with resolution 1624 (2005), which
prohibits incitement to terrorism, and that they be
implemented in full cooperation and coordination with
the Syrian Government. That would put an end to the
alliance between Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia that
supports, finances and arms the terrorist groups and
which is supported politically and in the media by its
paymasters and foreign sponsors.
But the problem is that some influential States
are not serious about fighting terrorism, especially
terrorism as it is practised by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) and organizations affiliated with
it. That is used by some countries to exert pressure
to prevent any coordination between Syria and Iraq
in fighting ISIS. That policy was made manifest this
morning when the General Assembly adopted resolution
69/281, on saving Iraqi artifacts. Syria was a sponsor of
that resolution. However, Western countries threatened
Iraq by saying that if Syrian artifacts were mentioned
the draft resolution would not be adopted — as if Iraqi
heritage were different from Syrian heritage, or ISIS in
Syria were different from ISIS in Iraq, and as if those
benefiting were two separate parties with no affiliation
with each other.
That general problem is also confirmed by the fact
that ISIS continues to obtain weapons and attract new
recruits to its ranks. The percentage of foreign fighters
in ISIS increased to 70 per cent after the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014). That was also the testimony of
the Security Council’s Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, established pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004). In paragraph 33 of its recent report on
foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/358), the Monitoring
Team, the Council’s own experts, confirmed that the
primary movement routes of foreign terrorists into
Syria and Iraq ran through Turkey and, to a lesser
degree, Jordan and Lebanon.
Many Council member States often affirm, both
inside and outside the Council — as do the SecretaryGeneral and the senior staff of the Secretariat — that the
only possible solution to the crisis in Syria is a political
rather than a military one. However, it is obvious that this
is simply a slogan for political and media consumption.
15-15464

28/05/2015

The situation in the Middle East

How can we speak of a political solution when, as we
heard only a few days ago, the Turkish Minister for
Foreign Affairs states that his country has an agreement
with the United States to provide air support to terrorist
groups in Syria? How can they claim to be rejecting
a military solution when they are providing support
to terrorists and opening training camps for them in
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Jordan, in the name
of a moderate Syrian armed opposition? However, the
real question we have for those States and for their
representatives in this Chamber is this: Where is that
moderate armed opposition on the map of Syria? Is it
in Palmyra, in Idlib, in Jisr Al-Shughur or Derizor? Or
maybe in Qalamoun, on our border with Lebanon? And
what is the fate of the weapons and funds supplied to
that moderate armed opposition?
It is no longer possible to continue misleading,
defrauding and hiding behind the slogan of a moderate
armed opposition in order to justify supporting
terrorism. How can Chechen, Australian, British,
French, Moroccan and Libyan citizens be part of a
moderate Syrian opposition? It is very simple. Things
have become crystal clear. There is no lawful terrorism
and sinful terrorism — no halal and haram — just as
there is no moderate and extremist terrorism. There are
terrorist movements on the ground committing atrocious
crimes with the support or acquiescence of some
influential countries within and outside the Council.
There is ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups that are allied with those two organizations and
cooperate and work with them.
Was it not ISIS that stormed Palmyra? Was it not the
Al-Nusra Front that stormed Idlib and Jisr Al-Shughur
recently, and the town of Ariha today, using the name
Jaish Al-Fatah? Of course, before it was the Jaish
Al-Fatah it was known as the Al-Shamiya Front. And
before that, it was known as the Syrian Front, the Syrian
Revolutionaries, the Hazam Movement, and so on as in
a Hollywood series in which we see one episode after
another.
Did not the Qatari Al-Jazeera television channel
yesterday invite Al-Julani, the commander of the
terrorist Al-Nusra Front, so that he could inform us that
there is now sharia law in Syria, and so that Qatar, in
turn, could inform us in that interview that the terrorist
Al-Nusra Front is a form of moderate terrorism that
can be “laundered” just as mafia gangs launder dirty
money? And after all that, there are still people who
speak of a moderate armed opposition. Tomorrow we

S/PV.7452

shall observe some people saying that the Security
Council must remove the Al-Nusra Front from the lists
of terrorist entities. I wager before all of you that this
will happen soon.
Once again, the latest report (S/2015/368) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) contains
many omissions and serious errors. Today we sent two
identical letters to the President of the Security Council
and to the Secretary-General in that regard. However,
I shall only mention here that all the allegations
contained in the report against the Syrian Government
are based on undisclosed sources. The report uses the
term “reportedly” 15 times when allegations were made
against the Syrian Government, but no information is
provided regarding the source of those reports or their
credibility.
Even worse, the report goes further than that and
makes allegations against the Syrian Government,
including that it uses so-called barrel bombs, without
even once using the term “reportedly”, as if that matter
was a proven fact. That is exactly what happened with
regard to crimes in which terrorists, aided by Turkey,
used chemical substances in Khan Al-Assel and other
localities, and when chlorine gas and sarin gas were
used in other areas. How can reports by the SecretaryGeneral make allegations against the Government of
a State Member of the United Nations without basing
them on reliable sources and without reading, taking
note of or referring to the reports, letters, evidence and
statements submitted by the Syrian Government during
the past four years? This is a very serious precedent
that will undermine what remains of the credibility of
the Secretariat in its handling of humanitarian issues
in Syria, unless it takes the credible and rapid action
required to avoid such a situation.
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that
the report fails to mention that the Turkish Government
has allowed thousands of trucks to enter Syria illegally
through checkpoints used by United Nations convoys
bringing in humanitarian aid, and has used them to
transport terrorists, weapons and dangerous materials
to armed terrorist groups in Syria. That has endangered
the United Nations convoys themselves — as we
warned Ms. Amos when she asked the Security Council
to adopt resolutions 2165 (2014).
Furthermore, the unilateral economic measures
imposed on the Syrian people are yet another cause of
their humanitarian suffering. Those unjust and illegal

15-154645/6

S/PV.7452

The situation in the Middle East

measures must therefore be lifted and the funding
gap for humanitarian activities in Syria addressed.
Only 17 per cent of the funding required for the 2015
Strategic Response Plan has been raised. This proves,
once again, that certain countries, including, first and
foremost, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and certain
Western countries, only want to use the humanitarian
crisis in Syria as a way to traffic commodities, as a
means of political extortion and to further their own
interventionist agendas.
The Syrian Government has cooperated with the
United Nations to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
assistance to all civilians. On 9 April, it agreed to most
of the requests made by the United Nations and other
international organizations to ensure the provision of
aid to certain unstable areas. As of 27 May, that is to
say as of yesterday, even though the Syrian Government
has granted permission for joint United Nations agency
convoys to transport humanitarian assistance to
difficult-to-reach or unstable areas, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has been able to

6/6

28/05/2015

provide only 30 per cent of what has been authorized.
The Syrian Government is, moreover, now considering
requests for permission to be granted for more joint
convoys.
Let me say onne final word. I hope this was a
problem of interpretation, but while she was addressing
the Council, I heard the Under-Secretary-General say
“on behalf of the Syrian people”. This is what the
interpreter said. On behalf of my Government, I cannot
allow the Under-Secretary-General to address the
Council saying that she is speaking on behalf of the
Syrian people. She is a representative of the Secretariat
and this international Organization. This oversteps
her mandate and the functions of Secretariat staff
members. She is not Syrian and she has no post in Syria
that allows her to speak on behalf of the Syrian people.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussions on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

15-15464
