A/RES/75/326

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 September 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 10 September 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.135)]

75/326.

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 75/280 of 24 May 2021 in its entirety, including its
decision to convene the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy
planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility, our opportunity”, in Stockholm,
on 2 and 3 June 2022, during the week of World Environment Day, to commemorate
the 50 years since the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment and its
outcome documents, as a contribution to the environmental dimension of sustainable
development to accelerate the implementation of commitments in the context of the
decade of action and delivery for sustainable development, including a sustainable
recovery from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
1.
Welcomes the generous offer of the Government of Sweden to host and
assume the costs of the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy
planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility, our opportunity”, with the support
of the Government of Kenya;
2.
Decides that the international meeting should be mutually reinforcing with
the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the creation of the United Nations
Environment Programme, UNEP@50, avoiding overlap and duplication;
3.
Also decides that the international meeting and its preparation shall
provide for the effective participation of all States Members of the United Nations,

21-12808 (E)

200921

*2112808*

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

A/RES/75/326

members of the United Nations specialized agencies and parties to t he multilateral
environment agreements; 1
4.
Encourages participation in the international meeting at the highest
possible level;
5.
Decides that the international meeting shall elect from among the
representatives of participating States the following officers: two Presidents, one from
Sweden and one from Kenya, and eight Vice-Presidents, 2 one of whom shall be
designated as Rapporteur-General;
6.
Also decides that the international meeting shall comprise an opening
segment, four plenary meetings and three leadership dialogues, and a closing
segment, to be held on 2 and 3 June 2022;
7.
Further decides that the opening segment of the international meeting
shall include a commemorative moment dedicated to the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972;
8.

Decides that the plenary meetings will be held as follows:

Thursday, 2 June: from 9.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 3 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 7 p.m.;
9.
Also decides that the leadership dialogues will be held in parallel with the
plenary meetings, as follows:
Thursday, 2 June: from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 3 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.;
10. Further decides that the leadership dialogues shall be collaborative and
multi-stakeholder in nature and will focus on recommendations that contribute to the
environmental dimension of sustainable development to accelerate the
implementation of commitments in the context of the decade of action and delivery
for sustainable development, including a sustainable recovery from the COVID -19
pandemic, including through strengthened cooperation, taking into account the theme
of the international meeting;
11. Decides that the organizational arrangements for the leadership dialogues
will be as follows:

__________________

For the purposes of the international meeting, the multilateral environment agreements shall be
understood as referring to the following treaties: Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal; Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity; Convention on Biological Diversity;
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora; Convention
on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals; Kyoto Protocol; Minamata
Convention on Mercury; Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; Paris
Agreement; Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade; Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants; United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa; United N ations
Framework Convention on Climate Change; and Vienna Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer.
2
Two from each of the following groups: African States; Asia-Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and We stern European and other States. The
election of the Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number of Vice Presidents allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
1

2/8

21-12808

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

(a)

A/RES/75/326

The leadership dialogues will address the following themes:

Leadership dialogue 1: Reflecting on the urgent need for actions to achieve a
healthy planet and prosperity of all;
Leadership dialogue 2: Achieving a sustainable and inclusive recovery from the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic;
Leadership dialogue 3: Accelerating the implementation of the environmental
dimension of sustainable development in the context of the decade of action and
delivery for sustainable development;
(b) Each leadership dialogue will be presided over by two Co -Chairs, one
from a developing country and one from a developed country, to be appointed by the
two Presidents of the international meeting;
12. Invites participants to share experiences and initiatives to protect our
planet and contribute to sustainable development, including a sustainable, resilient
and inclusive recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic;
13. Invites all relevant stakeholders, including women, youth, older persons,
persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, to contr ibute to
the discussions of the international meeting and their preparation and to build
momentum for a healthy planet for the prosperity of all;
14. Invites the Secretary-General to appoint the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme as the Secretary-General of the international
meeting;
15. Requests the Secretary-General of the international meeting to prepare by
the end of March 2022 a concept note and draft background papers for each of the
leadership dialogues for the international meeting before its preparatory meeting;
16. Requests the President of the General Assembly to convene a one-day
preparatory meeting no later than April 2022, at United Nations Headquarters in New
York, to be chaired by the co-hosts of the international meeting, with interpretation
services on an as-available basis, with a view to considering the preparations for the
leadership dialogues and other preparations for the international meeting;
17. Recommends the provisional agenda set forth in annex I to the present
resolution for adoption by the international meeting;
18. Decides that the international meeting shall be organized in accordance
with the organization of work set forth in annex II to the present resolution;
19. Also decides that the rules relating to the procedure and the established
practice of the General Assembly apply, mutatis mutandis, to the procedure of the
international meeting;
20. Requests the two Presidents of the international meeting to prepare a
summary of the discussions, with the support of the Secretary-General of the
international meeting, to be presented to the international meeting;
21. Requests the President of the General Assembly, with support from the
United Nations Environment Programme, to finalize the organizational arrangements
for the international meeting no later than April 2022;
22. Decides to invite to the international meeting and its preparatory meeting
representatives of organizations and other entities that have received a standing
invitation from the General Assembly pursuant to its relevant resolutions to
participate, in the capacity of observer, in its sessions and work, on the understanding

21-12808

3/8

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

A/RES/75/326

that such representatives would participate in the international meeting in that
capacity;
23. Invites non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council with relevant expertise to register with the Secretariat
to participate in the international meeting and its preparatory meeting;
24. Invites other relevant stakeholders, including organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations, international financial
institutions, other interested international bodies and non -governmental
organizations, including those that have an interest in the field of the environment,
civil society organizations, indigenous peoples’ organizations, academic institutions,
the scientific community, the private sector and philanthropic organizations, to seek
accreditation in accordance with the provisions set forth in annex II to the present
resolution, to participate as observers in the international meeting and its preparatory
meeting;
25. Decides that accreditation to the international meeting shall be in
accordance with the provisions set forth in annex II to the present resolution;
26. Encourages States and international donors, as well as the private sector,
financial institutions, foundations and other donors in a position to do so, to support
the preparations for the international meeting through voluntary contributions to a
trust fund in support of preparations for the international meeting and to support the
participation of representatives of developing countries in the international meeting.
103rd plenary meeting
10 September 2021

Annex I
Provisional agenda of the international meeting entitled
“Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the prosperity
of all – our responsibility, our opportunity”
Stockholm, 2 and 3 June 2022

4/8

1.

Opening of the international meeting.

2.

Election of the two Presidents.

3.

Adoption of the agenda of the international meeting.

4.

Election of officers other than the Presidents.

5.

Organization of work.

6.

Credentials of representatives to the international meeting:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

7.

General debate.

8.

Leadership dialogues.

9.

Outcome of the international meeting.

10.

Adoption of the report of the international meeting.

11.

Closure of the international meeting.

21-12808

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

A/RES/75/326

Annex II
Proposed organization of work of the international meeting
entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the prosperity
of all – our responsibility, our opportunity”
Stockholm, 2 and 3 June 2022
1.
The international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the
prosperity of all – our responsibility, our opportunity” will be held in Stockholm, on
2 and 3 June 2022.

I.

Organization of work

A.

Plenary meetings
2.
The international meeting will consist of a total of four plenary meetings, to be
held as follows:
Thursday, 2 June: from 9.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 3 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 7 p.m.
3.

The plenary meetings will be devoted to statements.

4.
The list of speakers for the plenary meetings will be established on a first -come
first-served basis, with the customary protocol that ensures that Heads of State or
Government speak first, followed by other heads of delegation. The European Union
will be included in the list of speakers. Detailed arrangements will be communicated
in a timely manner through a note by the Secretariat. The time limit for the statements
will be three minutes for individual delegations and five minutes for statements made
on behalf of a group of States.
5.
At the opening segment of the international meeting, to take place during the
first plenary meeting, to be held on the morning of Thursday, 2 June, consideration
will be given to all procedural and organizational matters, including the adoption of
the agenda, the election of the two Presidents of the international meeting, the election
of officers, as appropriate, the appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee, arrangements for the preparation of the report of the international meeting
and other matters. The opening segment shall include a commemorative moment
dedicated to the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in
Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972. At the first plenary meeting, on the morning of
Thursday, 2 June, statements will be made by the Presidents of the international
meeting, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President of the General
Assembly, the President of the Economic and Social Council and the SecretaryGeneral of the international meeting.
6.
The plenary meetings will also hear statements from representatives of other
intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, international
bodies, the United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes, as well as
major groups and other stakeholders in accordance with the practices of the General
Assembly.
7.
At the final plenary meeting, to be held on Friday, 3 June, the summary of
discussions will be presented by the Presidents of the international meeting.
8.
The plenary meetings will run in parallel with the leadership dialogues, unless
otherwise specified in the present resolution.

21-12808

5/8

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

A/RES/75/326

B.

Leadership dialogues
9.
The international meeting will include three leadership dialogues, to be held in
parallel with the plenary meetings, as follows:
Thursday, 2 June: from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 3 June: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
10. Summaries of the leadership dialogues should be presented to the international
meeting at its closing plenary meeting and be included in the final report of the
international meeting.

II.

Credentials of representatives to the international meeting:
appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
11. The Credentials Committee will be appointed in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. Its composition shall be based on that of the
Credentials Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session.

III.

Accreditation: institutional stakeholders
12. Relevant intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions
and international bodies that were accredited to the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the United Nations summit
for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, the high-level United Nations
Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Devel opment Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development, the intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond
national jurisdiction, the 2020 preparatory meeting for the United Nations Conference
to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
and to previous United Nations conferences on the sustainable development of small
island developing States, held in Barbados, Mauritius and Samoa, as well as those
invited to participate in the sessions of the United Nations Environment Assembly,
may participate in the deliberations of the international meeting and its preparatory
meeting, as appropriate.
13. Interested intergovernmental organizations that were not accredited to the
conferences and summits listed in paragraph 12 above may apply to the General
Assembly for accreditation following the established accreditation procedure.

IV.

Accreditation: non-governmental organizations and
other stakeholders
14. The non-governmental organizations and major groups as identified in
Agenda 21, 3 in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, those that
were accredited to the conferences and summits listed in paragraph 12 above, as well

__________________
3

6/8

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8
and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
21-12808

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

A/RES/75/326

as non-governmental organizations that have an interest in the field of the
environment and were invited to the previous sessions of the United Nations
Environment Assembly, shall register in order to participate.
15. The President of the General Assembly shall also draw up a list of other relevant
non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions,
the scientific community, the private sector and philanthropic organizations, which
may participate in the international meeting and the preparatory meeting, taking into
account the principles of transparency and of equitable geographical representation,
with due regard for gender parity, and shall submit the proposed list to Member
States – for their consideration on a non-objection basis and to bring the list 4 to the
attention of the General Assembly before the preparatory meeting and, in any case,
no later than February 2022, for a final decision by the Assembly on participation in
the international meeting and the preparatory meeting.
16. The provisions of paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 67/290 of 9 July
2013 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the international meeting and its preparatory
process.

V.

Secretariat
17. The Secretary-General of the international meeting will serve as the focal point
within the Secretariat for providing support to the organization of the international
meeting, in cooperation with the representatives of the Presidents and Vice Presidents.

VI.

Documentation
18. The official documentation of the international meeting will include documents
issued before, during and after the international meeting.
19. It is recommended that the international meeting adopt a report consisting of the
procedural decisions of the international meeting, a brief account of the proceedings
and a reportorial account of the work of the international meeting and the action taken
at the plenary meetings.
20. The summary of the plenary meetings and the leadership dialogues should also
be included in the report of the international meeting.

VII.

Organization of parallel meetings and other events of the
international meeting
21. Parallel meetings and other events, including those of major groups and other
stakeholders, may be held during the same hours as the plenary meetings and
leadership dialogues, space permitting. Interpretation services will be provided for
such meetings, as available.

__________________
4

21-12808

The list will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if
requested by one or more States Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized
agencies, will be made known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly and the
requester.
7/8

Modalities for the international meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all – our responsibility,
our opportunity”

A/RES/75/326

VIII.

Side events
22. Side events, including briefings, seminars, workshops and panel discussi ons on
issues related to the theme of the international meeting, will be organized by
participants in the international meeting. Guidelines for organizing such events and
the calendar of those events will be made available on the website of the internation al
meeting.

IX.

Media coverage
23. Press materials will be prepared by the Department of Global Communications
of the Secretariat for journalists covering the international meeting. In addition,
regular press releases will be issued on the results of plenary meetings, leadership
dialogues and other events. All relevant documentation will be made available on the
website of the international meeting.
24. The plenary meetings, the leadership dialogues and the press conferences will
be broadcast live to the media area. A programme of special media briefings and press
conferences will be announced.

8/8

21-12808
