UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/7
10 February 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3500th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 February 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"1. The Security Council has considered the second report of the
Secretary-General dated 25 January 1995 on the security in the Rwandese
refugee camps (S/1995/65), particularly those located in Zaire and his
letter dated 1 February 1995 (S/1995/127) on this subject.
"2. The Security Council agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the present situation in many of the refugee camps remains
dangerous for both refugees and relief workers and that the situation is
also potentially destabilizing for the subregion as a whole. It is gravely
concerned at reports of continuing intimidation and security problems in
the camps, particularly in Zaire and reaffirms its condemnation of actions
of former Rwandese leaders living in the camps, and of former government
forces and militias to prevent, in some cases by force, the repatriation of
the refugees. It also remains concerned at the security threat to
international relief workers. It welcomes the steps taken by some of the
host countries concerned to improve the security situation in the camps.
The Council remains concerned at the obstacles posed by the former civil
and military authorities and militias to effective local administration by
the host countries and the discharge by UNHCR of its mission.
"3. The Security Council attaches great importance to the earliest
possible action to address the security problems in the camps. In this
context it welcomes the decision that UNHCR, under its refugee protection
and humanitarian assistance mandate, conclude appropriate arrangements with
the Government of Zaire to enhance security in the camps. It welcomes the
agreement between UNHCR and the Government of Zaire of 27 January 1995 to
deploy 1,500 Zairian security forces and a UNHCR liaison group. It also
welcomes the agreement reached between the Governments of Zaire and Rwanda
on the return of refugees and property and urges its full implementation.
The Security Council urges Member States to provide UNHCR with the
resources needed in the context of the agreement concluded between it and

95-04056 (E)

100295

/...

S/PRST/1995/7
English
Page 2

the Government of Zaire. It stresses the importance of close coordination
of all operations with UNAMIR. The Council endorses the efforts of UNHCR,
in cooperation with the United Republic of Tanzania, to put in place
security arrangements in the Tanzanian camps, and encourages UNHCR also to
address the situation in Burundi. The Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to it on a regular basis on the implementation of
operations carried out by UNHCR.
"4. The Security Council stresses the importance of ensuring that
accurate information about the situation inside Rwanda is disseminated to
the camps. In this respect, it reaffirms the importance of UNAMIR Radio
commencing its broadcasts as soon as possible.
"5. The Security Council encourages efforts to provide security in
the camps and notes that they have to be accompanied by further efforts in
Rwanda to ensure that refugees can return to their homes without fear of
retribution or persecution. In this regard it acknowledges the
achievements of the Government of Rwanda, despite the difficulty of the
task and the lack of resources. It encourages the Government of Rwanda to
continue to provide a framework for the action to be taken to repatriate
the refugees, to promote national reconciliation, and to reinvigorate the
political process and calls upon the international community to continue to
support the Government of Rwanda in its task. The Council reaffirms its
view that such a framework should also include an appropriate mechanism for
sustaining a dialogue between the Government of Rwanda, the refugee
community and the United Nations. It welcomes the conclusions of the
summit meeting of leaders in the subregion, held in Nairobi on
7 January 1995. The Council encourages the International Tribunal for
Rwanda established in resolution 955 (1994) in its work, as well as efforts
to rebuild the local Rwandese judicial system to facilitate the maintenance
of law and order. The Council welcomes the commitments made at the recent
Round-table Conference on Rwanda and in response to the consolidated
inter-agency appeal that will assist the Government of Rwanda in its
efforts to rebuild the country and to promote national reconciliation.
"6. The Security Council looks forward to the regional conference on
assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in the Great Lakes
region, to be hosted by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and UNHCR
in Bujumbura from 15 to 17 February 1995. The Council expresses the hope
that this conference will lead to further progress in creating the
conditions necessary for the refugees and displaced persons to return to
their homes and that it will facilitate the identification of long-term
solutions to promote and ensure peace, security and development in the
subregion, those issues to be the subject-matter of a further and broader
conference of a political nature.
"7. The Security Council underlines that the presence of the refugee
camps should only be temporary and that the return of the refugees to their
homes in Rwanda remains the ultimate goal. It requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue his exploration of all options and to make any further
recommendations necessary for ensuring security in the camps as soon as

/...

S/PRST/1995/7
English
Page 3

possible and to submit a further report on this subject in the light of the
outcome of the conference in Bujumbura.
"8. The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and will
keep it under close review."

-----
