S/PRST/2010/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6452nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 December 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Sudanese parties’ reaffirmations of
their commitment to full and timely implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), and reaffirms its strong support for the parties’
efforts in this regard. The Security Council welcomes the conclusion of a
peaceful registration process for the Southern Sudan referendum in Sudan, and
encourages the parties to continue this forward momentum towards peaceful
and credible referenda held on January 9, 2011 that reflect the will of the
people. The Council strongly urges the CPA parties to promptly fulfil their
remaining commitments to finance the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and Southern Sudan Referendum Bureau.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the UN Secretary
General’s Panel for the Referenda led by President Benjamin Mkapa, and
welcomes its work, including its December 9, 2010 statement noting that the
registration process provides the basis for a credible referendum. The Council
extends its appreciation for the efforts of international and domestic observers.
“The Security Council notes with deep concern the absence of an
agreement on Abyei. The Security Council strongly urges the parties to calm
rising tensions in Abyei, to urgently reach agreement on Abyei and other
outstanding CPA issues, and to resolve critical post-referenda issues including
the border, security, citizenship, debts, assets, currency and natural resources.
The Council welcomes the work of the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel, led by former South African President Thabo Mbeki,
and its continuing efforts in this regard.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for all parties to cooperate fully
with UNMIS in the discharge of its mandate, specifically with respect to
protection of civilians and to granting unhindered access and freedom of
movement.
“The Security Council reiterates the urgent need for the parties to provide
immediate and ongoing reassurance to people of all nationalities in Sudan, so
that their rights, safety and property will be respected whatever the outcome of

10-69786 (E) 171210

*1069786*

S/PRST/2010/28

the referenda, and the urgent need to focus on the security and protection of
minorities including Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South,
The Security Council urges the parties to ensure that citizenship and residency
arrangements are in accordance with applicable international obligations and
refrain from arbitrarily depriving an individual of citizenship. The Council
urges the CPA parties to respect their obligations.
“The Council stresses the importance of inclusive, timely, and credible
popular consultations processes in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan States, in
accordance with the CPA. The Council also stresses the need for Southern
Kordofan state-level elections to be held in accordance with the timeline
established by the National Elections Commission.
“The Security Council underlines that, whatever the outcome of the
referenda, continued cooperation between the CPA parties will remain
essential. The Council stresses the importance of the parties abiding by the
commitments recorded in the AU High Level Implementation Panel statement
of November 15, including to find peaceful solutions to all outstanding matters,
to never to resort to war again, and that neither party should take any action, or
support any group, that would undermine the security of the other.. The
Council is deeply concerned about the recent military incidents in the Kiir
River Valley and the subsequent displacement of civilians, and urges all parties
to exercise restraint, avoiding escalation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the AU-UN led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the Government of Qatar. The Council strongly
urges all rebel movements to join the peace process without further delay or
preconditions. The Council reiterates the importance of increased participation
of women in the Sudanese peace processes. The Security Council reiterates its
deep concern about the increases in violence and insecurity in Darfur,
including recently in Khor Abeche, such as ceasefire violations, attacks by
rebel groups, increased inter-tribal fighting, attacks on humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers, and aerial bombardment by the Government of Sudan. The
Council recalls the importance it attaches to an end to impunity, and to justice
for crimes committed in Darfur. The Council reiterates its willingness to
consider measures against any party whose actions undermine peace in
Sudan.”

2

10-69786
