Resolutions adopted on the reportl of the Third Committee

mendations for action by Governments, the . Un_ited
Nations sys,tem and non-governmental organizations
and which would explain the relevance of the implementation of the Plan to the daily lives of men and
women throughout the world;
20. Decides to convene in 19 80, at the mid-term of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, a world conference of _all _States
to review and evaluate the progress made m implementing the objectives of the International Women's
Year as recommended by the World Conference of the
International Women's Year and, where necessary, to
readjust existing programmes in the light of new data
and research available.
.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
1

3521 (XXX). Equality between men and women
and elimination of discrimination against
women

The General Assembly,
Welcoming the results of the World Conference of
the International Women's Year, 64 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations which, inter alia, emphasize the importance of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion and for the equality of men and women,
Firmly convinced that discrimination against women
is incompatible with human dignity and prevents social
progress and the achievement of the goals of development,
Mindful that the continuation of armed conflicts,
the arms race, colonialism, foreign occupation, racism,
racial discrimination and apartheid hinders the effective
realization of equal rights for women and prevents the
improvement of the situation of women and their wider
participation in all spheres of life,
Noting conventions and recommendations concerning the rights of women adopted under the aegis and
within the framework of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and the progress achieved in their
implementation,
Noting that all States are not yet parties to relevant
conventions and other instruments elaborated by the
United Nations, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other United Nations hex.lies,
Expressing concern' in connexion with continuing
discrimination in many countries against women in
many fields, in particular in labour relations and general and professional education and training,
Aware that women, enjoying fully the rights provided for in the relevant international instruments,
should play an equal role with men in all spheres of
life, including the ensuring of peace and the strengthening of international security, and should fully participate in political life,
Confident that the relaxation of international tension
contributes to the development and implementation of
standards in all fields of concern to. women,
84 See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year
E.76.IV.1).

(United Nations publication, Sales No.

97

I. Calls upon all States that have not done so to
ratify the international conventions and other instruments concerning the protection of women's rights and
the elimination of discrimination against women and
to implement effectively the provisions of these conventions and other instruments, including declarations
of •the United Nations and recommendations of the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to complete, in 1976, the elaboration of the draft Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination again&t
Women;
3. Calls upon all States to promote vigorously
wider participation of women in the strengthening of
international peace and in extending the relaxation of
international tension, on the basis of full respect for
the Charter of the United Nations as well as for United
Nations resolutions, in settling the problems of disarmament, in the elimination of colonialism, foreign occupation, racism, racial discrimination and apartheid and
in all other forms of political life, contributing in this
way to the creation of the most favourable conditions
for the complete elimination of discrimination against
women.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3522 (XXX). Improvement of the economic
status of women for their effective and
speedy participation in the development of
their countries

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that many women in low-income countries are engaged in various economic activities on a
self-reliant basis not normally taken into account when
considering the gross national product,
Convinced that the contribution of such economic
activi-ties by women to the over-all national economic
develo~nt is substantial,
Further convinced that credit facilities are a necessary prerequisite for the improvement of economic
activities of women engaged in self-reliance projects,
Recognizing the continued benefits that can accrue
from access to even moderate financial resources, when
such become available,
Concerned that· many lending and financial institutions continue to practise discrimination against women,
considering them poor credit risks, and that local and
national practices and customs in Dlany parts of the
world bar women from engaging in ~ponsible financial transactions,
Reaffirming resolution 10, entitled "Access of women
to financial assistance", 6~ adopted by the World Conference of the International Women's Year, held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
1. Urges Governments and governmental and nongovernmental organizations to support more vigorously
official and private efforts to extend to women the facilities now being offered only to men by financial and
lending institutions;
2. Requests Governments to encourage all efforts
by women's organizations, co-operativ~ and lending
611 Ibid., chap. ill.

General Auemblr-Thirtieth Senion

98

institutions which will enable women at the lowest level
in rural and urban areas to obtain credit and loans to
improve their economic activities and integration in
national development;
3. Urges Governments and the organizations of the
United Nations development system, including specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations, to
incorporate, in their training programmes, workshops
and seminars, courses designed to improve the efficiency of women in business and financial management.
2 441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3523 (XXX).

Women in rw-al areas

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3276 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974, in which it decided to consider at its thirtieth
session an item entitled "International Women's Year,
including the proposals and recommendations of the
Conference of the International Women's Year",
Taking into account resolution 21 66 adopted by the
World Conference of the International Women's Year,
held at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975, the
principles contained in the Declaration of Mexico on
the Equality of Women and Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,67 the World Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year68 and the relevant resolutions
bearing on the contribution of women to equality, peace
and development,
Realizing the importance of adherence to the recommendations of the World Plan of Action, especially
those related to women in rural and low-income areas,
Considering the vital role rural women play, not only
within the family unit but also in the process of national development, through agriculture and particularly through food production and distribution,
Bearing in mind that in many parts of the world illiteracy, lack of education and training, inadequate distribution of hum.an and economic resources, and severe
unemployment and underemployment problems for
women have hindered them from contributing fully to
national development efforts,
Convinced that the struggle for development is a
primary responsibility of all peoples and Governments,
taking into account the principles of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States69 and the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 70
Noting the need for both quantitative and qualitative
data on the position of women and their role in all
rural activities,
Noting also the activities relating to rural women undertaken to date by the United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies concerned,
Noting further the need for co-ordinated and systematic examination of the situation of rural women and
their role in all rural activities,
1. Urges all Governments to accord, within their
respective plans, higher priority for:
66 Ibid.
67 Ibid., chap. I.
68 Ibid., chap. II, sect. A.

69 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
70 Re~lutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

(a) Gathering relevant data on the status and role
of women in rural and low-income areas;
( b) Achieving socio-economic conditions based on
the realization of the full and equal partnership of men
and women in the development of society, both in law
and in fact;
(c) Promoting agricultural productivity, agrobased industries and integrated rural development programmes;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit, through the Economic and Social Council, on
the basis of the views of relevant United Nations bodies
and specialized agencies as well as those of Governments, guidelines for non-formal educational programmes designed to enable rural women to use fully
their capabilities and to contribute to the development
of society;
3. Urges United Nations organizations, specialized
agencies, regional commissions and international financial institutions to accord special attention to government programmes and projects aimed at the full integration of rural women in development;
~-. Urges all Governments to develop extensive
trammg programmes relevant to women and to make
full use of all existing and proposed research institutes
and centres, particularly the regional and international
institutes and centres for the advancement of women
in rural areas;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with Member States and the specialized agencies and
organizations of the United Nations system, to report
to !he G~neral A~emb!Y biennially on the progress
achieved 10 connexion with the work referred to in the
previous paragraphs.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3524 (XXX). Measures for the integration of
women in development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975 International Women's Year,
Recalling also its resolution 3505 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, adopted on the recommendation of the
Second Committee,
Having considered the report of the World Conference of the International Women's Year 71 held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975 ~hich contains the resolutions adopted by the Conf~rence72 and
the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of
the Objectives of the International Women's Year 73
'
Noting tha! the World Plan of Action set forth guidance on action programmes for the integration of
women in development,
Recalling its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970 containing the International Development Strategy
!or th~ Second United Nations Development Decade,
10 • w~ch the General Assembly included among the
obJectives of the Strategy the full integration of women
in the total development effort, and recalling also that
71 UIJ'ited Nauons publication, Sales No. E.76 IV 1

72 I bid., c.hap. III.

7 3 Ibid., chap. II, sect. A.

.

. '
