292

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/151.

--- .
-----Code and to examine it with the required priority in order
to review it, taking into account the results achieved by the
process of the progressive development of international
law,
Bearing in mind that the International Law Commission
should fulfil its task on the basis of early elaboration of
draft articles thereof,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its thirty-ninth
session, 12
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the subject, 13
Taking into account the views expressed during the debate on this ítem at the forty-second session, 14
Recognizing the importance and urgency of the subject,
1. Agrees with the recommendation in paragraph 65 of
the report ofthe International Law Commission to amend
the title of this tapie in English, in arder to achieve greater
uniformity and equivalence between different language
versions;
2. Invites the Commission to continue its work on the
elaboration of the draft Code of Crimes against the Peace
and Security of Mankind including the elaboration of a list
of crimes, taking into account the progress made at its
thirty-ninth session, 12 as well as the views expressed during the forty-second session of the General Assembly; 14
3. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States regarding the conclusions contained in
paragraph 69 (e) (i) of the Commission's report on the
work of its thirty-fifth session; 15
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to include
the views received from Member States in accordance
with paragraph 3 above in a report to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind", to be
considered in conjunction with the examination of the report of the International Law Commission.
~---

Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns
for States and for the United Nations and that efforts for
strengthening the process of peaceful settlement of disputes should be continued,
1. Again urges ali States to observe and promote in
good faith the provisions of the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes in the settlement of their international disputes;
2. Stresses the need to continue efforts to strengthen
the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international
law and through enhancing the effectiveness of the United
Nations in this field;
3. Calls upon Member Sta tes to make full use, in accordance with the Charter, ofthe framework provided by the
United Nations for the peaceful settlement of disputes and
international problems;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session a report containing the replies of Member States, relevant United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and interested international legal
bodies on the implementation of the Manila Declaration
on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes and
on ways and means of increasing the effectiveness of this
instrument;
5. Decides that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States shall be considered at its fortythird session as a separate agenda item, in conjunction
with the item of the provisional agenda entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".

Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assemb/y,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations
for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution 177 {II) of 21 November 1947,
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and
security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code ofüffences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the International Law Commission and submitted to the General Assembly in 1954, 11
Recal/ing its belief that the elaboration of a code of offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and
security and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter,
Recalling also its resolution 36/106 of 10 December
1981, in which it invited the International Law Commission to resume its work with a view to elaborating the draft

11 Official Records of1he General A.,semhly. Ninth Se,.,ion. Suppleme11t
No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

94th p/enary meeting
7 December /987

42/152.

Report of the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law on the work of its
twentieth session

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the
progressive harmonization and unification ofthe law ofinternational trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of ali peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975,

12 Ib,d., Forty-second Se,sion, Supplement No. 10 (A/42/10).
13 A/42/484 and Add. l and 2.
14 See Official Records o_f the General Assembly. Forty-second Session.

Sixth Committee, 35th to 49th and 58th meetings, and corrigendum.
15 /bid .. Thirty-eighrh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/38/10).
