1ШШШ
NATIONS
General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/46/28
20 December 1991

Forty-sixth session
Agenda item 52
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee {A/46/665)]
46/28.

Amendment of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 44/106 of 15 December 1989 and 45/50 of
4 December 1990,
Reiterating its conviction that a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty
is the higheat-priority measure for the cessation of the nuclear arms race and
for the achievement of the objective of nuclear disarmament.
Recalling also the central role of the United Nations in the field of
nuclear disarmament and in particular in the cessation of all nuclear-test
explosions, as well as the persistent efforts of non-governmental
organizations in the achievement of a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty.
Conscious of the growing environmental concerns throughout the world and
of the past and potential negative effects of nuclear testing bn the
environment.
Recalling its resolution 1910 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, in which it
noted with approval the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere,
in Outer Space and under Water, 1/ signed on 5 August 1963, arid requested the
Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 2/ to continue with
a sense of urgency its negotiations to achieve the objectives set forth in the
presunble to the Treaty,
1/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964.

'

2/
The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on
Disarmeunent as from 7 February 1984.

/...

A/RES/46/28

Page 2

Recalling also that more than one third of the parties to the Treaty
requested the Depositary Governments to convene a conference to consider an
amendment that would convert the Treaty into a comprehensive test-ban treaty.
Reiterating its conviction that the Amendment Conference of the States
Parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere,
in
Outer Space and under Water will facilitate the attainment of the objectives
set forth in the Treaty and thus serve to strengthen it.
Recalling further its recommendation that arrangements be made to ensure
that intensive efforts continue, under the auspices of the Amendment
Conference, until a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is achieved,
1.
Notes with satisfaction that a substantive session of the Amendment
Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water was held in New York from 7 to
18 January 1991, and takes note of its report; 3/
2. Takes note of the decision adopted by the Amendment Conference 4/ to
the effect that, since further work needed to be undertaken on certain
aspects of a comprehensive test-ban treaty, especially those with regard to
verification of compliance and possible sanctions against non-compliance, the
President of the Conference should conduct consultations with a view to
achieving progress on those issues and to resuming the work of the Conference
at an appropriate- time;
3.
Welcomes the ongoing consultations being conducted by the President
of the Amendment Conference and the holding in 1992 of more structured openended consultations, as well as the establishment of a group of friends of
the President in order to examine various aspects of a comprehensive nucleartest ban, with a view to resuming the work of the
Conference as soon
as
possible thereafter;
4.
Calls upon all parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water to
participate in, and
to
contribute to the success of, the Amendment Conference for the achievement of
a comprehensive nuclear-test ban at an early date, as an indispensable measure
towards implementation of their undertakings in the preamble to the Treaty;
5.
Urges all States, especially those nuclear-weapon States which have
not yet done so, to adhere to the Treaty;
6.
Recommends that arrangements should be made to ensure the fullest
possible participation of non-governmental organizations in the Amendment
Conference;
7.
Reiterates its conviction that, pending the conclusion of a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty, the nuclear-weapon States should
suspend all nuclear-test explosions through an agreed moratorium or unilateral
moratoria;

3/

РТВТ/CONF/13/Rev.1.

4/

Ibid., para.26.

A/RES/46/28
Page 3

8.
StreBBBB once again the importance of ensuring adequate coordination
among the various negotiating forums dealing with a compreheneive nucleartest-ban treaty;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Amendment of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water".
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991
