S/2018/920

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Twenty-eighth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
1.
The present report is the twenty-eighth semi-annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It
provides a review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the
issuance of my previous report on the subject, on 21 May 2018 ( S/2018/480), and
covers developments up to 28 September 2018.

I. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation and a
number of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of
Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective has remained
the priority of my efforts.
4.
Following the parliamentary elections held in Lebanon on 6 May 2018, the new
Parliament, at its first session, on 23 May, re-elected Nabih Berri, of the Amal
Movement, as Speaker for the sixth time, with 98 votes out of 128. On the same da y,
the Parliament elected Elie Ferzli, who is allied with the Free Patriotic Movement, as
Deputy Speaker, with 81 votes. Mr. Ferzli replaced Farid Makari of the Future
Movement, who had served as Deputy Speaker since 2005.
5.
Saad Hariri was nominated as Prime Minister-designate on 24 May after
consultations between the President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, and Members of
Parliament, during which 111 of them expressed their support for Mr. Hariri to
become Prime Minister. In a speech that day, the Prime Minister-designate stated that
all large parliamentary blocs agreed on “the need to form a national entente
Government as soon as possible”, adding that “the new Government is required to

18-17144 (E)

191018

*1817144*

S/2018/920

continue to stabilize political stability, strengthen State institutions and reinforce the
economy”. He further stated that the Government was expected to “consolidate the
commitment to the policy of disassociation and establish the best relations with the
Arab brothers”.
6.
Since then, the Prime Minister-designate has conducted parliamentary
consultations aimed at forming a Government, which are ongoing as at the time of
reporting. The challenges around government formation ostensibly relate to a lack of
agreement among political forces on the allocation and distribution of ke y
government portfolios.
7.
Lebanese leaders have publicly reiterated the country’s commitment to the
disassociation policy. Most recently, in a television interview on 31 August, the Prime
Minister-designate stated that “we need Lebanon to stay in a position where it doesn’t
take any stance, and this is where we came with a policy of disassociation ”. In a press
conference with the Chancellor of Germany, Angela Merkel, held on 22 June, he
stated that the next Government would maintain its commitment to the disassociation
policy. The President of Lebanon also reiterated the country’s commitment to the
disassociation policy, most recently on 21 September, reportedly stating in an
interview that “Lebanon refuses to meddle in the internal affairs of any country; we
hold on to the dissociation policy pertaining to the conflicts jolting the region,
especially in Syria”. Noting that Hizbullah’s intervention in the Syrian Arab Republic
was condemned by some, he reportedly stated that Hizbullah was “defending the
lands” against terrorist attacks.
8.
In a speech on 19 September on the eve of Ashura‘, Hizbullah SecretaryGeneral, Hassan Nasrallah, stated: “We should not disassociate ourselves because
what is happening in the region will determine the fate of the reg ion and Lebanon.
We agree that the Government should disassociate itself, but political forces are not
disassociating themselves.”
9.
The number of registered refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic hosted by
Lebanon totalled 976,002 as at 31 July 2018. Returns of individuals and small groups
of Syrian refugees continued, mostly facilitated by the General Directorate of General
Security of Lebanon. Although not involved in the organization of these returns, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees coordinates with the
General Directorate to support the returning refugees in obtaining their civil
documents and education certificates, to address other issues critical for their
re-establishment in the Syrian Arab Republic and to be present at each departure
point.
10. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. This remains
critical to enable proper border control and management, including the movement of
people and the potential movement of arms.
11. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon als o remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While
border delineation is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains an obligation
for Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680
(2006).
12. As stated in my report of 13 July 2018 on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2018/703), the Lebanese Armed Forces continued
to deploy land border regiments and construct border observation posts along the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic. On 29 May, the Central Training Centre for
border security was inaugurated at Rayak Air Base, in the Biqa‘ Valley, as part of the
2/8

18-17144

S/2018/920

technical assistance project entitled “Enhanced capability for integrated border
management in Lebanon”, funded by the European Union. There were no reports of
cross-border incidents on the eastern and northern borders during the reporting
period. Unconfirmed reports of smuggling continued, however.
13. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
14. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area.
Furthermore, neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has responded to the
provisional definition of the area contained in my report of 30 October 2007 on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641).
15. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security
Council dated 29 May 2018 (A/72/887-S/2018/517), the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations stated: “On 22 May 2018, an Israeli warplane violated
Lebanese airspace and circled over the city of Beirut. The Israeli Government flaunted
that violation by displaying photographs of the combat aircraft on 22 May 2018 at a
conference of air force commanders held in Israel.” The Permanent Representative
expressed the condemnation of Lebanon of the violation and called upon the Security
Council “to condemn this hostile action” and “to take all measures needed to deter
Israel from continuing to commit serious violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon”.
16. The Special Tribunal for Lebanon held closing arguments in the case of The
Prosecutor v. Ayyash et al. between 11 and 21 September. Against that backdrop, in a
speech on 26 August, Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah cautioned what
he said were political forces betting on the verdict of the Tribunal not to “play with
fire”. In response, at the end of a meeting of the Future Movement parliamentary bloc
held on 28 August, chaired by the Prime Minister-designate, the bloc issued a
communiqué stating that it considered that achieving justice for the assassination of
Rafic Hariri was “not subject to any threat of intimidation”. After attending the
opening of the final hearings in The Hague on 11 September, the Prime Ministerdesignate stated that “Rafic Hariri was not a man of revenge but of justice and we
will continue on this path”, insisted on the stability and security of Lebanon and
pledged to deal with the verdict of the trial “as a responsible official who has the
responsibility to protect the country and the Lebanese people ”.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
17. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authori ty of the
State throughout all the Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and in
resolution 1559 (2004). The Lebanese Armed Forces remained at the forefront of such
efforts. Yet, that endeavour continued to be challenged.
18. The Lebanese Armed Forces and other security forces continued to confront
threats to the country’s security. On 22 May, armed clashes between the Lebanese
Armed Forces and a group of wanted individuals in the northern city of Tripoli left
one soldier killed and eight others injured.
19. Insecurity in Baalbek-Hirmil Governorate, including as a result of the
possession of unauthorized weapons by individuals, posed renewed challenges to the

18-17144

3/8

S/2018/920

exercise of State authority during the reporting period and prompted the Lebanese
Armed Forces to step up their operations in the Biqa‘ Valley area. On 31 May, in
response to a request from the caretaker Minister of the Interior, Nohad Machnouk,
the President of Lebanon reportedly pledged to “hold intensive meetings with
political and security leaders to put an end to chaos in the Baalbek -Hirmil region as
soon as possible”. As noted in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2018/703), two persons were killed and five injured in a family dispute in
Baalbek. In response, on 21 June, the Lebanese Armed Forces reportedly started to
patrol the city of Baalbek and to set up mobile checkpoints across the city and in the
vicinity of Ras al-Ain, arresting one suspect. On 26 June, the President pledged that
the security measures would be “accompanied by an integrated development work
consistent with the economic and social needs of the region”. He added that at its
previous session, the Higher Defence Council had adopted a series of sequenced
measures that were being implemented progressively. On 19 July, two centres of the
General Directorate of General Security were inaugurated in the Biqa‘ Valley. On that
occasion, the Director General of the Directorate, General Abbas Ibrahim, reportedly
stated that he was confident in the success of the security plan for the area.
20. On 23 July, eight individuals were reportedly killed, includ ing a local drug
dealer, Ali Zaid Ismail, and six injured in raids conducted by the Lebanese Armed
Forces in Hammoudieh in the Biqa‘ Valley, while several Lebanese and Syrian
nationals were apprehended over possession of drugs and arms. There had been a
long-standing arrest warrant against Ali Zaid Ismail. The operation was part of a new
security plan, primarily an anti-drug plan, that the Lebanese Armed Forces were
enforcing in the area of Baalbek-Hirmil. During a raid carried out in Al-Hirmil in
search of wanted individuals on 25 September, a soldier from the Lebanese Armed
Forces was killed and several others were wounded.
21. The Lebanese Armed Forces also continued to arrest individuals allegedly
affiliated with or supporting extremist groups. On 10 September, the Internal Security
Forces apprehended two individuals reportedly planning terrorist attacks in Beirut ’s
southern suburbs, as well as planning to kill members of the Lebanese Armed Forces.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
22. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords.
23. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country. In a
democratic State, it remains a fundamental anomaly that a political party maintains a
militia that has no accountability to the democratic, governmental institutions of the
State but has the power to take that State to war. The self-acknowledged maintenance
of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its
arsenal pose a serious challenge to the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and
authority over its territory. In a speech on 20 September, Hizbullah Secretary -General
Hassan Nasrallah claimed for the first time that “the resistance owns enough precision
(accurate) and non-precision (non-accurate) missiles and armament capabilities that
if Israel imposes a war on Lebanon, Israel would face a fate and a reality it never
expected”. In addition, several Palestinian armed groups continued to operate in the
country, inside and outside the Palestine refugee camps.

4/8

18-17144

S/2018/920

24. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal outside
of a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those issues to be
destabilizing factors in the country and ones that undermine democracy. Many
Lebanese see the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat that the
weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
25. The participation of Hizbullah and other Lebanese in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to breach the policy of disassociation and the principles of
the Baabda Declaration. As noted in my report on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) (S/2018/703), on 6 June, Speaker Nabih Berri said that Hizbullah would
only withdraw once “Syria is liberated and its territories are united”. In a speech on
8 June, Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah stated that Hizbullah was present in
the Syrian Arab Republic on the basis of a request by the Syrian leadership, and that
it would withdraw only at the request of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
a point he reiterated in his speech of 19 September.
26. On 19 August, Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah reportedly met a
delegation of Yemeni Houthis led by its spokesperson, Mohammad Abdul Salam. In
a letter dated 24 August 2018 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/595), the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the United Nations,
referencing the meeting, expressed his concern at, inter alia, Hizbullah ’s “transfer of
advisers and military instructors to the Houthi coup” as posing “a serious regional
and global threat”, and asked the Council, through the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), “to investigate, within its mandate,
Hizbullah’s activities that pose a serious threat to Yemen and to take appropriate
measures”. In an interview with a Russian television channel on 20 August following
a meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Sergey
Lavrov, the caretaker Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, Gebran Bassil,
responding to a question about the alleged meeting between Hizbullah and the
Houthis, stated that “as Foreign Minister, I am compelled to express Lebanon’s
official position, which is disassociation”, adding that Lebanon did not “support
interference in Yemen’s affairs”.
27. Against the backdrop of a reported Israeli air strike over the Syrian Arab
Republic on 17 September and the subsequent downing of a Russian aircraft by Syrian
anti-aircraft fire, resulting in the death of 15 Russian personnel, the Israel Defense
Forces acknowledged on 18 September to have “targeted [overnight] a facility of the
Syrian Armed Forces from which systems to manufacture accurate and lethal weapons
were about to be transferred on behalf of Iran to Hizbullah in Lebanon ”.
28. In a speech on 9 May 2018 congratulating Lebanese citizens for the
parliamentary elections, the President of Lebanon reiterated his intention to develop
“a defensive strategy that organizes the defence of the homeland and preserves its
sovereignty and territorial integrity” and that would “complete the implementation of
the Taif agreement”. After a meeting with the Assistant Secretary of Defence for
International Security Affairs of the United States of America, Robert Karem, on
23 August, the President reiterated his “intention to call for a national dialogue on the
defence strategy once the formation of the new Government is completed ”. On
25 September, the Lebanese Parliament ratified the Arms Trade Treaty. The
multilateral treaty regulates the international trade and transfer of conventional
weapons, with a focus on enhancing the responsibility of Governments, including to

18-17144

5/8

S/2018/920

prevent the illicit transfer of arms in Lebanon and illegal circulation of weapons
outside of State control.
29. The security situation in the Palestine refugee camps remained relatively calm
during the reporting period, with a smaller number of armed clashes relative to
previous reporting periods. On 25 June, the Lebanese Army Command announced in
a communiqué that it had removed the electronic gates it had previously installed at
the entrances of the Ein El Helweh and Mieh Mieh refugee camps on 10 June, which
had triggered protests. On 26 June, a suspected drug dealer was reportedly killed
during drug-related clashes in Ein El Helweh. In the Mieh Mieh camp, a man
apprehended by the Ansar Allah group on suspicion of an attempt on the life of the
group’s leader was found hanged in the group’s headquarters on 22 July, leading to
increased tensions. On 15 September, the situation in the Ein El Helweh camp
escalated significantly after one person was killed by the son of Bilal Abu Arqub, the
leader of an extremist group. Tensions increased when the suspect, who sought refuge
in the Islamist-controlled section of the camp, refused to surrender to national
authorities.
30. The handover of some individuals from Palestine refugee camps wanted by the
Lebanese authorities continued during the reporting period. On 30 July, one of the
supporters of militant Salafist sheikh Ahmad al-Assir who had fled to the Ein El
Helweh camp after clashes between the sheikh’s supporters and the Lebanese Armed
Forces in 2013, as highlighted in my report of 16 October 2013 ( S/2013/612),
surrendered to the Lebanese army intelligence. On 12 August, the Palesti nian factions
at the Mieh Mieh camp handed over to the Lebanese Armed Forces several camp
residents who were reportedly wanted for involvement in armed clashes in the camp.
On 19 September, the Lebanese Armed Forces stated that it had arrested an individua l
in Ein El Helweh camp “for belonging to the terrorist organization Abdullah Azzam
Brigades and for his relation with the two suicide bombers who targeted the Iranian
embassy in Bir Hassan” in 2013 (see S/2014/296).
31. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps also continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue,
and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camp s
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.
32. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) continued its efforts to deliver essential health, education, relief and
social services to Palestine refugees in Lebanon, in the face of serious funding
shortfalls. I attended the UNRWA pledging conference held in New York on 25 June,
where donors expressed strong support for ensuring the continuity of the Agency’s
work. The United States decided on 31 August to stop all of its funding to the Agency.
Additional commitments were secured at the ministerial meeting held in New York
on 27 September, which I attended, and at which strong support for the Agency ’s
work was also reiterated. As of September 2018, the overall shortfall in the Agency ’s
budget has been reduced to $64 million.

II. Observations
33. Almost five months have passed since Saad Hariri was nominated as Prime
Minister-designate. While I take note of the continued efforts to form a new
Government, all concerned must step up their efforts to reach an agreement
expeditiously. This is also necessary in order to seize opportunities to advance the
priorities set forth by Lebanon and the international community at the high -level
6/8

18-17144

S/2018/920

conferences earlier in 2018 in Rome, Paris and Brussels. Once a new Government is
formed, I encourage Lebanese leaders to give due consideration to the principles
articulated by the International Support Group for Lebanon adopted at its ministerial
meeting of 8 December 2017, as well as the outcome documents of the high -level
international conferences and relevant Security Council resolutions, as a basis for the
international community’s steadfast partnership with Lebanon.
34. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State, combined
with the existence of heavily armed militias, continues to undermine security and
stability in Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated
military capabilities outside the control of the Government of Lebanon remains a
matter of grave concern. I note with concern the claim by Hassa n Nasrallah that
Hizbullah possesses precision weapons. I reiterate my calls for all concerned to
contribute to efforts to reinforce the institutions of the Lebanese State. I call again
upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not to engage in any mi litary activity
inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the Taif Accords and
resolution 1559 (2004). It is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented
by all to avoid the spectre of a renewed confrontation among Lebanese citizens and
to strengthen the institutions of the State. The Lebanese State should increase its
efforts to achieve a monopoly over the possession of weapons and the use of force
throughout its territory. I continue to urge the Government and the armed forces of
Lebanon to take all measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups
from acquiring weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of
the State, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004).
35. I welcome the renewed commitment of the President of Lebanon to develop a
national defence strategy once a Government is formed. This, among other pressing
matters, highlights the need for a Government to be formed soon. I reiterate my earlier
encouragement to the President to spearhead a renewed dialogue on a national defence
strategy and to political leaders to support him in that endeavour. It is time for
Lebanon to resume the national dialogue as a Lebanese-led and Lebanese-owned
process, in line with the country’s international obligations. A national dialogue
should address the need to achieve a State monopoly over the possession and use of
weapons and the use of force.
36. The renewed commitment by the President, the Prime Minister-designate and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the policy of disassociation is an important signal
that the policy remains the core tenet of Lebanon in its approach to conflicts in the
region. At the same time, Lebanon needs to ensure that these commitments are turned
into deeds. Hizbullah’s engagement in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic is not
only in breach of the disassociation policy and the principles of the Baabda
Declaration of 2012, but also carries a risk of entangling Lebanon in the regional
conflicts and poses risks to the stability of Lebanon and of the region. The
involvement of Hizbullah in the Syrian Arab Republic for several years demonstrates
the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal to be accountable to the State
institutions that the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) was intended to
strengthen.
37. I continue to be concerned by the reported involvement of Hizbullah, as well as
that of other Lebanese elements, in fighting elsewhere in the region. In particular, I
note the allegations by the Government of Yemen about Hizbullah ’s involvement in
the conflict there. I call upon countries in the region that main tain close ties with
Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of that armed group into a solely civilian
political party, and its disarmament, in accordance with the requirements of the Taif
Accords and resolution 1559 (2004), in the best interests of Lebanon and of regional
peace and security.

18-17144

7/8

S/2018/920

38. I condemn all violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
They also undermine the credibility of the Lebanese security institutions an d generate
anxiety among the civilian population. I reiterate that the overflights of Lebanese
airspace by Israeli military aircraft are violations of Lebanese sovereignty and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). I renew my calls for Israel to adhere to its
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions and to withdraw its forces
from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue
Line, as well as to cease immediately its overflights of Lebanese airspace.
39. The absence of shooting, shelling, air strikes, rocket attacks and incursions from
the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period is noteworthy. This presents a
renewed opportunity for the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to make progress in
the delineation of their common border, in respect of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. This is critical to enabling proper border control and
management, including the movement of people and the potential movement of arms.
I call upon all concerned to cease violations of the border and to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
40. I have previously noted that it is in the interest of Lebanon and in line with its
obligations under international law to ensure that those behind terrorist acts, including
political assassinations, are held accountable and that violence is not committed with
impunity. I note the continued work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which sends
a clear message that impunity will not be tolerated.
41. I appreciate the efforts of Lebanon aimed at extending its authority throughout
its territory, including through renewed efforts to address the in security in the Biqa‘
Valley. I welcome the Biqa‘ security plan and encourage all security services to work
together to address the continued challenges in the area. I also encourage the Lebanese
State to continue its efforts to extend other State services throughout its territory.
42. The support displayed by 34 donor countries and organizations present at the
ministerial meeting of 27 September in support of UNRWA has been a relief and has
raised hopes that UNRWA will be able to continue its critical fun ctions. In Lebanon,
UNRWA services and contributions are vital to the dignity and security of Palestine
refugees. The deficit in UNRWA funding, however, persists and threatens the
continued delivery of assistance by the Agency. I encourage other donor coun tries to
come forward with additional funding for the Agency, which remains a key factor for
stability in the Palestine refugee camps and the region. Such efforts are without
prejudice to the need for the just resolution of the Palestine refugee question i n the
context of a comprehensive settlement in the region.
43. The international community has continued to support Lebanon as the country
persists with efforts to make steady progress towards restoring its institutions to their
full functioning. Forming a Government, a key next step in that process, is within
reach, but it requires Lebanese political decision makers to demonstrate leadership
and prioritize national interests and needs. I count on the continued commitment of
the Government of Lebanon to its international obligations, and I call upon all parties
and actors to fully abide by resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).
The United Nations will continue its efforts towards the full implementation of those
and all other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

8/8

18-17144
