A /77/PV.70

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

70th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 16 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Eyeberdiyev
(Turkmenistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 61
Zone of peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): On
28 July 2022, the General Assembly adopted resolution
76/299, a historic resolution for Central Asia. It proclaimed
our region a zone of peace, confidence and cooperation.
We express our sincere gratitude to the States Members
of the United Nations for their unanimous support for
Turkmenistan’s resolution. We thank in particular the
cosponsors of this significant document.
Today we are taking the next very important step
towards forming and cementing the concept of a zone
of peace in Central Asia. In doing so, we are holding
our first debate on this topic in the General Assembly.
The aim is to convey to the international community
our commitment to preserve stability and security in a
strategically significant region of the planet.
Before we begin the discussion, focusing on
the Central Asian region, we see the need to draw
the Council’s attention to history and to a global
retrospective of the actions we have taken. For many
years now, humankind has associated with the United
Nations the formation of a reliable mechanism to ensure
security. That is a foundation for crafting peace that
is grounded in mutual respect, trust and the peaceful

settlement of any disputes pursuant to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
However, as before, we regret to see the relevance
of the words of Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who
said that our political and organizational culture and
practice is still much more geared towards responding
rather than preventing. The concept of an international
zone of peace opens up broad latitude for us to put into
effect what the Secretary-General said, particularly
the creation of long-term security guarantees using
preventive mechanisms and forming “islands” of
geopolitical stability, ones that are set out in multilateral
legal documents.
I am pleased to be able to stress that, thanks to the
efforts of a number of countries, our Organization has
not remained in place when it comes to forging such
islands of peace and security. Over the past few decades,
both within and outside of the United Nations, there
have been a number of initiatives that were implemented
to establish zones of peace and cooperation in various
parts of the world.
Specifically, multilateral political declarations and
other international legal documents have been adopted.
They have created zones of peace. That has happened
in areas such as the Mediterranean, South-East Asia,
the Indian Ocean, the South Atlantic and the South
Pacific. We are called upon, in this General Assembly
debate, to remind the international community that
zones of peace can and should be viewed as instruments
to promote and strengthen stability in regions that are
key for global security. Those zones are an integral part

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13752 (E)

*2313752*

A/77/PV.70

of the entire toolkit for ensuring a preventive agenda
and for acting early to stop any military presence from
growing in those areas. That will ensure that there are
no conditions conducive to the creation of conflicts,
do not develop into serious conflicts, let alone their
escalation.
In that regard, substantial steps have been taken
to ensure international recognition in the forming of
a legal concept for zones of peace. One such important
step was resolution 41/11, adopted on 27 October 1986,
which established a zone of peace and cooperation in
the South Atlantic. Another step was the adoption,
on 16 December 1971, of resolution 2832 (XXVI),
establishing such a zone in the Indian Ocean. In
that regard, Central Asian States are continuing
the approaches and the ideas set out and practically
implemented by our friends in Latin America and
South Asia.
Central Asia, in historical terms, is a region where
the geopolitical and geoeconomic interests of major
international players are concentrated. The States
of our region are fraternal countries — Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and our country,
Turkmenistan — that gained independence in the early
1990s. We have made major progress towards crafting
our statehood and strengthening our national economies
and improving the living conditions of our populations.
That is why, in 2022, the President of Turkmenistan
took this initiative in order to stress the importance of
strengthening stability in Central Asia as an integral and
key part of the contemporary system of international
relations. Our country set out key principles for
preserving peace and sustainable development in the
region, while considering the legitimate interests of
all Central Asian States. That was done in the form of
resolution 76/299, which sets forth that the territory of
the Central Asian States would acquire international
legal status as a zone of peace, cooperation and trust.
Looking ahead, I stress that the natural and logical
extension of developing and setting out a zone of peace
in Central Asia as a legal phenomenon is adopting
decisions at the highest State level within the existing
mechanism for cooperation among Central Asian States,
specifically at the consultative meetings of the Heads of
State of countries of the region. The most recent such
meeting took place on 21 July 2022 in Kyrgyzstan.
In September 2006, five Central Asian States signed
an agreement to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
2/27

16/05/2023

Central Asia. Together with guarantees from nuclear
Powers, that agreement enshrined the non-nuclear
status of the region, and it was also one of the most
important steps on the path to strengthening peace and
security globally.
Those decisions were the logical continuation of
our country’s firm approach in international relations
to move from a culture of reaction to a culture of early
warning. The practical realization of that approach
has been successfully implemented, since December
2007, by the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, in Ashgabat,
Turkmenistan. Today our Regional Centre seeks to use
preventive diplomacy tools, while making an invaluable
contribution to strengthening peace and stability in our
region and consolidating our joint efforts to ensure our
peacekeeping agenda.
The process of integration and improving
confidence in our region is marked by a systematic
and consistent approach that is annually boosted by the
creation of the critically important institutions required
to develop and foster a multi-vector regional dialogue.
An outstanding example is the Central Asian Women
Leaders’ Dialogue, which was established in 2020
and has demonstrated its effectiveness. It is the first
platform of its kind in the region aimed at increasing
political, economic and social participation of women
in inter-State relations. We note with satisfaction that
contacts have been established between the Central
Asian Women Leaders’ Caucus and key United Nations
entities, such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs. We also note the Preventive
Diplomacy Academy, where young people learn the
tools of early warning and prevention. It was established
by the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy and is currently serving as the basis for the
creation of a permanent regional dialogue for peace for
young people of Central Asia.
Sustaining peace is inextricably linked to
socioeconomic development and the promotion of the
economy, trade and cultural and humanitarian ties,
both at the regional and global levels.
In a relatively short historical period, Central
Asian countries, building on a strong resource base and
geographic advantages, have developed joint economic
competences and have cooperated, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, in the areas of energy, transport,
23-13752

16/05/2023

logistics and communications, thereby forming trade
and economic integration corridors from the North to
the South and the East to the West. Today we have the
ambitious but realistic goal of transforming Central
Asia into an integral part of the new Silk Road. The
cornerstone of those efforts is transport, logistics and
the modern infrastructure currently taking shape in
our region, which has ensured the interconnectivity
of the transport systems of Central Asia, Europe, the
Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region. In particular,
we are working swiftly to implement projects to
ensure transportation via routes from Central Asia to
the Caspian Sea and to the Black Sea, as well as from
Central Asia to the Persian Gulf.
The Central Asian region, with its massive energy
resource potential, provides reliable infrastructure in
the heart of the Eurasian continent and guarantees the
stable supply and transit of energy to the world’s largest
markets. We have already jointly implemented a major
energy project — a gas pipeline from Turkmenistan
through Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan to China. We
are working with partners to increase energy supplies
from Central Asia to Europe and to strengthen our
transit configuration. Moreover, Turkmenistan today
is actively working on implementing a gas pipeline
project from Turkmenistan through Afghanistan and
Pakistan to India.
We also would like to stress the importance of
the participation of Afghanistan in those and other
multilateral projects. That is a key factor in rebuilding
the Afghan economy and society and, ultimately,
achieving sustainable peace and harmony in the
country. The Central Asian countries, as neighbours
of Afghanistan with historical ties to the country, are
key partners in international efforts to ensure stability
in that country and lay the groundwork for achieving
nationwide harmony through peaceful dialogue,
contributing to international efforts to combat
terrorism and provide Afghanistan with economic
and humanitarian assistance. In that regard, forming a
strong and reliable zone of peace, trust and cooperation
in Central Asia is the key to overcoming a number of
complex geopolitical conflicts in those adjacent regions,
which the international community has not been able to
overcome for many decades.
Finally, Central Asia, as a cradle of global
civilization, forms a unified cultural space through
a system of integrated engagement of the cultural
communities of our countries, as well as promoting the

A/77/PV.70

rich spiritual and historical heritage of our peoples and
the literary and artistic achievements of our time.
Turkmenistan, together with Central Asian
countries, has prepared a concept paper and background
material in the six official languages of the United
Nations for this General Assembly debate. We express
our sincere gratitude and respect to the delegations
that responded to our invitation to participate in this
debate, the main objective of which is to provide an
opportunity for Member States to exchange opinions
on maintaining peace and strengthening security in
Central Asia and beyond; stressing the importance of
establishing a zone of peace, trust and cooperation in
Central Asia to form a more stable international order,
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations; and reaffirming the need to develop
and strengthen internationally recognized zones of
peace that have been declared in General Assembly
resolutions in various parts of the world. We look
forward to a constructive and useful debate.
In conclusion, the success of the Central Asian
countries in maintaining and further developing a stable
and lasting peace in the region depends on the support
of the international community and on the will of the
United Nations Member States to ensure a peaceful and
secure future for succeeding generations. We call on
all countries to work together to establish a sustainable
zone of peace, trust and cooperation in Central Asia,
as well as to ensure respect for the national unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all States of the region in strict compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to
all Member States for their unanimous support for
resolution 76/299, entitled “Zone of peace, trust and
cooperation of Central Asia”.
Kazakhstan views Central Asia as the main
strategic vector of its foreign policy. Together with our
regional partners, we are committed to strengthening
our political interaction and deepening economic ties
to move our region forward. We coexist peacefully as
good neighbours and are diversifying our cooperation
based on our shared centuries-long history, economic
background, human capital and common advantages
and challenges.
Located at the crossroads between East and West and
South and North, we are jointly addressing the pressing

23-137523/27

A/77/PV.70

regional agenda which includes climate change, the
Aral Sea, transboundary water management, combating
terrorism and extremism, economic and social
development and many other issues. To coordinate our
joint national efforts and those of the United Nations,
we plan to establish the United Nations Regional Centre
for the Sustainable Development Goals for Central Asia
and Afghanistan in Almaty, Kazakhstan. The hub will
streamline the United Nations inter-agency regional
and interregional coordination and management to
transform Central Asia into a zone of peace, security
and sustainable development, with a spillover effect
into Afghanistan, which is much needed in the current
challenging times.
Kazakhstan sees the future Afghanistan as a truly
independent, neutral, united and prosperous nation,
living in peace with its neighbours. Therefore, we
support the difficult process of nation-building in the
country, including lifesaving humanitarian assistance.
Kazakhstan, as the world’s seventh largest grain
producer, is committed to utilizing its agricultural
potential to overcome global food insecurity in the
region and beyond.
My nation suffered immensely from nuclear
weapons testing. We very clearly understand the danger
of escalating tensions between nuclear Powers. For
that reason, nuclear disarmament remains a key part
of Kazakhstan’s foreign policy. We will continuously
struggle for a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The closure of the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site
in 1991 kicked off the closure process of other test
sites around the world. In 2006, countries of the region
established a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia.
In addition, Kazakhstan was one of the first parties to
sign the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
Against the backdrop of the existential biological threat
aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, we
initiated the creation of an international agency for
biological safety, which would be accountable to the
United Nations. A consultative process is already
under way. We urge the international community to
join this process.
Kazakhstan is a strong supporter of international
anti-terrorism efforts. With the support of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, we in the region
4/27

16/05/2023

are actively implementing the United Nations global
counter-terrorism strategy in Central Asia.
Kazakhstan considers peacekeeping to be an
important component of strengthening regional and
international security. Starting in 2014, more than
600 Kazakhstan troops and military observers have
served in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in Western Sahara, Côte d’Ivoire, Lebanon, Mali
and the Central African Republic. The Kazakhstan
Peacekeeping Training Centre is being used for various
United Nations peacekeeping courses for local and
international participants.
My country will continue to advance regional
cooperation on the empowerment of women and youth,
including through financial support for the regional
programme for Central Asia in Afghanistan focusing
on educating Afghan students, with an emphasis on
girls, with the support of the European Union. We are
also implementing the United Nations-led Spotlight
Initiative and Generation Equality Forum, and we
are chairing the Central Asia Women Leaders Caucus
in 2023.
Kazakhstan is a home for over 120 nationalities and
ethnic groups. It has invested significantly in promoting
freedom of religion, mutual respect, inclusion and
social cohesion. Our national model of interethnic and
interreligious accord is based on the principles of unity
and diversity. Last September, the seventh Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions once
again highlighted the importance of religious tolerance,
dialogue and mediation. We are ready to build bridges
and provide platforms for dialogue whenever needed.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Central Asia
has already become a region of vast opportunities for
international cooperation. With the rising importance
of Central Asia regionally and globally, the C5+ format
is bringing new opportunities to expand cooperation
with our partners. As the leading economy of Central
Asia, Kazakhstan will further contribute to regional
and global development and to creating bridges between
countries, cultures and nations.
Let me now continue in my capacity as the
representative of the Kazakhstan chairmanship of the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia (CICA).
On behalf of the Kazakhstan Chairmanship of
the CICA, it is a great honour to address this high23-13752

16/05/2023

A/77/PV.70

level meeting of the General Assembly with a view
to highlighting the importance of Central Asia as a
dynamic, growing and important region in the global
context. From the very first day of its existence, CICA
has considered the establishment of confidence-building
measures, peace and dialogue as the primary basis for
broad cooperation aimed in turn at achieving the goals
of sustainable development and socioeconomic wellbeing for the vast Asian continent.

CICA is entering a new phase in its development,
and its proposed transformation into a full-fledged
international organization will be beneficial for Central
Asia, giving it a new, higher profile. Furthermore, the
recently established CICA Fund will provide assistance
to countries in need. We are confident that CICA
will continue to maintain and promote constructive
cooperation in accordance with principles and objectives
that contribute to peace, security and stability in Asia.

I would like to note that resolution 76/299, entitled
“Zone of peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia”,
affirms a clear link between the strengthening peace,
trust and cooperation in the region and the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals, which can be
considered the motto of all CICA activities. CICA very
much focuses on Central Asia, and the region thereby
benefits greatly from the comprehensive mandate
and objectives of the organization, which converge
fully with the Charter of the United Nations, the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the New Agenda
for Peace and all other global processes and policies set
forth by the international community.

Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.

Like the rest of the world, the Central Asian
region is facing unprecedented existing, new and
emerging challenges. Our forum comprises 28 States
with eight observers. It is interesting to note that the
entire perimeter of the region is bordered exclusively
by CICA member States with which we interact closely.
CICA is also a platform for Central Asian efforts
to reach out to other parts of the Asian continent, in
particular its neighbouring subregions. Central Asia
stands to gain considerably from CICA’s multifaceted,
multidimensional portfolios. One of the important
priorities of CICA is strengthening connectivity aimed
at acceleration, regional growth and development.
In his remarks at the sixth CICA summit last October,
President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev of Kazakhstan
proposed the idea of establishing a CICA council on
sustainable connectivity. Convenient and accessible
routes for transporting goods are an important factor
in the sustainable growth of our economies. It is also
important to address water management, poverty
reduction and energy and food insecurity, as well as
illegal migration flows, terrorism, extremism and
cross-border crimes. In the age of rapid acceleration of
digital information and communication technologies,
our region is devising greater security measures against
the possible negative impact of these developments.

In conclusion, Central Asia has achieved much
social cohesion and political synchrony, of which we
can be truly proud. As the CICA Chair, Kazakhstan
is committed to building forward with accelerated
momentum to make our region a model zone of peace,
progress and prosperity.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank Turkmenistan for taking
the initiative to hold today’s discussion within the
framework of resolution 76/299 of 28 July 2022. We
also welcome the establishment of the zone of peace,
trust and cooperation of Central Asia.
The Charter of the United Nations calls upon
all members of the Organization to maintain
international peace and security, promote friendly
relations, achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems and settle disputes by peaceful
means. In developing these purposes and principles,
the international community recognized that the
establishment of zones of peace in various regions of
the world could contribute to strengthening economic
development and peace.
In that regard, Argentina actively participates in
the zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
(ZPCSA) out of the conviction of the importance and
transcendence of the zone, which is an initiative that
was created in 1986. On 18 April 2023, ZPCSA held
its eighth ministerial meeting in Mindelo, Cabo Verde.
As a result, a ministerial declaration and a plan of
action were adopted. In addition, the member countries
reaffirmed the active commitment of both coasts of the
South Atlantic to the social and economic development
of the southern hemisphere, unrestricted respect for
human rights and international law, and the universal
values of international peace and security. Of singular
importance is the status conferred upon the zone, not
only as one of peace and cooperation but also as a zone

23-137525/27

A/77/PV.70

free from nuclear weapons — an effort included in the
ideology of peace and security that gave rise to the
United Nations itself, as well as the various regional
and subregional organizations to which the States of the
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone belong.
Based on the experience of the South Atlantic
countries, Argentina commends the initiative for the
Central Asian zone of peace, trust and cooperation.
The effort to promote peace, trust and cooperation
in Central Asia and other regions is more vital now
than ever before. The countries of Central Asia have
enormous potential for cooperation and development.
The success of the initiative will depend on the joint
work and determination of the States members of
the zone, as well as the support of the international
community. Today’s debate is a demonstration of that
commitment and a promising sign for the consolidation
of that initiative.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The delegation of Pakistan
once again thanks Turkmenistan for the historic
initiative that led to the adoption of resolution 76/299
last year, declaring Central Asia as a zone of peace.
We welcome this important debate to consider steps to
consolidate the zone of peace.
In a world in which conflicts and tensions have
proliferated in several regions, the creation of zones
of peace in critical parts of the world can serve as a
vital instrument for stability and an avenue for regional
and cross-regional cooperation. Pakistan has made
consistent efforts to promote peace and cooperation
in its own and adjacent regions. Pakistan actively
advocated the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in South Asia for more than two decades. That was
thwarted by the nuclear explosions initiated by our
neighbour. Pakistan has also supported the creation of
a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean, in accordance with
the declaration of the General Assembly contained in
resolution 2832 (XXVI).
We are concerned that the Indian Ocean is being
drawn into a geo-strategic construct that implies
renewed great Power rivalry and the emergence of
new military alliances. Those developments could
destabilize large parts of Asia, the Pacific and even
Africa. In the face of those steps to escalate great
Power military and political competition, it is all the
more vital to preserve Central Asia as a zone of peace.
A peaceful Central Asia can be a bulwark against the
extension of conflicts from Europe to Asia and serve as
6/27

16/05/2023

a bridge of peace across the Eurasian landmass. Located
at the juncture of South Asia, Central Asia, West Asia,
the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean, Pakistan has
a vital stake in the preservation of Central Asia as a
zone of peace. With the Central Asian States, Pakistan
shares membership in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, as well as the Economic Cooperation
Organization. Those two coterminous organizations
can form a critical component of endeavours to build
security and prosperity across Eurasia.
Both Pakistan and Central Asia also accord
the highest priority to ensuring durable peace and
stability in Afghanistan. The platform of Afghanistan’s
six neighbours and Russia, which includes three
Central Asian countries, is a vital forum in which to
promote peace, stability and economic development in
Afghanistan. In turn, once it is stabilized, Afghanistan
will serve as the critical connection for regional
cooperation between Central Asia, Pakistan and all
countries committed to the early implementation
of shovel-ready connectivity projects, including the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan gas pipeline,
the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project (CASA-100) electricity grid from
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan to Afghanistan and Pakistan,
and the Uzbekistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan railway.
Last week, at the trilateral ministerial meeting
between Pakistan, China and Afghanistan held in
Islamabad, it was agreed to extend the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor to Afghanistan, which will further
reinforce the close connection between Central Asia
and Afghanistan, Pakistan and China. Such economic
integration within Central Asia and with its adjacent
regions will unleash the vast productive potential of
those regions. Their prosperity will in turn consolidate
peace and security, including in the Central Asian zone
of peace.
Mr. Hikmat (Tajikistan): My delegation, as one of
the main co-sponsors of resolution 76/299, welcomes
the convening of today’s General Assembly debate
and commends the efforts of the Permanent Mission of
Turkmenistan in spearheading this meeting.
For Tajikistan, in line with its open-door policy, the
consistent development of comprehensive relations and
the maintenance of trust and dialogue among Central
Asian countries is a priority. Today, when the world is
experiencing simultaneous crises in security, health,
economy, politics and climate change, the countries of
23-13752

16/05/2023

Central Asia demonstrate constructive and predictable
inter-State relations. That is facilitated primarily by the
format of the annual consultative meeting of the Heads
of State of Central Asia launched in 2018.
Tajikistan recognizes the significance of economic
and social development for the prosperity of its people
and the region. We have made notable strides in recent
years by focusing on infrastructure development, energy
projects and economic diversification through several
reforms and strategies implemented in those fields. As
a water-abundant country, we have great hydropower
potential. We seek to harness that potential to drive
economic growth and create employment opportunities.
We stand ready to cooperate with the countries of the
region in that regard. The increasing trade turnover
of Tajikistan with Central Asian countries, which
amounts to almost $3 billion, is a vivid example of
our commitment to doing just that. For instance,
Kazakhstan is considered one of the leading trade
partners of Tajikistan. In recent years, trade turnover
with Uzbekistan has doubled. With Kyrgyzstan, we
continue working towards the implementation of the
Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project (CASA-1000), aimed at providing
electricity to the hungry markets of South Asia. We are
also confident that Turkmenistan will soon become one
of the leading foreign economic partners of Tajikistan.
The outcome of the Tajik-Turkmen intergovernmental
negotiations held on 10 and 11 May demonstrated
that Dushanbe and Ashgabat have all the necessary
prerequisites for that.
Mitigating climate change, addressing waste
and water pollution and ensuring environmental
sustainability are the world’s most pressing issues. To
that end, it is very important to maintain an ecological
balance in our planet’s natural environment and
conserve natural resources to support the well-being of
current and future generations. As a country blessed
with beautiful landscapes, including mountains, rivers
and lakes, Tajikistan is committed to preserving and
protecting the environment for future generations.
Therefore, we have undertaken several global initiatives
to address climate change, promote sustainable water
management resources and conserve biodiversity.
For example, the International Conference on the
International Decade for Action “Water for Sustainable
Development” 2018–2028 and the International Year
of Glaciers’ preservation, 2025 (resolution 77/158)
both paved the way for important global processes.

A/77/PV.70

The former gave birth to the historic and successful
United Nations 2023 Water Conference, which
Tajikistan was honoured to co-host with the Kingdom
of the Netherlands in March. The latter conferred the
mandate to host an international conference dedicated
to glaciers’ preservation in Tajikistan in 2025. As a
water champion and the host of the Dushanbe Water
Process Conference, we will continue to advocate
actively in regional and international forums dedicated
to environmental issues, including water and climate
change, emphasizing the importance of collective action
and cooperation to mitigate environmental challenges.
Tajikistan places great emphasis on security
and stability in Central Asia. As a country that
has experienced its share of conflict and security
challenges, we understand and value the importance of
maintaining peace and stability in the region. Therefore,
as a member of several regional and international
frameworks, Tajikistan actively cooperates with the
international community, in particular the countries
of the region, to address shared security threats, such
as terrorism, extremism and drug trafficking, mainly
emanating from Afghanistan.
Given its strategic geographical location and the
importance of Asia-Europe connectivity, Central
Asia plays a pivotal role in broader regional security,
particularly in the light of recent developments in
Afghanistan. Drug trafficking, radicalization and
the presence and widespread activity of terrorists
and extremist groups in the territory of Afghanistan
remain a serious challenge and, as global security
issues, at times they threaten not only our region but
also the entire international community. To that end,
we reiterate the call of President Emomali Rahmon of
Tajikistan to build a security belt around Afghanistan
in order to enhance further and strengthen regional
cooperation and coordination to combat such threats.
Tajikistan will continue to provide its well-established
platform, known as the Dushanbe Process on Countering
Terrorism and its Financing, in order to engage the
international community, in particular the United
Nations and other relevant partners, in exchanging
views and conducting deliberations on the complex
issues and multifaceted problems related to countering
terrorism and its financing, as well as in strengthening
regional cooperation mechanisms.
Last but not least, as we prepare to host the fifth
Consultative Meeting of the Heads of State of Central
Asia in Dushanbe on 14 and 15 September, which

23-137527/27

A/77/PV.70

will be chaired by the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan, we are convinced that the meeting will
further strengthen the process of developing regional
cooperation and maintaining security and stability in
the region.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes today’s debate on establishing a zone
of peace, trust and cooperation in Central Asia and
congratulates its good friends Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan on the
adoption of resolution 76/299. It is highly commendable
that Central Asian countries engaged with the wider
membership to align their regional initiative with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and reflect the views and inputs of other
Member States. We are especially pleased to see that
the resolution rightly addressed the importance of
preventive diplomacy and the active role of women in
achieving peace, stability and sustainable development
in the region.
In order to address the complex set of transboundary
challenges faced by Central Asia, which include
climate change, environmental degradation, the
threat of terrorism and narcotics, an integrated and
preventative approach is crucial. In that regard, my
delegation appreciates the work of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA), which was established in 2007.
The Centre has actively led initiatives to empower
women and young people, in particular through the
Central Asian Women Leaders’ Caucus. My delegation
also encourages the Peacebuilding Commission to
continue engaging with the Caucus following its first
meeting in 2022, which shed light on the role of local
women in addressing the nexus linking climate, peace
and development.
In that regard, I would like to take this opportunity
to announce that the Republic of Korea will put forward
the women and peace and security agenda as one of
its priorities in the Security Council, if elected as
a Council member next month. As a sponsor of the
UNRCCA resolution adopted in February (resolution
77/273), my delegation supports the Centre’s proactive
role, including the facilitation of the engagement of
Central Asian countries in addressing the multifaceted
challenges in Afghanistan. The situation in Afghanistan
significantly affects peace and stability in the region and
beyond. Therefore, coordination between neighbouring
countries and the wider international community is
8/27

16/05/2023

essential to securing a peaceful, stable, prosperous and
inclusive Afghanistan.
Another serious matter is the environmental
vulnerabilities facing the region of landlocked
countries (LLCs) and even double-landlocked
countries. The Republic of Korea welcomes the
readiness of Central Asian countries to make efforts to
reach mutually beneficial arrangements on water and
energy management. We also applaud their leadership
in water diplomacy, including Tajikistan’s co-hosting of
the United Nations 2023 Water Conference. However,
despite such efforts, the ongoing desertification of
LLCs, land degradation and melting glaciers deserve
the international community’s consistent attention.
The Korean people have maintained contact
with Central Asia for more than 1,000 years, and our
partnership with the region has exponentially expanded
over the past 30 years since the establishment of
diplomatic relations. Our trade volume with the five
countries has increased several hundredfold, and there
has been a growing number of high-level exchanges.
In the light of the close interlinkages between
the region’s peace and security and sustainable
development, the Republic of Korea will expand
future-oriented economic cooperation with the Central
Asian countries, including through projects on digital
government and health infrastructure. My delegation
also takes serious note of the climate-related risks in the
region and will join efforts to increase environmental
sustainability. We will build on our past contributions
to address desertification and deforestation.
More recently, the Republic of Korea began to
increase green official development assistance to share
our smart water management technologies. We plan to
combine those efforts with our work on the Security
Council for the term 2024 to 2025, during which we
will prioritize climate and security.
Last September, my President, Yoon Suk Yeol,
outlined in the General Assembly Hall the vision of the
Republic of Korea (see A/77/PV.4) to promote global
peace and freedom by bridging the digital divide and
expanding official development assistance. Under
that vision, our strong partnership with the Central
Asian countries will be aimed at further consolidating
peace, trust, cooperation and friendship in the global
community on the way forward.
23-13752

16/05/2023

Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Republic of Turkmenistan and Mr. Rashid
Meredov, Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan, for
convening today’s high-level debate on the zone of
peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia.
Cuba believes that in order to move towards a
world of peace, the diversity of various political,
economic, social, cultural and religious systems, as
well as the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and a fairer,
more democratic and equitable international order
must be strictly respected. As the historic leader of the
Cuban Revolution, Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro
Ruz, said, we reaffirm today Cuba’s firm aspiration
to achieve peace with respect, rights, transparency,
independence and security for all peoples of the world.
That is the peace for which we must all fight.
The planet now faces a crisis that began owing
to the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, which we have not yet overcome. However,
we do not learn from our mistakes and continue to spend
more to modernize and increase our weaponry, including
nuclear weapons — spending billions of dollars that
could instead be used to promote peace, sustainable
development and a decent life for all inhabitants of the
planet. We must focus on eliminating hunger, poverty,
disease, ignorance, the effects of colonialism and the
unjust international economic order, which reproduces
the privileges of the rich countries and perpetuates the
deficiencies of the poorest countries.
The consequences of climate change are yet another
threat to the survival of our species. Promoting peace
also entails strengthening international cooperation,
in particular North-South cooperation, guaranteeing
universal access to education, protecting all human
rights and sparing no effort to close the wide gaps
that divide societies. There can be no peace without
economic and social development, justice and equality
for all, within and among countries. Nor can there be
peace or a culture of peace without fully respecting the
purposes and principles of the Charter and international
law, in particular the prohibition on the threat or use of
force, non-interference in internal affairs, and respect
for sovereignty or self-determination.
Cuba reaffirms its efforts to build international
peace by declaring Latin America and the Caribbean a
zone of peace. The declaration was signed by the Heads

A/77/PV.70

of State and Government in Havana at the summit of
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States held in January 2014. That declaration, which
will soon mark its tenth anniversary, reiterates the
principles and standards that we have always upheld in
all scenarios, while rejecting political manipulation and
double standards.
We fully recognize the role of peace and the
importance of promoting a culture and environment that
encourages it. For more than six decades, we have faced
the effects of the criminal economic, trade and financial
embargo, which was imposed by the Government of
the United States of America and tightened during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Acts of war and subversive
agendas against our people were also increased. We
believe that promoting peace in all regions of the world
is the way to achieve a better, more just and more
sustainable world. As long as multilateralism is not
upheld and our legitimate differences are not respected,
a world of peace will remain a utopia.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I thank the President of the
General Assembly for organizing today’s timely debate.
Today we are faced with multifaceted and
intertwined challenges all around the world. The
maintenance of peace and security, sustainable
development and the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms are all interrelated and cannot be
taken up in isolation from each other. We need greater
international cooperation and the contribution of each
and every Member State to address those challenges
effectively. In that connection, regional inclusion and
ownership are of paramount importance.
Türkiye has undertaken initiatives to contribute
to conflict-resolution efforts in various geographies
and address disruptions in the food and energy supply
chains. The Turkic Council, the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization, the Central American
Integration System, the Astana Platform and the Black
Sea Grain Initiative are among the regional mechanisms
in which we participate.
We are happy to see similar initiatives being
realized in Central Asia. In that vein, I would like to
refer to resolution 76/299, entitled “Zone of peace, trust
and cooperation of Central Asia”, which was adopted
last July. Through that resolution, the region of Central
Asia was declared a zone of peace, trust and cooperation.
That was an important step, demonstrating the collective
political will of the countries of the region to bolster

23-137529/27

A/77/PV.70

a culture of cooperative and peaceful coexistence in
Central Asia. Türkiye was a sponsor of that resolution.
Our position is in line with the main tenets of Turkish
foreign policy and a natural reflection of our strong
bonds of friendship with Central Asian republics.
Initiatives such as those are important, not only
for the region itself but also for the wider international
community, as Central Asia is key to the security
and stability of the Euro-Atlantic region. The energy
resources of Central Asia are vital for global energy
security. The region is also a major hub for trade and
transport corridors. As such, Türkiye is pleased to
be among the main co-sponsors of draft resolution
A/77/L.67, which the General Assembly will adopt
later today, which proclaims 26 November as World
Sustainable Transport Day. I take this opportunity to
thank Turkmenistan for its leadership.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
readiness to continue working closely with Central
Asian countries to promote regional peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mrs. Kasymalieva (Kyrgyzstan): We believe that
today’s discussion on agenda item 61, entitled “Zone
of peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia”, will
contribute to our ongoing efforts here at the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security and in promoting multilateralism. We also
thank our colleagues from the Permanent Mission of
Turkmenistan to the United Nations for their valuable
efforts in facilitating, on behalf of Central Asian
countries, resolution 76/299, which declared the region
of Central Asia a zone of peace, trust and cooperation.
I would like to note that the format of regional
consultative meetings at the level of the Heads of
State of Central Asia is a very important platform that
promotes cooperation within the region and beyond
in ensuring peace and trust. The fourth such meeting,
which was held in the Kyrgyz Republic in July of
last year, once again confirmed the commitment of
the Central Asian Heads of State to maintaining a
constructive and mutually beneficial dialogue in the
interest of all peoples of the region and constituted
an important milestone in regional cooperation.
Recognizing the importance of joint efforts to
strengthen a zone of peace, trust and cooperation of
Central Asia, the countries of the region, following the
results of the fourth consultative meeting, launched the
procedure of the signing of a treaty of friendship, good
10/27

16/05/2023

neighbourliness and cooperation for the development
of Central Asia in the twenty-first century between
the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the
Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic
of Uzbekistan. The outcome document of that meeting
(see A/76/920) was circulated to Member States.
We attach great importance to the interactions within
the Central Asia plus format, which has strengthened
cooperation among the partner States of the region and
international and regional organizations, as well as the
mutually beneficial use of their accumulated experience
of multilateral diplomacy.
For Kyrgyzstan, strengthening peace and security
and preventing and ending armed conflicts by raising
awareness and understanding of disarmament issues
among the public, especially young people, is very
important. This year, on 5 March, the International Day
for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Awareness,
which was proclaimed by the General Assembly
(see resolution 77/51) on the initiative of the Kyrgyz
Republic, was celebrated around the world for the first
time. We look forward to commemorating that very
important day every year on 5 March.
Furthermore, I would like to note that last year,
on behalf of the Central Asian zone, our delegation
submitted and facilitated resolution 77/70, entitled
“Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia”, which the General Assembly adopted on
7 December 2022. Kyrgyzstan supports the initiatives
of United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia in strengthening the role
of women and young people in promoting sustainable
development and maintaining peace and security in
the region.
We believe that the Central Asian Women Leaders’
Caucus will continue to promote women’s active
involvement in policymaking and to support their
participation in the socioeconomic life of the States of
Central Asia. Coordinating joint efforts to accelerate
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its 17 Goals is very important for
the Kyrgyz Republic. In that context, we would like
to highlight that the Heads of State of Central Asia, at
their fourth consultative meeting, approved the road
map for the development of regional cooperation for
2022–2024, the framework for the interaction among
the Central Asian States within multilateral formats
23-13752

16/05/2023

and the Regional Green Agenda Programme for
Central Asia.
Recognizing the urgency of the environmental
threats and in order to give a new impetus to the
international community’s efforts to address the
challenges and problems of mountain countries, the
General Assembly, on the initiative of Kyrgyzstan,
decided to proclaim the period 2023–2027 as Five
Years of Action for the Development of Mountain
Regions. We invite Member States and international
organizations to further enhance support for sustainable
mountain development, including by participating in
that initiative.
I would like to inform the Assembly that Kyrgyzstan
is aiming to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
44 per cent by 2030, and that it will try to achieve
carbon neutrality by 2050, which will be made possible
primarily through the development of hydropower.
We have therefore proactively started building small
and medium-sized hydropower plants throughout the
country over the past two years and adopted appropriate
regulations for granting preferential terms to investors.
The largest construction project, the Kambarata-1
hydropower plant, which will have a positive impact
on water issues in the region, has been launched. We
are firmly committed to developing the green economy
and therefore invite our development partners to an
effective and mutually beneficial swap of our country’s
external debt for green initiatives.
We indeed recognize that the region has great
geographical potential, making Central Asia an
important transit zone for commercial markets and
trade between Russia, China, South Asia and Europe.
In that regard, Kyrgyzstan has reached an agreement on
the construction of the China-Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan
railway. The realization of that project will provide us
an access route to the sea via a transit railroad.
In conclusion, I would like to note that in January of
this year, we completed the process of the delimitation
of the Kyrgyz-Uzbek State border. Together with our
brotherly country, Uzbekistan, we have demonstrated
our readiness for dialogue and the search for mutually
acceptable solutions on border issues. That is truly a
historic event, which will make a huge contribution to
regional cooperation based on trust and mutual respect.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the convening of today’s debate
on a zone of peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia.

A/77/PV.70

We commend Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan on successfully steering
the consultations process in order to reach a consensus
on draft resolution A/77/L.67, which Nicaragua is
pleased to co-sponsor.
The Charter of the United Nations calls on all States
Members of the Organization to maintain international
peace, foster friendly relations, promote international
cooperation and settle their disputes by peaceful
means. In developing those purposes and principles,
the international community has recognized that the
establishment of zones of peace in various regions of
the world can contribute to the security of the States
in those areas and to international peace and security
as a whole. By declaring Central Asia as a zone of
peace, trust and cooperation, we continue to advance
towards multipolarity, thus promoting political, social,
economic and cultural integration among the brotherly
countries and peoples of the region.
We recognize the important role played by the
countries of Central Asia in ensuring peace, stability and
sustainable development in the region and in promoting
regional and international cooperation, as well as
their determination to preserve their independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, developing their
relations in peace and freedom.
We support actions such as the creation of
mechanisms for unconditional solidarity cooperation,
greater investment and trade liberalization towards
non-traditional markets, as well as the consolidation
of the positions of developing countries on issues that
should guide the agenda of the international community,
such as the fight against poverty, the prevention of war,
the climate crisis, food security, non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons, energy cooperation, comprehensive
sustainable development and peace.
In our own region, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC) in 2014
declared Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone
of peace, based on respect for the principles and
norms of international law, including the international
instruments to which the member States are party and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. CELAC also declared the commitment of the
peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean to foster
friendly and cooperative relations among themselves
and with other nations, regardless of the differences
between their political, economic and social systems or

23-1375211/27

A/77/PV.70

their levels of development, to practice tolerance and to
live together in peace as good neighbours.
Nicaragua, in its culture of peace with the
international community, continues to defend
multilateralism, building relations based on respect,
equality,
solidarity
and
mutual
cooperation.
Unfortunately, there are still countries that do not
apply this culture of peace that is so necessary for
the peoples of the world. Instead, those countries use
unilateral coercive measures to attack sovereign, free
and independent countries and peoples.
We reject those unilateral measures, wrongly
called sanctions, as well as the intention to apply
them, to countries in Central Asia. These aggressions
undermine the efforts of our peoples to achieve true
and sustainable peace. We must therefore continue to
call for their total elimination.
Nicaragua recognizes the need to continue
strengthening the bonds of friendship and partnership,
sharing the principles and values that we uphold
in defence of independence, sovereignty, selfdetermination and non-interference in the affairs of
States, their people and Government.
We join and support all initiatives that promote
unity, solidarity and respect in order to prevail over those
who have always used the weapons of division, abuse,
authoritarianism, degradation, arrogance, supposed
superiority and the desire for control to continue with
their perverse logic as masters of the world.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I want to thank
Turkmenistan for its introduction of today’s topic and
the speakers before me for their valuable insights. I
also want to congratulate Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan for
establishing a zone of peace, trust and cooperation of
Central Asia.
Central Asia is facing serious challenges such as
climate change, water scarcity, geopolitical tensions and
the threat of terrorism. At the same time, Central Asian
countries has made significant progress in building
up their statehood, strengthening their economies and
improving their standard of living for their population.
We are confident that stronger regional cooperation
will accelerate those trends and further promote
economic prosperity and environmental sustainability.
Regional cooperation will deepen intra-regional trade,
expand the use of renewable energy and protect natural
12/27

16/05/2023

resources. Germany strongly welcomes these positive
developments and stands ready to support these
regional aspirations.
In particular, the zone of peace can create
positive momentum to deepen ties and foster regional
cooperation on a range of important topics. It can
serve as a strong foundation for maintaining peace
and security, bringing forward sustainable and green
development and promoting human rights. We also very
much welcome the explicit recognition in resolution
76/299 of the important role of women and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in that regard.
As a nation in the heart of Europe, Germany
enjoys the benefits of close cooperation with its many
neighbours. After centuries of being ravaged by
conflicts, we, together with other European nations,
have managed to build the European Union, a strong
community in which we have achieved a high degree of
economic, political and social integration. We therefore
strongly welcome efforts by other regions around
the world that also strive to foster peace, trust and
cooperation and do our best to actively support them.
For example, Germany is supportive of the Green
Central Asia initiative, which focuses on joint regional
projects in the fight against the climate crisis. Within
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), we are cooperating with all Central
Asian States to strengthen comprehensive security
in the region, and we are a partner in multiple OSCE
projects to foster long-term stability, resilience and
prosperity for young people in Central Asia.
In conclusion, we wish our Central Asian partners
all the best in reaching the goals of the resolution,
harnessing their full potential for socioeconomic
development and strengthening cooperation among
the States of the region. We are looking forward to
continuing our cooperation and support and to further
deepening our ties as the zone of peace brings the
region even closer together.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this debate and
Turkmenistan for leading the discussion on zone of
peace, trust and cooperation in Central Asia.
The countries of Central Asia have great potential
for cooperation and development. They share common
23-13752

16/05/2023

spiritual, cultural and historical heritage, and they are
brought together by the unity of faith, closeness of the
languages and the peoples’ mentality. The countries of
the region also have common transport-communication
networks and economies that complement one another.
Therefore, in Uzbekistan, we strongly believe that
Central Asia, in the heart of the Eurasian continent, can
once again play an important role as a main intersection
of interregional transport-transit corridors connecting
the East with the West.
In recent years in our region, thanks to the political
will of President Shavkat Mirziyoyev, which was
embraced by the leaders of all Central Asian States,
within a relatively short period of time, we created a
fundamentally new political atmosphere, raised the level
of political trust and strengthened traditionally friendly
and good neighbourly relations among ourselves.
The important outcome of all that work is the
settlement of such acute issues as demarcation of
borders, management of water resources, joint use of
transport communications, among others. In addition,
a visa-free regime has been introduced for the free
movement of our citizens in order to promote active
cultural and tourist exchanges.
At the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan,
consultative meetings of the Heads of State of
Central Asian countries have started to be convened.
Such meetings serve as an excellent platform for our
leaders to exchange opinions on a broad range of
regional and global political issues and discuss ways to
further advance regional and multilateral cooperation
and promote economic, trade and investment and
cultural collaboration.
As a result of that positive shift in relations
among Central Asian countries, mutual trust was
strengthened, which opened myriad opportunities for
the implementation of various large-scale industrial
and investment projects, creating efficient value chains
and developing transport and energy infrastructure. We
are convinced that our strong political will and common
creative spirit will further contribute to advancing close
collaboration among our countries and peoples.
One must underline the growing importance of
a consolidated Central Asian region in maintaining
regional peace and security. In Tashkent, we strongly
believe in the importance of further strengthening
practical cooperation with our neighbours in

A/77/PV.70

confronting the traditional threats of extremism and
terrorism, organized crime and drug-trafficking.
Special attention should also be paid to new
challenges, such as illegal activity on the Internet, which
is currently rife. Today there are no borders for those
threats which penetrate through the web. Therefore,
our law enforcement bodies and other relevant agencies
have closely interacted in confronting those threats.
We also believe that further consolidation of the
region as a zone of peace and cooperation can be assured
through ensuring long-term peace in Afghanistan,
which can play an important role as a natural bridge
connecting Central and South Asia. Uzbekistan stands
ready to cooperate with interested Member States
on involving Afghanistan into regional economic
processes, expanding humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people and promoting important social and
infrastructure projects.
In that regard, I would like to recall the initiative of
the President of Uzbekistan on establishing, under the
auspices of the United Nations, an international highlevel negotiating group to develop and agree with the
de-facto Government of Afghanistan on a road map
for the gradual implementation of the obligations of
the parties.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Central Asian region has enormous opportunities and
tremendous potential. Uzbekistan remains committed
to advancing with its neighbours and all United Nations
Member States mutually beneficial cooperation to
further forge regional collaboration to maintain peace,
stability and prosperity in Central Asia.
Mr. Yoshino (Japan): At the outset, allow me to note
that Japan is very pleased that resolution 76/299 was
adopted by consensus last year. Given our long history
of close cooperation with the Central Asian countries,
Japan gladly joined the consensus and truly appreciates
today’s debate with our fellow Member States. In that
regard, once again we would like to express our deep
respect to the Central Asian countries of Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and, particularly,
Turkmenistan, which has been leading the way on
the resolution.
The year 2022 marked the thirtieth anniversary
of the establishment of diplomatic relations between
Japan and the five Central Asian countries. Japan
established its cooperation mechanism with the region,

23-1375213/27

A/77/PV.70

the Central Asia plus Japan dialogue, which dates back
to 2004, when no other countries had such a framework
of cooperation.
Last December, the ninth Foreign Ministers’
meeting of the Central Asia plus Japan dialogue was
held in Tokyo. There, we reviewed the achievements
of cooperation between Japan and the Central Asian
countries over the past 30 years in areas such as
economic infrastructure improvement, health and
medical care, the environment, border management,
agriculture and human resources development. We
presented a new model with a particular focus on
investing in people and the quality of growth to achieve
sustainable development in the region, amid the
drastically changing international situation.
In addition, we reaffirmed the importance of
mutual cooperation as partners in maintaining and
strengthening a free and open international order
based on the rule of law and agreed on the importance
of upholding the Charter of the United Nations and
other fundamental principles of international law,
such as the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.
Japan once again salutes the enormous efforts of
the relevant organizations and individuals dedicated
to ensuring a more prosperous Central Asia. Among
many entities, we commend the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia for its contribution and commitment to preventive
diplomacy and the Central Asian Women Leaders’
Caucus for its efforts to advance the women and peace
and security agenda.
Japan is working together with Central Asian
countries to tackle a variety of challenges they face.
We also continue to cooperate with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations
Development Programme. Last year, we decided to
provide $4.1 million in grant assistance to empower
youth and strengthen social cohesion in countries across
the region. Japan also continues to provide financial
assistance for a project to strengthen border control
capacity in Central Asia through the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In conclusion, building on those achievements,
Japan will continue to support peace, stability and
sustainable development in the Central Asian region.
14/27

16/05/2023

Mr. Wood (United States of America): The United
States commends Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan on resolution 76/299
declaring Central Asia a zone of peace, trust and
cooperation. The intent to establish the region as a zone
of peace creates a foundation for greater cooperation. It
reinforces the interconnected pillars of a peaceful and
prosperous society: sustainable development, peace
and security, human rights and the rule of law.
Central Asia’s commitment to the principles of
preventive diplomacy strengthens the security of
States within the region, and it is vital to maintaining
international peace and security.
Even so, we were disappointed that last year
some delegations fought vigorously to prevent the
resolution from reaffirming the mutually reinforcing
relationship between human rights and the rule of
law in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Just as
the resolution notes the important role of sustainable
development in advancing peace and security, it should
also note the same of human rights and the rule of law.
The idea that no country or region can flourish
without respect for the human rights of all or for the rule
of law is enshrined in the preamble of the Charter of
the United Nations. It is our responsibility as a General
Assembly to continuously reaffirm our commitment to
those principles.
We were delighted by the resolution’s
acknowledgement of the critical role women play
in the promotion of peace, security and sustainable
development. Let us not forget that women must
always — always — meaningfully participate in policy
leadership, development and implementation. Their
involvement in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution and at all levels of
decision-making will ensure we can move quickly and
comprehensively to address shared challenges.
Here today, the United States again reinforces its
strong commitment to each Central Asian country’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
as well as to supporting a prosperous, secure and
democratic Central Asia.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank
Turkmenistan for initiating today’s important discussion.
Let me start by highlighting the United Kingdom’s
continued support for a stable, secure and prosperous
Central Asia, as envisaged by resolution 76/299. We
23-13752

16/05/2023

are firm advocates of the work of the United Nations
in support of this goal, including through the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventative Diplomacy in
Central Asia. Given the security challenges the region
faces, cooperation and mutual support between the five
Central Asian republics and their global partners are
ever more critical, whether due to the deteriorating
situation in Afghanistan or the economic uncertainty
caused by Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine.
We encourage the Central Asian republics to
continue to work with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund, which offer important tools for managing and
preventing regional conflicts. Political stability, longlasting reform and sustainable economic development
are necessary for Central Asian States to fulfil their
potential. The United Kingdom is strengthening trade
links with all five Central Asian States and continues
to work closely with the region bilaterally and through
our regional programming to support long-term reform
and stability.
Today’s debate also rightly addresses the
environmental challenges that Central Asia faces.
Temperatures in the region are expected to rise faster
than the global average. This is already affecting water
patterns and driving water scarcity and food insecurity.
It is crucial that we find sustainable solutions to these
challenges. We welcome the success of the recent United
Nations Water Conference co-hosted by Tajikistan
and the Netherlands as an example of how the United
Nations can provide support. I hope that together we
can do more in this area.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
initiative of Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, the General Assembly
adopted a resolution in July 2022 declaring Central
Asia a zone of peace, trust and cooperation (resolution
76/299). This reflects the firm determination and solemn
commitment of Central Asian countries to enhancing
mutual trust and cooperation and achieving common
development. China fully supports the establishment of
such a zone in Central Asia and stands ready to work
with other countries to explore and contribute to the
promotion of cooperation for peaceful development in
Central Asia.
The world today is now entering a new period of
turbulent changes and is facing multiple challenges to
international peace and security. More than ever before,

A/77/PV.70

we need to enhance trust, strengthen solidarity and
promote cooperation. China and Central Asian countries
have always developed strategic partnerships based on
the principles of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness,
reciprocal benefit and win-win cooperation.
The China-Central Asia summit will be held in
Xi’an, China on 18 and 19May, that is, starting the
day after tomorrow, with the participation of Chinese
President Xi Jinping and the Central Asian Heads of
State. This is an important action taken by China and
Central Asian countries, with a view to building a
closer China-Central Asian community with a shared
future. It will open a new chapter in China-Central
Asia relations and bring new opportunities and impetus
to the development of each and every Central Asian
country and the strengthening of regional cooperation.
China will work with Central Asian countries to
firmly defend the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, practice genuine multilateralism,
embrace the concept of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security, explore a path to
security and development well-suited to the common
interests of all countries, jointly build a zone of peace,
trust and cooperation in Central Asia and contribute to
the promotion of regional peace, stability, prosperity
and development.
First, China is committed to good-neighbourly ties
and firmly supports the sovereignty, independence,
security and territorial integrity of Central Asian
countries. We welcome countries of the region
working to enhance political mutual trust and jointly
address regional security and development challenges
through dialogue and cooperation. China opposes the
interference by external forces in the internal affairs
of Central Asian countries under any pretext. as such
moves create chaos and turmoil and turn Central Asia
into a battleground for geopolitical games.
Secondly, China will work with Central Asian
countries to scale up the fight against the three
forces of terrorism, separatism and extremism.
Under the framework of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, we will support
Central Asian countries in strengthening cooperation
in border control, law enforcement and security,
preventing and combating transnational organized
crime and cybercrime, and stepping up communication

23-1375215/27

A/77/PV.70

and cooperation on the question of Afghanistan, so as
to jointly maintain regional peace and tranquillity.
Thirdly, China and the Central Asian countries
have achieved positive results through the Belt
and Road cooperation. China will further enhance
economic trade, investment and financing cooperation
with Central Asian partners, build a modern regional
connectivity network, expand people-to-people
exchanges, enable the smooth transportation of goods,
expand cooperation in agriculture, new energy,
e-commerce, the digital economy and other fields, and
enhance cultural and local exchanges to inject strong
momentum into regional cooperation.
China will continue to expand all-around
cooperation with Central Asian countries, elevate
bilateral relations to new heights and make new
contributions to the peace, stability, development and
prosperity of the region and the world at large.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is pleased to participate in the debate on
the item entitled “Zone of peace, trust and cooperation
of Central Asia”, which was included in the agenda of
the seventy-seventh ordinary session of the General
Assembly, following the adoption by consensus of
resolution 76/299, which our country is pleased to
have co-sponsored. We also take this opportunity to
recognize Turkmenistan’s efforts, including within
the framework of this General Assembly, aimed at
promoting initiatives that seek to enhance the value
of dialogue, tolerance, understanding, cooperation,
confidence-building and neutrality as necessary means
to ensuring peace, especially in the current international
situation. We also thank the Turkmen delegation for its
efforts in preparing a number of elements, reflected in
document A/77/859, to guide our deliberations today.
In recent years, the Central Asian region has set
important examples of commitment to peace: from
the entry into force of the Treaty of Semei, which
established the region as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
to the establishment of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which is mandated to facilitate both the addressing
of existing and emerging threats to stability and the
promotion of dialogue and cooperation among the
Governments of the countries of the region, to the
recent signing of the Treaty of Friendship, GoodNeighbourliness and Cooperation for the Development
16/27

16/05/2023

of Central Asia in the Twenty-first Century, which we
hope will soon enter into force. A new step forward
was taken last year when, in full compliance with the
tenets of the United Nations Charter, including the
principle of good-neighbourliness, and based on the
political will of all parties, it was agreed to declare
the Central Asian region a zone of peace, trust and
cooperation. This further strengthens the basis for
integration, peaceful coexistence and the development
of win-win relations between Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, towards the
socioeconomic development and well-being of their
peoples, as well as the consolidation of the progress
already achieved, inter alia, in strengthening their
economies and improving their standard of living.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of Central
Asian countries, not only in promoting mechanisms
aimed at preventing conflict and strengthening
regional peace, security and stability — aware of
the indissoluble link between peace and sustainable
development — but also in promoting initiatives aimed
at deepening dialogue, integration, solidarity and
regional cooperation with a view to addressing, in a
coordinated manner, common challenges and threats,
including in the area of the environment, as well as
defining joint priorities and frameworks for action,
especially within the framework of the consultative
meetings that are held periodically among the leaders
of that important strategic subregion.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela strongly
believes that zones of peace can make a valuable
contribution to strengthening peace and trust among
the Member States of our Organization. Our Latin
American and Caribbean region is an example of that,
especially in the light of the proclamation of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace in the
framework of the second summit of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, held in Havana
in January 2014.
We want to take advantage of this special
opportunity to speak from the rostrum today, faithful
to the tenets of our Bolivarian diplomacy of peace,
to once again reaffirm our unwavering commitment
to crystallizing Latin America and the Caribbean
as a zone of peace, in which differences are resolved
through dialogue, diplomacy, negotiation or any other
mutually agreed mechanisms that work towards the
peaceful resolution of disputes.
23-13752

16/05/2023

Unfortunately, many of the ideals and promises
contained in the Charter of our Organization, founded
more than 77 years ago, still elude the peoples of the
United Nations, who continue to yearn for a more
peaceful and prosperous world. Therefore, in the
context of today’s debate on this important agenda
item, which coincides with the declaration of 2023 as
the International Year of Dialogue as a Guarantee of
Peace — and which should encourage us to mobilize
efforts to promote peace and trust among nations on
the basis of political dialogue, negotiations, mutual
understanding and cooperation — we urge the
responsible members of the international community to
put an end to continuing their recourse to inflammatory
rhetoric and zero-sum games; to taking punitive, divisive
and confrontational approaches; to taking actions that
are reckless, provocative, unilateral or based on double
standards; and to deepening divisions and imposing
questionable visions and agendas, bearing in mind
that such approaches in no way serve the purpose of
achieving lasting peace or preventing the emergence
of new conflict or crisis situations that could endanger
global peace, security and stability.
We therefore renew our firm commitment to
upholding the Charter of the United Nations, both in letter
and in spirit, and to facilitating confidence-building
measures that will create the conditions for a genuine,
good-faith dialogue that is based on mutual respect and
includes diversity in all its forms. We are confident
that will enable us to work together in the framework
of an essential process in which we see each other
as equals, recognize the legitimate concerns of all
and accommodate different points of view, positions
and concerns, so that we can — without pressure or
sanctions — forge the necessary consensuses and
commitments to achieve the common goal of realizing
peace for all our peoples.
Finally, we would like to conclude by expressing
our hope that the establishment of a zone of peace,
trust and cooperation of Central Asia, anchored in the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter, will
bring us closer to achieving that noble goal of peace.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank our Turkmen colleagues for their
initiative in convening today’s meeting of the General
Assembly on such an important topic. Russia is a longstanding and reliable partner of the Central Asian States.
For many years, we have supported our neighbours
in their desire to follow the path of progressive

A/77/PV.70

development. Within the General Assembly, we have
made that evident through our consistent support and
co-sponsorship of resolutions on Central Asia, a clear
example of which was our support for resolution 76/299,
on the establishment of a zone of peace, trust and
cooperation of Central Asia.
Russia and the Central Asian States continue to
systematically strengthen cooperation. On 14 October
2022, Astana hosted the first Russia-Central Asia
summit, and on 14 April, the sixth meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of Russia and the Central Asian States was
successfully held in Samarkand, Uzbekistan. And the
participation of the leaders of the Central Asian States
in the celebration of Victory Day held in Moscow on
9 May was symbolic in reflecting the strength and
maturity of our relations with the States of the region.
For our country, the geopolitical importance of
Central Asia as a neighbouring region and a good
neighbour is extremely high. That fact is also reflected
in Russia’s new foreign policy concept, which states that
ensuring stable, long-term good-neighbourly relations
with the Commonwealth of Independent States member
States, including the Central Asian ones, is the most
important thing for the security, stability, territorial
integrity and socioeconomic development of Russia and
the consolidation of its position as one of the influential
centres of world politics.
The member States of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) are the guarantors of the
security of the Central Asian region. The 201st Russian
Division military base in Tajikistan and Russia’s
joint military base in Kant, Kyrgyzstan, are also key
elements of stability. As for the CSTO itself, the high
demand for its work is regularly reflected through
the General Assembly’s adoption of resolutions on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO,
the most recent of which, resolution 77/13, was adopted
on 21 November 2022.
The situation in Central Asia has always been
a priority on the CSTO agenda, not least because
of the situation in Afghanistan. Invaluable support
for the region has been provided by the specialized
structures of related regional organizations, namely,
the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Executive Committee of
the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We support a peaceful

23-1375217/27

A/77/PV.70

16/05/2023

resolution of the remaining issues among our Central
Asian friends.

peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia”, adopted
last year.

Russia also remains a key trading partner of the
Central Asian States, with a high level of participation
in their economies and as one of the main consumers
of goods produced in the region. Our participation
in the Commonwealth of Independent States and the
membership of Russia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan
in the Eurasian Economic Union are catalysts for
deepening trade and economic ties. The transport and
logistics corridors that run through Russia, including
the International North–South Transport Corridor, play
an important role in the region’s economic development.
The absence of visa barriers, as well as the existence
of a specialized legal framework and the prevalence of
the Russian language in the region, make the Russian
labour market very attractive for Central Asian citizens
who travel abroad to work. For example, the remittances
sent to Uzbekistan by migrant workers accounted for
11 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product in
2022, while in Kyrgyzstan the corresponding figure
exceeded 26 per cent.

Declaring Central Asia a zone of peace, trust
and cooperation was a historic moment that now
significantly contributes to the strengthening of
international peace and security and to promoting the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including the principles of sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
all States.

Against the backdrop of our country’s consistent
efforts to create a zone of peace, trust and cooperation
of Central Asia, we are concerned about the desire of
some Western countries to undermine the stability
and security of the region and weaken its economic
development, including through threats of sanctions.
Nothing good will come of that. Primarily, this pertains
to those who are openly attempting to impose their
world view on others — a world view that is very far
from a peace-loving one.
We would like to ensure our Central Asian partners
that we aspire to cooperation and good neighbourly
relations for the sake of our States and peoples.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President for convening this important
debate on the new agenda item 61, entitled “Zone of
peace, trust and cooperation of Central Asia”. We
would like to express our deep appreciation to the
delegation of Turkmenistan, as well as the delegations of
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan for
this initiative, as a shining example of multilateralism
and diplomacy, which reinforces the advancement of the
three pillars of the United Nations, namely, sustainable
development, peace and security and human rights.
My country, the Republic of Azerbaijan, proudly
co-sponsored resolution 76/299, entitled “Zone of
18/27

The countries of Central Asia play an important
role in ensuring peace, stability and sustainable
development in the region, as well as in promoting
regional and international cooperation in such areas as
science and technology, education, the environment,
trade, transport and culture.
Azerbaijan enjoys friendly relations and constructive
cooperation with all five countries of Central Asia. We
have constructive and close engagement in many areas,
including transport, logistics, energy, agriculture
and tourism. Azerbaijan attaches high importance to
further enhancing our cooperation, focusing on greater
connectivity and communication.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that my
delegation is delighted about the inclusion of this
item on the agenda of the General Assembly and look
forward to comprehensively addressing our common
challenges together.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 61.
Mr. Wallace
the Chair.

(Jamaica),

Vice-President,

took

Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/77/L.68)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.68.
23-13752

16/05/2023

Mr. Cruvinel Barhenho (Brazil): Good morning.
It is an honour to be here today to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.68, entitled “Implementation of
the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition
(2016- 2025)”.
I would like to start by thanking the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Health Organization for their partnership and
trust, which enabled the Brazilian delegation to bring
this text to a successful conclusion. The long-standing
partnership between Brazil and these organizations
is a testament to our deep commitment to advancing
Sustainable Development Goals 2 and 3. I also take
this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation
to the more than 50 Member States that co-sponsored
this draft resolution. The cross-regional support for the
draft resolution is a reaffirmation of our deep belief that
inclusive multilateralism is the only road that can help
us reach our aspirations for a better future for current
and future generations.
On a personal note, I am deeply grateful to
Ambassador Costa Filho of the Brazilian Permanent
Mission to the United Nations for allowing the country’s
youngest representative to facilitate and introduce this
draft resolution. In terms of youth participation, Brazil
is talking the talking and walking the walk.
Proclaimed on 1 April 2016, the United Nations
Decade of Action on Nutrition derives from our shared
belief that, together, countries are able to set a new
ambition and direction in the global nutrition agenda,
in line with the right of every human person to adequate
food. The bold Work Programme for the Nutrition
Decade, to which we are reaffirming our commitment
in this draft resolution, encompasses six action areas
that clearly illustrate both the complexity and ambition
of delivering healthy, adequate and diversified diets
to everyone — from the resilience of food production
on one end to its sustainable consumption by final
consumers on the other — frequently through the
routes, challenges and inequities of international trade.
The draft resolution that we are about to adopt
upholds the whole-of-society and whole-of-Government
spirit of the Work Programme. It not only represents
the resumption of the General Assembly follow-up to
this process, but it also demonstrates the diversity of
views, interests and concerns that Member States have
in this area. It recognizes the added value of indigenous
peoples food systems’ to healthy diets, but encourages

A/77/PV.70

further technological cooperation to promote resilience
and productivity; it urges countries to make food
security and nutrition a high domestic priority, but
stresses the need for a truly open, fair, inclusive and
equitable multilateral trading system; and it emphasizes
the importance of building synergy between the Decade
and other ongoing processes, while steering clear of the
risks of mandate expansion and effort duplication.
The Secretary-General’s report on which this draft
resolution is based (A/76/796) reaffirms a well-known
fact for everyone in this Hall — consequential action
for the improvement of the world’s food security and
nutrition indicators is necessary and urgent.
Unfortunately, since the Decade was proclaimed
and especially in the past few years, many parts of
the world have seen hard-won progress start going in
reverse. As projected by the report, by the end of 2022,
disruptions related to the coronavirus disease pandemic
resulted in up to 16.3 million additional children
suffering from wasting and up to 4.5 million additional
children facing stunted growth. Such a trend is never
positive for our developmental goals, but is especially
worrisome when it poses such lifelong consequences.
The Brazilian Government is fully committed to
getting nutrition back on the right track of our agreed
goals. Since the start of the year, we re-established the
National Council for Food Security and Nutrition in
order to make our civil society part of the deliberations
and implementation of our food security and nutrition
policies. In addition, we are fully engaged in soon
launching Brazil’s Zero Hunger Strategy, aimed at
establishing a new paradigm of policymaking that
recognizes hunger as the most extreme and perverse
culmination of societal inequities, such as income,
regional, racial, social and gender disparities.
However, the challenge does not stop at our borders.
We are also eager to pursue a fruitful and substantial
agenda for food security and nutrition through
multilateral cooperation. We will continue using such
spaces as the School Meals Coalition to share our best
practices, experiences and capacities in integrated
and multisectoral policies aimed at food security and
nutrition. We are committed to making food security a
priority in our presidencies of MERCOSUR, in 2023,
the Group of 20, in 2024, and the BRICS group of
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, in 2025,
respectively.

23-1375219/27

A/77/PV.70

16/05/2023

As recognized in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, our development challenges are
indivisible and integrated, and so our policies to tackle
them will also be integrated. In the same vein, food
security and nutrition are a fundamental part of human
life and development, from the day life starts to the day
it ends, and so it must also be a fundamental part of the
work of the United Nations. This is our promise and
appeal before Member States today.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider the draft resolution.
For the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/77/L.68, the following countries have also
become co-sponsors of the draft: Bangladesh, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, the Gambia, Germany, Iceland, Indonesia,
Ireland, Latvia, Lebanon, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, the
Netherlands, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam and Zambia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
take action on draft resolution A/77/L.68 entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition (2016–2025)”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.68?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/285).

A/77/L.68

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.
20/27

Mr. Hill (United States of America): I wish to
speak in explanation of position on resolution 77/285,
which was just adopted under agenda item 13.
On behalf of the Government of the United States,
I would like to extend our thanks to the facilitator. We
were pleased to join the consensus on the resolution and
wish to explain several points in the text.
The United States regrets that the resolution does
not state the importance that eliminating food loss
and waste has for the global efforts to implement the
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition, aimed
at reducing hunger and malnutrition, improving food
security, creating jobs, spurring economic development
and mitigating climate change. Without addressing
food loss and waste, many goals of the Decade of
Action on Nutrition will not be met. The United
States prioritizes the reduction of food loss and waste
and encourages States and stakeholders to join us in
actively supporting the Food is Never Waste Coalition,
launched in conjunction with the United Nations Food
Systems Summit in 2021. The United States recognizes
the right of everyone to an adequate standard of living,
including food, as reflected in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The United States understands that resolution
77/285, including its references to the right to food,
does not alter the current state of conventional or
customary international law. Neither does it imply that
States must implement obligations under human rights
instruments to which they are not party. The United
States is not a party to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), and
the rights contained therein are not justiciable in United
States courts.
Furthermore, as the ICESCR provides, each State
party undertakes to take steps to achieve progressively
the full realization of the rights recognized in the
Covenant. We note that countries have a wide array
of policies and actions that may be appropriate in
promoting that progressive realization. We therefore
believe that the resolution should not try to define
the content of the rights provided under the ICESCR,
including its article 11, or suggest that specific steps are
required of States parties to progressively achieve the
full realization of those rights.
The United States is also concerned about the undue
prominence given to agroecology in the resolution.
23-13752

16/05/2023

Focusing on the advancement of agroecological
principles should not be seen as preferential, or come at
the expense of other sustainable agricultural practices
for producing food, fibre and other agricultural products.
The United States disassociates itself from
paragraph 5 of the resolution, to the extent that the
paragraph promotes technology transfer or distribution
of intellectual property rights — which is neither
voluntary nor on mutually agreed terms. The United
States firmly considers that the strong protection and
enforcement of intellectual property provides the
critical incentives needed to drive the innovation that
will address the health, environmental and development
challenges of today and tomorrow.
The United States understands that, with respect to
the resolution in general and paragraph 5 in particular,
the references to the dissemination of technology
and the transfer thereof or access thereto pertain to
voluntary technology transfer on mutually agreed
terms, and that all references to access to information
or knowledge are made available with the authorization
of the legitimate holder. The United States underscores
the importance of regulatory and legal environments
that support innovation. The language in paragraph
5 concerning technology transfer does not, from the
United States perspective, serve as a precedent for
future negotiated documents.
We refer the Assembly to our full statement, to be
posted on the website of the United States Mission to
the United Nations, and to be published in the Digest of
United States Practice in International Law.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 13.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/77/L.67)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.67.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): It is my honour, on
behalf of the delegation of Turkmenistan, to introduce
the draft resolution entitled “World Sustainable
Transport Day”, contained in document A/77/L.67.

A/77/PV.70

At the outset, we would like to express our
sincere gratitude to all delegations for their productive
engagement in and the constructive inputs they brought
to the negotiations that led to the substantive text of this
draft resolution. We note with appreciation the broad
interregional support for document A/77/L.67. I am
honoured to announce that more than 50 countries have
joined the list of sponsors. Throughout the process of
negotiating the text, we made every effort to maintain a
constructive atmosphere and reach a broad consensus.
Sustainable transport is essential for a sustainable
future. It plays a fundamental role in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Transport drives development, links people, connects
local communities to the world, builds markets and
facilitates trade. In turn, sustainable transport drives
sustainable development, and it is fundamental to
meeting the demands of people in their personal and
economic lives, while respecting the ability of future
generations to address their needs.
Sustainable transport and mobility systems focus
on reducing the environmental impact of transport
while also promoting economic growth and social
well-being. It involves a variety of strategies, including
the use of public transportation, walking, cycling,
electric vehicles, and the development of low-carbon
infrastructure. World Sustainable Transport Day
would be an opportunity to raise awareness about the
benefits of sustainable transportation and mobility.
It would be a chance to promote low-emission modes
of transportation, such as cycling, walking and public
transportation, the use of alternative fuels and energyefficient vehicles, and to enhance interconnectivity
at the regional and global levels. It would also be an
opportunity to showcase the progress that has been
made in sustainable transportation and to encourage
further action.
The lessons learned from the immediate and
short-term measures taken by Governments show
that the transport sector was not prepared to operate
in the conditions that resulted from the pandemic.
These measures led to disruptions in logistics chains
across the entire globe, which had a significant impact
on the delivery of essential goods, such as food
stuffs, pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and fuels,
especially for landlocked developing countries and
other economically vulnerable countries, which often
rely heavily on imports to cover their basic needs. The
declaration of World Sustainable Transport Day could

23-1375221/27

A/77/PV.70

16/05/2023

play a significant role in reminding the international
community of the lessons learned and the challenges
that remain with us.
The operative part of the draft resolution requests
the President of the General Assembly, in collaboration
with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
to convene, during the seventy-eighth session of the
Assembly, a high-level meeting in New York to promote
sustainable transport cooperation. This meeting would
be convened in support of the implementation of the 2030
Agenda, the Paris Agreement, the New Urban Agenda
and the political declaration of the high-level meeting
on improving global road safety (resolution 76/294).
The main objectives of the meeting would be to
promote sustainable transport, enhance international
cooperation on the transport agenda, strengthen
sustainable mobility partnerships, share best practices
and find solutions.
World Sustainable Transport Day is an essential
call for us to make progress in promoting sustainable
transportation and mobility. It is a chance to raise
awareness, drive policy change and encourage
individuals and organizations to take immediate action.
Let us work together to make that day a reality and to
create a better and more sustainable future for all. I
hope that Member States will support our initiative by
co-sponsoring draft resolution A/77/L.67 and joining
the global efforts to create a sustainable future for all.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.67.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.67 and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.67: Algeria,
Angola, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Colombia, the Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, the Gambia, Haiti, Honduras,
Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Maldives, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
22/27

Sierra Leone, Singapore, Suriname, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zambia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/77/L.67, entitled
“World Sustainable Transport Day”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.67?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/286).

A/77/L.67

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 18.
Agenda item 22 (continued)
Eradication of poverty and other development issues
Draft resolution (A/77/L.69)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.69.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): On behalf of Bangladesh
and its 62 co-sponsors, as of the last count, I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.69, entitled
“Community-based primary health care: a participatory
and inclusive approach to universal health coverage”,
the first-ever United Nations draft resolution on the
community clinic model.
It is my distinct pleasure to thank all delegations for
their valuable contributions and support in finalizing
the draft resolution for adoption today. And our special
thanks go to all the experts for their tireless efforts
and flexibility to reach consensus on this landmark
draft resolution. We also thank the World Health
Organization for its support and contribution to our
efforts. Allow me to take this opportunity to also thank
the 62 Member States that have co-sponsored the draft
resolution as of now, and we sincerely hope that more
States will join as co-sponsors before its imminent
adoption. It is extremely important for the General
Assembly to convey a strong message of universal
support for our collective efforts on community-based
primary health care and its paramount importance in
poverty alleviation and sustainable development.
23-13752

16/05/2023

The draft resolution is a long-overdue recognition
of the critical role of community-based primary health
care in achieving universal health coverage. It calls for
the promotion of a participatory and inclusive approach
by providing comprehensive, accessible and affordable
primary health care that engages communities,
particularly those in underserved areas and hard-toreach populations in the design, implementation and
monitoring of health programmes. It is imperative to
adopt a whole-of-society approach to tackle universal
access to health in a holistic manner. Given our country’s
successful experience in implementing communitybased primary health care, Bangladesh firmly believes
that approach can improve health outcomes, reduce
health inequities and strengthen health systems,
especially in low-resource settings.
Bangladesh has a pluralistic health system in which
both public and private sector providers play important
roles. We are committed, in line with the Declaration of
Alma-Ata of the International Conference on Primary
Health Care, to ensuring health for all and providing
all citizens with the right to access quality health care
without facing financial hardship in order to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and universal
health coverage. As a part of its existing primary
health care system, the Government of Bangladesh
has started to establish community clinics — one for
every 6,000 people — in rural areas, as part of Sheikh
Hasina’s initiative for community clinics, which is
a unique example of public-private partnership. The
Government of Bangladesh has been able to establish
more than 14,000 community clinics all over the
country, after having made intensified efforts in
that regard since 2010. The community clinics have
now become the Government’s primary strategy for
achieving universal health care. Many other countries
in the world have promoted and established communitybased health services.
Community clinic-based health care services can
reduce poverty — under SDG 1 — by increasing access
to quality health care for underserved populations,
including those who live in poverty. When people have
access to preventive care, early treatment and chronic
disease management, they are more likely to stay
healthy and to prevent costly health crises. In addition,
community health-care services can create jobs and
stimulate local economies, which can help to reduce
poverty by increasing income and improving overall
financial stability. By working in partnership with

A/77/PV.70

community organizations and local leaders, communitybased health care services can empower communities
and help to build strong, healthy and equitable societies
for all. Community-based health care services can
directly help achieve SDG 3 — on good health and
well-being — and its targets by providing preventive
and curative health-care services in the community and
reducing the burden of disease. They also play a crucial
role in achieving other SDGs, namely, Goals 2, 4, 5, 6,
8 and 10.
The draft resolution before us calls on Member
States to allocate adequate human and financial
resources and to build synergies with other development
priorities in order to support the strengthening of
community-based primary health care and to explore
innovative approaches in their respective countries.
It also invites international financial institutions,
multilateral and regional development banks and
donors to provide appropriate resources, especially for
developing countries, to strengthen community-based
health services towards the full implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The adoption of today’s draft resolution, on
community-based primary health care, would be a
watershed moment in the global efforts for universal
health coverage. Implementing universal access to
health is a global challenge that needs global solidarity
and a collective effort.
Let me conclude by calling on the Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/77/L.69 with a strong mandate,
which could serve as a road map for strengthening
primary health care and advancing universal health
coverage globally. By working together, we can ensure
that all individuals and communities have access to
quality health services that are responsive to their
needs and priorities.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.69.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.69 and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become co-sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.69:
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Brazil,

23-1375223/27

A/77/PV.70

16/05/2023

Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, the Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Fiji, the Gambia, Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Malawi,
Maldives, Mozambique, Nauru, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, the Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Togo, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
take action on draft resolution A/77/L.69, entitled
“Community-based primary health care: a participatory
and inclusive approach to universal health coverage”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.69?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/287).

A/77/L.69

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of position on the resolution just adopted, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt congratulates
the delegation of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
on the adoption of resolution 77/287, and thanks it for
facilitating the related consultations.
We believe that the resolution reflects the successful
development experience of Bangladesh in the context of
seeking to improve aspects of health care. We consider
the resolution as motivation for all Member States to
continue developing their national programmes aimed
at achieving universal health coverage and achieving
Sustainable Development Goal 3. The adoption of the
resolution reflects the growing need to increase elements
of the support provided to developing countries in order
to advance their efforts in developing the efficiency of
health systems in accordance with their priorities and
in line with the principle of national ownership. My
delegation looks forward to continuing to support that
work in the upcoming governmental consultations on
the political declaration on universal health coverage,
which is scheduled to be adopted in September.
The delegation of Egypt would like to explain
its position on the resolution’s sixteenth preambular
paragraph, which was proposed by some delegations
during the consultations, although a large number
of other delegations had made it clear that it was not
24/27

appropriate to include that paragraph in a resolution
that primarily concerns the experience of national
development — as the text of the paragraph does not
pertain to the development of health systems or the
provision of health care in general.
Egypt is committed to ensuring the highest level
of health care for all and to continuing its efforts to
improve the efficiency of our country’s health systems,
in accordance with the Egypt Vision 2030 and the
100 Million Healthy Lives presidential initiative. We
believe that it was not appropriate to limit the sixteenth
preambular paragraph to one aspect of health care,
especially since the resolution was considered under
the agenda item “Eradication of poverty and other
development issues”. Accordingly, the delegation of
Egypt stresses that our interpretation of the text of the
sixteenth preambular paragraph is based on the work
programme of the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development, which was held in Cairo,
and is in accordance with what is stipulated in Egypt’s
national laws and legislation and consistent with the
religious and cultural values of our society.
Mr. Aref (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the outset,
please allow me to express our gratitude to the delegation
of Bangladesh for its hard work and commendable
efforts made in the negotiation process leading to
the adoption of resolution 77/287. We attach great
importance to its dedication and efforts in highlighting
the importance of universal health coverage.
In line with the relevant principles of the
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
following the implementation of national programmes,
remarkable progress has been made in enhancing access
to medical care and health coverage for our population.
We will continue our efforts to strengthen measures
with respect to universal health coverage aimed at
enhancing the health and well-being of people.
Despite the tremendous measures we have taken
at the national level in addressing universal health
coverage and health policies, the promulgation and
application of the unilateral coercive measures against
my country continue to impede our efforts in that area.
Such wrongful acts, which are a flagrant violation of
the fundamental principles of international law and
the principles set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, hinder the population’s full achievement of
economic and social development and negatively affect
the enjoyment of human rights, including the right to
23-13752

16/05/2023

health, as well as well-being and access to medicines.
It goes without saying that the unilateral coercive
measures also impair the allocation of resources and
undermine the ability of States to implement healthrelated programmes and commitments. In the light of
that, we emphasize that States must desist and refrain
from promulgating and applying unilateral coercive
measures, so as to ensure the full enjoyment of all
people of the highest attainable standard of health.
Consistent with resolution 77/287, we would like to
reiterate that achieving the objectives of the resolution,
including health financing, requires global solidarity
and collective efforts by addressing the barriers that
developing countries face in that area and promoting
genuine international cooperation among Member
States. In that regard, we underline the importance of
adopting concrete measures at the international level
to ensure strengthened cooperation among Member
States, including financial and technical assistance
upon request, and based on the needs and priorities of
the requesting States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran highlights that the
provisions of the resolution and its implementation are
subject to our national laws, regulations and priorities,
as well as our cultural, religious and social specificities
and contexts.
Ms. Morris Garrido (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is committed to communitybased primary health-care services as a participatory
and inclusive approach to achieving universal health
coverage. However, Guatemala dissociates itself the
from sixteenth preambular paragraph of resolution
77/287, taking into account that the language contained
therein runs counter to our national legislation
and public policy on the protection of life and the
institutionalization of the family.
Guatemala promotes, defends and protects the
human rights of all persons, without discrimination,
within a framework of ensuring the conventionality of
its laws. My country therefore expresses its reservations
regarding the application of terms, conditions and
provisions that explicitly or implicitly contradict the
Political Constitution of the Republic of Guatemala and
its internal legal system, including, but not limited to,
issues related to sexual and reproductive rights. We also
reserve the right to interpret the term “reproductive
rights”, which for the State of Guatemala does not
include abortion.

A/77/PV.70

There is no international consensus on the
interpretation of reproductive rights, and Guatemala’s
national legislation pertains to sexual and reproductive
health policies only — and not to reproductive rights,
which could be interpreted as the right to abortion or
abortion practices, which contravenes my country’s
national legislation.
Mr. Gueye (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to thank the delegation
of Bangladesh for its excellent work in facilitating
the negotiations on resolution 77/287, which is an
important resolution.
The General Assembly has adopted it at a crucial
time. After barely turning the page on the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the world continues to be faced with
its many after-effects, which have left indelible marks
on our health systems, thereby demonstrating the
fragility and limitations of those systems when it comes
to the imperative of universal health security.
Undoubtedly, the text we have just adopted, in
addition to being a relevant contribution to the various
political statements made by Member States at the
high-level meetings on health and development issues,
will serve as the basis for an articulated response
to combat the inequalities that exist in the field of
health, both within individual countries and from one
country to another. It will also serve as a means for
political commitment towards the adoption of action
plans and the development of successful multilateral
strategies, especially with regard to socioeconomic and
environmental factors. It is for these ambitious reasons
to effectively address our shared sanitation challenges
that my delegation endorses the process and welcomes
the consensus that led to its adoption.
However, Senegal did not co-sponsor the text due
to the inclusion of the sixteenth preambular paragraph,
which we consider very ambiguous and contrary to
our consistent position, especially as regards the term
“sexual rights”, to which my delegation would like to
object. We reserve the right to interpret that paragraph
in accordance to the laws and the cultural and religious
values of my country.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We commend Bangladesh for its facilitation
of the negotiations process. Russia joined the consensus
on resolution 77/287.

23-1375225/27

A/77/PV.70

The sixteenth preambular paragraph retains a
reference to the outcome document of the review
conference on the Programme of Action of the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development. This is problematic for our delegation.
Pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 65/234, the
agreements reached on the aforementioned Programme
are not subject to repeat negotiations. We also share
Iran’s view on the negative impact of unilateral
measures. On the whole, we express our gratitude for
the useful initiative of this resolution.
Primary health care involves comprehensive
care for human health throughout the lifespan of an
individual. It ranges from strengthening health and
preventing diseases to treatment, rehabilitation and
palliative care. As noted in the resolution, the concept
of primary health care has been heavily influenced
by the experience of the development of health care
systems in socialist countries.
The resolution adopted today will also give impetus
to efforts that Russia is undertaking at the national
level. Ever since 2019, we have been implementing
the measures stipulated by a federal project for the
development of our primary health care system, which
seeks to improve the accessibility of primary health
care for residents of remote and sparsely populated
areas, develop medical airlift services, form a system
to protect patients’ rights, improve citizens’ access to
polyclinics and polyclinic departments and introduce
standards and rules for a new model for organizing the
provision of health care. We are improving coverage of
preventive check-ups and other medical examinations.
As of the end of 2022, in the implementation of this
federal project, 6.5 million visits were made to new or
updated paramedic units, paramedic and obstetric units
and outpatient clinics. Mobile medical teams made
300,000 visits, serving some 9 million people. The
adoption of this resolution will have a positive impact
on ensuring comprehensive health care coverage and
will also help to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, including those related to health, poverty
eradication, the eradication of hunger, access to water,
sanitation, employment and economic growth.
Ms. Pichardo Urbina (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks Bangladesh for
submitting this resolution forward to promote and
guarantee access to universal health coverage, a right
26/27

16/05/2023

that our Government recognizes and provides to the
whole of the Nicaraguan population.
With regard to the paragraphs that refer to universal
access to sexual and reproductive rights, we note that
those concepts and their interpretation are governed by
the national legislation of each country.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting. May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 22?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Draft resolution (A/77/L.66)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item
69, entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”,
to take action on a draft resolution issued as A/77/L.66.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/77/L.66.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.66, and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Norway,
Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
23-13752

16/05/2023

A/77/PV.70

Switzerland, Thailand, Türkiye, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.66, entitled
“Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster”. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution
A/77/L.66?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/288).

A/77/L.66

was

adopted

The Acting President: I have been requested to
deliver the following remarks on behalf of the President
of the General Assembly.
“This resolution, initiated by Belarus in the past
and by Ukraine during this meeting, touches upon

important issues of nuclear safety and reminds us of
the environmental and human catastrophe that can
occur when nuclear reactors are unsafe. Managing
such disasters and their aftermath requires regional
cooperation and dialogue. I am pleased to see the
broad support for the resolution and its crossregional co-sponsoring. I call on Member States
to continue to work together on issues related to
nuclear safety and humanitarian affairs.”
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d)
of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

23-1375227/27
