United Nations

A/RES/56/144

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 119 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/583/Add.1)]

56/144. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/157 of 17 December 1999 and 55/90 of
4 December 2000 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/67 of 26 April
2000, 1
Mindful that the International Covenants on Human Rights 2 constitute the first
all-embracing and legally binding international treaties in the field of human rights
and, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 form the core of the
International Bill of Human Rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 4 on the status of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 5
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and reaffirming that all
human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the promotion and protection of one category of rights
should never exempt or excuse States from the promotion and protection of the
other rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in examining the progress
made by States parties in fulfilling the obligations undertaken in the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in providing recommendations to States
parties on their implementation,

_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
4
A/56/178.
5
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.

01 48506

A/RES/56/144

Considering that the effective functioning of the Human Rights Committee
and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is indispensable for the
full and effective implementation of the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the importance of regional human rights instruments and
monitoring mechanisms in complementing the universal system of promotion and
protection of human rights,
1.
Reaffirms the importance of the International Covenants on Human
Rights 2 as major components of international efforts to promote universal respect
for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2.
Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General at the Millennium
Assembly of the United Nations to invite heads of State and Government to sign,
ratify or accede to the International Covenants on Human Rights, and expresses its
appreciation to those States that have done so;
3.
Strongly appeals to all States that have not yet done so to become parties
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2 and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 as well as to accede to the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights5 and
to make the declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
4.
Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
intensify systematic efforts to encourage States to become parties to the
International Covenants on Human Rights and, through the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, to assist such States, at their request, in
ratifying or acceding to the Covenants and to the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to achieving
universal adherence;
5.
Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties
with their obligations under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and,
where applicable, the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
6.
Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of human rights by
derogation, and underlines the necessity of strict observance of the agreed
conditions and procedures for derogation under article 4 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, bearing in mind the need for States parties
to provide the fullest possible information during states of emergency so that the
justification for the appropriateness of measures taken in those circumstances can be
assessed, and in this regard takes note of General Comment No. 29 adopted by the
Human Rights Committee; 6
7.
Encourages States parties to consider limiting the extent of any
reservations that they lodge to the International Covenants on Human Rights, to
formulate any reservations as precisely and narrowly as possible and to ensure that
no reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant treaty;
8.
Also encourages States parties to review regularly any reservations made
in respect of the provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights and the
_______________
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40), vol. I,
annex VI.

2

A/RES/56/144

Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a
view to withdrawing them;
9.
Takes note with appreciation of the annual reports of the Human Rights
Committee submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth 7 and fifty-sixth 8
sessions, and takes note of General Comments Nos. 27, 9 28 10 and 29 6 adopted by the
Committee;
10. Welcomes the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights on its twentieth and twenty-first sessions 11 and on its twenty-second, twentythird and twenty-fourth sessions, 12 and takes note of General Comments Nos. 11, 13
12, 14 13 15 and 14 16 adopted by the Committee;
11. Urges States parties to fulfil in good time such reporting obligations
under the International Covenants on Human Rights as may be requested and to
make use in their reports of gender-disaggregated data, and stresses the importance
of taking fully into account a gender perspective in the implementation of the
Covenants at the national level, including in the national reports of States parties
and in the work of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights;
12. Calls upon States parties that have not yet submitted core documents 17 to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to do so,
and invites all States parties regularly to review and update their core documents;
13. Urges States parties to take duly into account, in implementing the
provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights, the recommendations
and observations made during the consideration of their reports by the Human
Rights Committee and by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
as well as the views adopted by the Human Rights Committee under the first
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
14. Invites States parties to give particular attention to the dissemination at
the national level of their reports submitted to the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the summary records relating
to the examination of those reports by the Committees and the recommendations and
observations made by the Committees after the examination of those reports;
15. Urges all States to publish the texts of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil

_______________
7

Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/55/40).
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40).
9
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/55/40), vol. I, annex VI A.
10
Ibid., annex VI B.
11
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum
(E/2000/22 and Corr.1).
12
Ibid., 2001, Supplement No. 2 (E/2001/22).
13
Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum (E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex IV.
14
Ibid., annex V.
15
Ibid., annex VI.
16
Ibid., 2001, Supplement No. 2 (E/2001/22), annex IV.
17
See HRI/CORE/1 and addenda.
8

3

A/RES/56/144

and Political Rights in as many local languages as possible and to distribute them
and make them known as widely as possible in their territories;
16. Urges each State party to translate, publish and make widely available in
its territory by appropriate means the full text of the concluding observations on its
reports to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights;
17. Reiterates that States parties should take into account, in their
nomination of members to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, that the Committees shall be composed of
persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human
rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of the participation of some
persons having legal experience, and that members serve in their personal capacity,
and also reiterates that, in the elections of the Committees, consideration shall be
given to equitable geographical distribution of membership and to the representation
of the different forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems;
18. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, when considering the reports of States parties, to
continue to identify specific needs that might be addressed by United Nations
departments, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, including through
the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
19. Stresses the need for improved coordination among relevant United
Nations mechanisms and bodies in supporting States parties, upon their request, in
implementing the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and
encourages continued efforts in this direction;
20. Takes note of the adoption by the Human Rights Committee of its revised
rules of procedure, 18 and welcomes the efforts of the Human Rights Committee and
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights regularly to review their
working methods in order to increase their efficiency and effectiveness;
21. Welcomes the meeting between the Human Rights Committee and States
parties, held on 30 October 2000, to exchange ideas on how to render the working
methods of the Committee more efficient, expresses appreciation for the decision of
the Committee to organize similar consultations in 2002, and encourages all States
parties to continue to contribute to the dialogue with practical and concrete
proposals and ideas on ways to improve the effective functioning of the Human
Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
22. Also welcomes the continuing efforts of the Human Rights Committee
and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to strive for uniform
standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenants on
Human Rights, and appeals to other bodies dealing with similar human rights
questions to respect those uniform standards, as expressed in the general comments
of the Committees;
23. Stresses the need for further efforts towards developing indicators and
benchmarks to measure progress in the national implementation by States parties of
_______________
18
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40), vol. I,
annex III B.

4

A/RES/56/144

the rights protected by the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
24. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision 2001/220 of 4 June
2001, in which the Council authorized the appointment by the Commission on
Human Rights of an independent expert to examine the question of a draft optional
protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and
invites the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to consider
contributing to the work of the independent expert;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to assist States parties to
the International Covenants on Human Rights in the preparation of their reports,
including by convening seminars or workshops at the national level for the training
of government officials engaged in the preparation of such reports and by exploring
other possibilities available under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights effectively assists the Human Rights
Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the
implementation of their respective mandates by providing, inter alia, adequate
Secretariat staff resources and conference and other relevant support services;
27. Decides to endorse the request by the Human Rights Committee to hold
an additional week of meetings at Geneva in 2002 in order to reduce further the
existing backlog;
28. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General, taking into account the
suggestions of the Human Rights Committee, to take determined steps, in particular
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, to give more
publicity to the work of that Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Committee
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session, under the item entitled “Human rights questions”, a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including all
reservations and declarations.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

5
