S/PV.7768

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7768th meeting

Tuesday, 13 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-28515 (E)
*1628515*

S/PV.7768

The situation in Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/774, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by all Council members. I would
like to thank all Council members for sponsoring the
draft resolution, which is now a presidential text.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/729, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
United Nations mission in Colombia.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2307 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
United Kingdom, I warmly welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2307 (2016) today, and I
congratulate the Government of Colombia on the
historic peace agreement reached with the Fuerzas
2/10

13/09/2016

“Historic” is a word that is sometimes overused in
this Chamber, and yet today it could not be more fitting.
Through this resolution, we have marked history — an
agreement that brings to an end over half a century
of fighting and that has taken almost four years to
negotiate. It is a process that is already bringing the
dividends of peace. Just this weekend, we saw more
children released into a new life — one without guns
and without fear. Both parties have shown great bravery
and leadership in giving those children and every other
Colombian genuine hope for the future.
It takes courage to lay aside weapons and
accept the protection of a former enemy. It took a
bold step — perhaps an unprecedented step — for a
Government to put its country on the Council’s agenda.
In turn, the Council has shown great sensitivity and
flexibility in responding quickly to Colombia’s request.
As the penholder on this issue, I am proud of the role
that the United Kingdom has played, both here and in
Colombia, in support of the peace agreement, and I
pay tribute in particular to Cuba and Norway, as well
as Chile and Venezuela, for their sustained support
throughout the process.
But resolution 2307 (2016) is not just about tributes;
it is also about providing our own support to make sure
that this historic agreement turns into a historic peace.
Through the resolution, we have finalized the mandate
of the United Nations mission. We have authorized 450
United Nations observers to be there on the ground,
verifying the return of peace after over 50 years
of conflict. We have authorized the United Nations
mission to contribute, together with the Government
of Colombia, towards the camps for the FARC. And
we have committed to doing all that in a way that
maximizes the number of women in the mission.
Resolution 2307 (2016) is just one more milestone
in Colombia’s long journey towards peace. Outside this
Chamber, generations of ordinary Colombians have
lived their lives knowing nothing but war, and they now
stand on the brink of peace. Next month, the people of
Colombia will have a momentous opportunity to choose
between a lasting peace or a return to years of conflict
and suffering. The choice is in their hands.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its work in leading the negotiations on the drafting of
16-28515

13/09/2016

The situation in Colombia

resolution 2307 (2016), which we adopted today in the
belief that it will help to consolidate and strengthen peace
at this hopeful stage for Colombia. Uruguay commends
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo for
the historic agreement reached on 24 August on ending
the conflict and building stable and lasting peace in
Colombia, which made it possible for us to adopt today’s
resolution. My country acknowledges and highlights
the commitment and courage of the parties during the
four years of negotiations. The implementation of the
agreement will put an end to the last and oldest conflict
on the hemisphere, while consolidating Latin America
and the Caribbean as a zone of peace. My country also
acknowledges the ongoing efforts of Cuba and Norway
as guarantor countries, as well as the work of Chile and
Venezuela as supporting countries during the peace
negotiations. We are also grateful for the complete and
detailed report (S/2016/729) of the Secretary-General,
which informed the drafting of today’s resolution and
which details the complex work still ahead, which we
trust will be concluded successfully.
At this new stage in the process, Uruguay reaffirms
its support for peace in Colombia and reiterates its
readiness and willingness to continue to work with
the parties in any way they deem we can be useful.
Uruguay is very pleased to point out that this was
a process initiated and led by Colombians, with
Colombians as the main focus of its future success.
We believe that hallmark of the process is an example
for the international community. We will continue
attentively to follow each step forward in this new
phase of the process in the same spirit of supporting
the Government and the people of Colombia at such a
crucial stage of their national history and that of the
entire American continent.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): After nearly
four years of negotiations and over half a century of
conflict, the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) have
reached a final peace accord that covers myriad complex
issues. Today the United States welcomes the support
of the Security Council to help Colombia implement its
final peace accord with the FARC, and congratulates
the parties for their sustained commitment to ending
the longest-running conflict in the Americas, which
tragically resulted in hundreds of thousands of
deaths and tens of thousands of kidnappings and
displaced millions of Colombians. We also thank

S/PV.7768

Cuba and Norway for the special roles they played as
co-guarantors, as well as Venezuela and Chile, which
supported the process.
As President Obama said,
“Even as we mark the end of an era of war,
we recognize that the work of achieving a just
and lasting peace is only beginning. Yet just as
the United States has been Colombia’s partner in
a time of war, we will be Colombia’s partner in
waging peace.”
Through resolution 2307 (2016), the Security
Council makes clear that the United Nations also
stands with the Colombian people as they work towards
implementing the final peace accord. The agreement’s
successful implementation is integral to the hard work
of securing a truly just and lasting peace, which all
those gathered here today know is something that the
Colombian people unquestionably deserve.
Today’s resolution will ensure the readiness of the
United Nations monitoring and verification mission in
Colombia by updating the mandate with details that
were unavailable last January when resolution 2261
(2016) was adopted. The United States commends
those countries that will be playing a role in the United
Nations monitoring and verification mechanism to
monitor and verify the bilateral ceasefire, the cessation
of hostilities and the disarmament process.
The stakes for the success of the mission are high.
The recent killing of five human rights activists in
Colombia, including the assassination of Nestor Iván
Martínez over the weekend, makes clear that the peace
is still fragile. The United Nations monitoring and
verification responsibilities will be critical to building
confidence between the parties and preventing a return
to armed conflict. With today’s adoption, we are
confident it will be up to the task.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
co-sponsored and voted in favor of resolution 2307
(2016), on the establishment and operation of the United
Nations political mission in the Republic of Colombia,
which complements resolution 2261 (2016). We did
so out of our conviction that the former constitutes a
fundamental element in the verification and monitoring
of the international community over the historic peace
process taking place in fraternal Colombia. I kindly as

16-285153/10

S/PV.7768

The situation in Colombia

that Ambassador María Emma Mejía Vélez convey our
congratulations to her Government.
Today’s unanimous adoption of the resolution took
place in an atmosphere of joy and hope following the
definitive, full and Final Agreement reached between
the Government of Colombia and Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo to
end once and for all the bloody conflict that brought
mourning to the Colombian people for over 50 years.
The commitment of the parties to ending the war and
building a stable and lasting peace has led to widespread
support and a feeling of joy in our region and among the
international community. We commend both parties on
that historic agreement.
For our country, it is extremely important that
Colombia successfully build a society of peace, for,
as the brothers we are, we have felt for and supported
the Colombian people throughout the terrible years
of violence. Our countries were created and forged
together under the leadership of the sword of the
Liberator Simón Bolívar. We were one country, and the
liberation armies crossed borders only to bring freedom
to the rest of South America.
On our own territory, we have given shelter to more
than 4 million Colombians who, product of the war
and its economic consequences, were forced to move.
Similarly, along the entire length of our long border of
over 2,000 kilometres, we have suffered the rigours of
violence and the existence of illegal structures to finance
and support the war in Colombia. Today our border area
is plagued by the phenomenon of paramilitarism, which
was created as an anti-insurgent strategy and must be
completely dismantled.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela feels
vindicated, along with Cuba, Chile and Norway, for
having participated as supporters and guarantors
of the complex and lengthy negotiation process that
culminated in the signed peace accords. We also greatly
appreciate the effort, participation and political support
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, which expressed its unanimous support for
the terms of the agreements and their willingness to
participate and support the work of the United Nations
political mission.
I would also like to mention and recognize President
Hugo Chávez Frías for his commitment and tireless
work for peace in Colombia. As a close associate of
his, I can attest to his efforts and constant concern for
4/10

13/09/2016

peace in Colombia, as well as to the political work led
directly by him to approach and convince the parties as
to the need for peace.
The work ahead for the political mission in
supporting the parties in implementing the agreements
and in monitoring and verifying compliance is a
complex, and probably the most difficult task of all.
Hence the need for the United Nations to dedicate itself
as a whole — not only on aspects pertaining to financing
the mission along with the Colombian Government, but
above all in the extensive work relating to eradicating
the root causes of conflict and creating spaces for
former combatants and their bases of political support
to participate in political and economic life.
We must work intensely and come to grips with
the causes and characteristics of the conflict if we are
to counter them and go from a logic and dynamic of
intolerance and violence to one of inclusion, peace and
social justice. We must recall that the war was triggered
in part by the assassination of the popular leader Jorge
Eliécer Gaitán and the Bogotazo riots, after which
broad sectors of the Colombian people were unable
to participate in the political process and advocate
for their economic and social aspirations, particularly
those concerning land access and peasant claims.
We are concerned about the persistence of violent
elements, which no doubt will be a problem the
political mission will face on the ground. Some of
these elements are national while others are local, such
as paramilitarism and drug trafficking, which are an
ongoing obstacle to peace. We also must be able to
counter the actions of warlords, who have a great deal
of economic and political clout in the country.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
supported, supports and will continue to support all
efforts towards peace in Colombia. President Nicolás
Maduro has expressed that sentiment, and we are doing
so at the request of the Colombian Government. We
hope and trust that the success of the United Nations
political mission and the parties’ adherence to the peace
agreements will blaze a path for other insurgent groups
to sign on to the peace process and the entire military
and war structure can begin to adapt to the new reality.
In order to build momentum for peace, it is essential
to reconsider Plan Colombia: Plan for Peace, Prosperity
and the Strengthening of the State , which would
result in a disproportionate foreign military presence
on Colombian soil. Our country, deeply respectful of
16-28515

13/09/2016

The situation in Colombia

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Colombia,
as well as the decisions of its Government and people,
reiterates its offer to send at least 100 Venezuelan
observers, with excellent training and gender balance,
to be integrated into the United Nations political
mission. We are deeply committed to the success of the
mission and we have in-depth knowledge of the terrain
and characteristics of the conflict.
Finally, we hope that the entire people of Colombia
will support President Santos in this courageous
historic bid for peace. It is our wish that by 2 October,
peace and social justice will triumph over war.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister of Foreign Affairs for New
Zealand.
At the outset, I welcome the Colombian Permanent
Representative to the Council today. The historic peace
agreement concluded between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) rebels on 24 August represents a
significant milestone that offers the promise of a future
of security and prosperity for all Colombians in the
years to come. New Zealand congratulates President
Santos on the courage and determination that he and
his country have demonstrated in order to conclude this
historic agreement.
We also commend FARC for its commitment to
peace through the long period of negotiations. We
congratulate and thank Cuba and Norway, as well as
Chile and Venezuela, for their vital roles in steering
the peace process to its successful conclusion. The
United Nations will play a crucial role in supporting
the effective implementation of Colombia’s peace
agreement.
By adopting resolution 2307 (2016) today, endorsing
the Secretary-General’s recommendations in his
most recent report (S/2016/729) for a special political
mission to assist with monitoring and verifying the
agreed ceasefire and laying down of arms, the Security
Council is ensuring it plays its part in helping to secure
a better future for Colombia. It is only appropriate that
the Council should play its part in these efforts. We
hope that the activities of the special political mission
can help give confidence to all sides that key elements
of the agreement are being faithfully and effectively
implemented by both sides.

S/PV.7768

The Security Council’s response to Colombia’s
requests for assistance also represents an unusual and
positive model for how the Council can and should
interact with conflict-affected States. It is rare for a
country to voluntarily approach the Security Council
seeking its help. Colombia’s actions in doing so, and
the Council’s swift responsiveness to its requests,
with due respect to the specific needs of the situation,
have provided an example of how constructive the
relationship can be between the Council and the
countries it seeks to assist. New Zealand was pleased
to sponsor the resolution today, and welcomes its
unanimous adoption. We recognize that challenges
remain, and that there is a long road ahead to secure
the peace that has been made, but with the continued
commitment of all parties, we are confident these can
be overcome.
The Colombian people will have an opportunity
to express their views on the peace agreement through
the referendum on 2 October. We hope they will choose
the path of peace. New Zealand is also committed to
supporting Colombia’s efforts to find lasting stability
and reconciliation, and to ensuring that Colombia
experiences an early peace dividend. That is why we
have pledged to assist Colombia in achieving its goal
to become a landmine-free country by 2021. Colombia
will not face the road ahead alone. New Zealand, the
Council, and the international community stand ready
to help.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I welcome you in presiding over today’s
meeting. China welcomes the Security Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2307 (2016),
authorizing the United Nations mission in Colombia.
The Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia reached a
final peace agreement in August, which will soon be
formally signed and which represents major progress
in Colombia’s peace process. China wishes to extend
its congratulations in that connection and to express
its appreciation for the efforts of the Colombian
Government and other countries, including Venezuela,
Cuba, Chile and Norway, in that connection.
The signing of the final peace agreement will
provide lasting peace and stability to the Colombian
people and promote the peace and stability of the entire

16-285155/10

S/PV.7768

The situation in Colombia

region. It will also have a positive ripple effect on the
search for solutions to other regional hotspot issues.
The Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2307
(2016) is conducive to stepping up the deployment
of the United Nations political mission in Colombia,
facilitating the implementation of the monitoring and
verification mechanism, and further promoting the
peace process in Colombia.
China hopes that the United Nations will, on the basis
of respect for Colombia’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity, work to strengthen communication
and coordination with the Colombian Government,
facilitate the early deployment of the mission, help the
parties in Colombia in fully implementing the ceasefire
agreement and the final peace agreement, and provide
constructive assistance to Colombia to ensure a smooth
implementation of the peace process.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
and welcome you, Sir. Your presence here today
demonstrates the importance of this meeting.
France warmly welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2307 (2016), which is a major step and pillar
in the establishment of this historic peace in Colombia.
It establishes the size, operational aspects and mandate
of the United Nations mission created by the Council
in order to monitor and verify respect for the ceasefire
between the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), as
well as the laying down of arms agreed to last year
in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement
concluded on 23 June in Havana. The Council’s new
resolution, for which we are grateful to the United
Kingdom, will enable the mission to begin working to
deploy on the ground as soon as possible with the goal
of being fully operational as soon as the Agreement
enters into force. It concludes an exemplary planning
and preparation process in which the United Nations
has taken all necessary steps to respond effectively to
the joint call by the parties concerned for support in
implementing the peace provisions. Once again, France
heartily welcomes this outcome.
Adopted only days after the conclusion of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Long Lasting Peace between the Colombian
Government and FARC, which has paved the way for
ending a conflict that has lasted more than 50 years,
today’s resolution shows that our Organization as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, has
6/10

13/09/2016

lived up to expectations. It demonstrates once again
the degree to which the United Nations is a central,
legitimate and trusted actor in the maintenance of
international peace and security all over the world.
France would like to once again congratulate
President Santos Calderón, who had the courage and
foresight to begin negotiations with FARC in 2012, and
to acknowledge the role played in the Agreement by
the guarantor States, Cuba and Norway, as well as the
supporting States, Chile and Venezuela. I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that as a nation, France
stands in support of the Colombian people on their
historic journey towards peace. Besides working on the
issue in the Council, we will continue to support the
peace process bilaterally, specifically by contributing
to funding rural development and demining, and as part
of the European Union, which also has an important
part to play in implementing the Agreement.
The resolution we have just adopted is one of
the final, essential bricks in the wall that is peace in
Colombia. It is up to the Colombian people to complete
it on the basis of the plebiscite to be held on 2 October.
France will continue to work diligently to ensure that
the peace process in Colombia succeeds, not only, of
course, for Colombia and its people first and foremost,
but also for the United Nations.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): In January,
at a ministerial-level Security Council meeting
(S/PV.7609) held under the Uruguayan presidency,
we adopted resolution 2261 (2016), which created a
monitoring mission in Colombia designed to begin
its work during the 12 months following the signing
of a final peace agreement between the Colombian
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC). Six months after that, in Havana
on 24 August, the Colombian parties signed the historic
Final Agreement, bringing 50 years of internal conflict
to a definitive end. Today, under the presidency of New
Zealand, and at another ministerial-level meeting — and
I would like to thank New Zealand’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs for his presence here — the Council has
just adopted resolution 2307 (2016), approving, among
other things, the Secretary-General’s recommendations
regarding the size, operational aspects and mandate of
the mission.
Senegal, as a firm supporter of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, welcomes the determined
commitment of the Colombian parties and the trust they
16-28515

13/09/2016

The situation in Colombia

have placed in the Security Council, thereby helping to
restore the Council to the heart of its original mission.
That is why the Senegalese delegation sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 2307 (2016), in a sign of
its faith in the peace process in Colombia. I take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its leadership in conducting the formal
negotiations, as well as the guarantor States, Cuba
and Norway, and Chile and Venezuela, the supporting
States.
As the international component and coordinator of
the tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism,
the United Nations mission in Colombia will have the
important job of monitoring the separation of the forces
and the laying down of arms, including through its
regional offices, set up for managing the transitional
local points for normalization. The recent tripartite
visit of the United Nations, the Colombian Government
and FARC to the areas where the operations will take
place augur well. To the representative of Colombia
here in the Council today, I would like to repeat what
I said at our meeting in January, in a quotation from a
popular Colombian television series, which is that “a
people that does not know its history is condemned to
see that history repeat itself indefinitely”. Today I can
say that Colombia has learned the tragic lesson of the
past 50 years and has taken a historic step, one full of
hope.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): Angola voted in
favour of resolution 2307 (2016), which approves the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on the size,
operational aspects and mandate of a United Nations
mission in Colombia. We warmly welcome the signing,
on 24 August, of the Final Agreement between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), putting an end to more than 50 years of
conflict.
We also welcome the recent report (S/2016/729)
of the Secretary-General and its recommendation
for deploying 450 unarmed observers and a civilian
component. We commend the efforts of the mediators
in the peace negotiations in Havana — Cuba, Norway,
Venezuela and Chile — for their manifold contributions
to peace and security in the region. We urge the two
sides to strive to implement the peace agreement and
wish the monitoring and verification mechanism every
success in its work with the Government and FARC-

S/PV.7768

EP in implementing the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities.
Lastly, we call on the international community to
support the implementation of the peace agreement by
providing the financial and logistical assistance that the
Government of Colombia needs to ensure the success of
the peace process.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour for me to participate in today’s historic meeting,
which crowns the work that has been done to achieve
peace in Colombia with the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2307 (2016), which moves the peace process
into a new stage, on the basis of a solid foundation
and the support of the United Nations. I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Colombian
Government on reaching a peace agreement with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC), enabling Colombia to begin a new chapter in
its history and put an end to a conflict that has lasted
more than 50 years and created thousands of victims.
Today’s resolution was adopted unanimously, proof
of the Council’s desire to ensure that the Government
of Colombia has the support it needs in order to restore
peace in the country. In that regard, I would like to
point out that Egypt sponsored and voted in favour of
the resolution, because we have always supported the
Colombian Government in its efforts to achieve peace.
I therefore thank all those who contributed to
and played an effective role in achieving this historic
Agreement. I hope that the people of Columbia will be
satisfied with it, so that it can be truly implemented and
the United Nations political mission can commence its
work.
I would also like to thank the United Kingdom
delegation for its contribution in drafting the resolution
and achieving the necessary consensus.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia is pleased to
have co-sponsored and voted in favour of resolution
2307 (2106), which was adopted unanimously today,
and endorses the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the size, operational aspects and
mandate of the United Nations mission in Columbia, as
contained his report (S/2016/729).
We take this opportunity to congratulate the
Government of Columbia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) on reaching a final peace accord, which

16-285157/10

S/PV.7768

The situation in Colombia

will close a chapter on half a century of armed conflict.
The success of the peace process is the culmination
of the political will, courage and leadership of both
sides in finding solutions aimed at a peaceful and
prosperous Colombia, bolstered by the unwavering
support of the international community. Those shared
aims must continue to guide the work of all parties in
the implementation of the peace accords, including
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.
We wish to commend in particular the Government
of Colombia and FARC-EP for their commitment to
the protections and rights of children during the peace
process, exemplified by the Agreement signed on
15 May between the two sides to separate and reintegrate
children associated with FARC-EP. We are heartened
by the release of the first group of children associated
with FARC-EP on 10 September to the relevant childprotection actors and look forward to further progress in
implementing the Agreement. In that regard, we stress
the importance of coordination between all relevant
United Nations presences and mechanisms in Colombia
in ensuring that children affected by the armed conflict
receive the attention, protection and assistance that
they need.
We reiterate our firm support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Jean Arnault,
and the United Nations mission in Colombia, as they
carry out their mandate within the monitoring and
verification mechanism. The good will and cooperation
of member States of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States in contributing observers to the
mission is fully recognized and deeply appreciated. We
also pay tribute to the guarantors, Cuba and Norway,
as well as the accompanying countries of the peace
process, Chile and Venezuela, for the positive role,
which they have played in the peace process.
In closing, we are hopeful that lasting peace and
stability are within reach. We must working towards
ensuring that the hopes and dreams of a Colombia free
from conflict become a reality. We wish the people of
Colombia well in this journey towards shared prosperity
for all Colombians.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Japan is very pleased to
have co-sponsored resolution 2307 (2016), unanimously
adopted today. It is an enormous step forward for
Colombia’s reconciliation and development after half
a century of conflict and four years of peace talks.
8/10

13/09/2016

Japan would like once again to welcome the final
peace Agreement between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) on
24 August. We congratulate the parties on this historic
achievement for the good of the people of Colombia.
Japan particularly commends Cuba, Norway, Chile and
Venezuela for their contribution to the process.
We now turn to the essential work of
implementation. As was emphasized in resolution 2261
(2016), the people of Colombia must be true owners of
the Agreement. All parties should work together to the
process forward, but we, the international community,
also have a vital role to play through the United Nations
mission in Colombia. Having co-sponsored resolution
2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016), Japan fully supports the
mission. We look forward to the mission’s success over
the course of the coming year.
Japan also underlines its continued commitment to
the political process and to the equitable and sustainable
socioeconomic development of Colombia, including
through the rehabilitation of victims and post-conflict
assistance, such as demining. After more than five
decades of conflict, Colombia is approaching a critical
phase in achieving national unity and overcoming its
remaining challenges, including the laying down of
arms and reintegration.
In Japan, we say that on a trip, just as it is reassuring
to have a companion, it is similarly important to support
each other on the journey through life. Japan pledged to
be such a companion to the people of Colombia as they
advance on their journey towards true reconciliation.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for all your efforts and for presiding
over this meeting, which has a very special meaning
for Spain.
In January, Colombia asked the Security Council
to support the peace process, which had not yet been
concluded, while the ceasefire had not yet been achieved.
Contrary to the natural tendency of the Council, a
special mission was authorized. That was certainly
an unusual occurrence, explained by the fact that the
Council was fully convinced on that occasion that the
people of Colombia were going to successfully achieve
peace. It was a wager for Colombia and Colombians.
The universally known author Miguel de Cervantes
wrote, “The goal that we seek tires us all the more when
16-28515

13/09/2016

The situation in Colombia

we are closer to the hope of obtaining it”. Colombians
have not given into that fatigue, and on 26 August made
history with the signing of the final peace Agreement.
Through its effort, determination and courage,
Colombia seems committed to rejecting once and for
all the argument of Álvaro Mutis, who wrote that the
human species is hopeless.
Today
we
have
adopted
a
second
resolution — resolution 2307 (2016) — with 15 votes
in favour and 15 sponsors on the mission in Colombia,
which has just clarified several aspects of its mandate
but maintains the focus on defined tasks within
specified time frames as requested by the parties.
Spain is very proud to participate in the United Nations
mission in Colombia by providing 22 observers, 25 per
cent of whom are women, which particularly pleased
us, especially since that is in line with the request made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
To conclude, within the specific context of the
laying down of arms and the ceasefire, towards which
the mission is working, there are other aspects — such
as demining, reintegration, reparations and restitution
for victims — that are particularly important in order
to establish a lasting peace. With regard to support
in those areas, which the international community is
providing, Colombia can always count on Spain.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): The Ukrainian
delegation decided to co-sponsor resolution 2307
(2016), adopted today, for the following reasons.
Ukraine welcomes the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable
and Lasting Peace reached between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, which has been
achieved after almost four years of formal negotiations.
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón said that the
peace agreement represented the beginning of the end
of the suffering, pain and tragedy of war and that it
brought an end to more than 50 years of armed conflict
in Colombia.
In the spirit of strong support for a stable and longlasting peace in the Republic of Colombia, Ukraine
welcomes today’s resolution, which endorsed the
report (S/2016/729) of the Secretary-General and his
recommendations on the mandate of the United Nations
mission in Colombia. We also express our appreciation
to the British delegation for its leadership and efficient
work in preparing the draft and conducting negotiations.

S/PV.7768

The Security Council should continue to play a
proactive role in supporting the parties as they advance
in implementing the provisions of the Final Agreement,
as well as ensuring the effective functioning of the
tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism.
We believe that the Colombian experience of
engaging the United Nations as the international
component of the tripartite mechanism will be a
success story that will bring stability to the region and
become an example for other parts of the world affected
by lasting conflict.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported resolution
2307 (2016) and hopes that it will lead to a final
settlement in Colombia.
The agreement reached in Havana between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) is key to the pacific settlement of more
than half a century of inter-Colombian conflict. The
agreement opens a new chapter for the country in terms
of national reconciliation and development.
We congratulate the parties to the dialogue and the
Colombian people on this victory. We note the political
resolve involved in finding a compromise solution that
was displayed by the participants in the negotiation
process and the significant mediation efforts deployed
by the guarantors, Cuba and Norway, assisted by
Venezuela and Chile. A considerable contribution has
been made to the promotion of peace in Latin America,
to the bolstering of regional stability and to reaffirming
the effectiveness of legal political means in solving
long-standing, even very difficult, problems.
We hope for a swift conclusion to the preparation
period for the practical implementation of the provisions
of the Final Agreement. We are prepared to continue
to assist Colombia, both bilaterally and multilaterally,
by providing international assistance to the settlement
process and to ensuring that the necessary post-conflict
changes take place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Minister McCully, for your presence
here today and for the unanimous decision just taken
by the Security Council in adopting resolution 2307
(2016). This is yet another reflection of the commitment

16-285159/10

S/PV.7768

The situation in Colombia

of Council members and of the Members of the
United Nations to peace in Colombia. On behalf of
my Government, I should like to thank you for your
invaluable help as well as Ambassador Matthew Rycroft,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, and
his team of diplomats for having drafted the resolution
and for the difficult task of coordinating it.
On 24 August, the lead negotiators of the Government
and of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) agreed
in Havana something that many Colombians may
have believed unattainable: final texts for ending the
conflict and building a long-lasting and stable peace in
my country. They will be endorsed through the signing
of the Final Agreement on 26 September, in Cartagena
de Indias — just three days — and thus put an end
once and for all to more than five decades of armed
conflict in our country. We are deeply grateful to and
appreciative of the Governments of Cuba, Norway,
Chile and Venezuela, as guarantors and supporters of
the negotiating process, for their dedication and their
commitment to this difficult undertaking. We are
grateful also to the States members of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States for contributing
unarmed observers to the United Nations mission in
Colombia, and to all the other countries that will be
supporting us through their participation, as, Spain, for
example, just announced it would do.
This negotiating process has been arduous, complex
and fraught. Begun four years ago, it leaves important
lessons for peace for the world and great challenges
with respect to its implementation, as some here have
pointed out. It has been an inclusive process that has
placed at the centre of peace the protection of human
rights, specifically the rights of victims, women,
peoples of African descent and indigenous people,

10/10

13/09/2016

organizations of farmers and of displaced persons, and
ensured that all minors are removed from the ranks of
FARC-EP and returned to civilian life.
The agreement has begun to bear fruit. Since the
entry into force of the ceasefire, there has not been a
single victim or clash because of the conflict. Likewise,
on 10 September, representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross received the first 13 minors
handed over as part of the commitment to return all
of the children and adolescents who remain among the
ranks of the organization. They and future Colombian
generations, as President Santos has said, will now have
the opportunity to learn about the suffering of the war
only from history books.
With the signing of the Final Agreement on
26 September and the approval of the referendum to be
held by the Government on 2 October, Colombians will
have the opportunity to open the door to a better future,
with a stable and lasting peace that we will have built
with the support of the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole.
Foreign Minister María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar,
speaking here at the United Nations on 25 January, said
that the international community, with the culmination
of the peace process, will see a Colombia that is taking
off, one that has enormous potential, human capacity
and national resources. That will enable it not only to
forge a more prosperous and just society but also to
better contribute to the development of our Americas
and the world. That was the dream of the thousands
of Colombians whose lives were sacrificed to the
violence and who cannot be here today to witness this
historic event.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

16-28515
