•

General Aaembl7-'11drteenth Seuion

Noting with sal-isfaction the effective way in which
the Force continues to carry out its function,
Requests the Fifth Committee to recommend such
action as may be necessary to finance the continuing
operation of the United Nations Emergency Force.2
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

1299 (XDI). Question of amending the United
Nations Charter, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 108 of the
Charter, to increase the number of nonpermanent memben of the Security Council
and the number of votes required for decisions of the Council
Question of amending the United Nations
Charter, in accordance with the procedure
laid down in Article 108 of the Charter, to
increase the membership of the Economic
and Social Council
Question of amending the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, in accordance
with the procedure laid down in Arllcle 108
of the Charter of the United Nations and
Article 69 of the Statute of the Court, with
respect to an increase in the number of
judges of the International Court of J11Stice
The General Assembly,
Reali.ring that the membership of the United Nations
has increased considerably in recent years,
Taking note of the feeling expressed by many Members that there should be an increase in the membership
of some of the organs of the United Nations,
Noting that such increases would necessitate amendments to the Charter of the United Nations,
Realizing that such amendments to the Charter require a larger area of agreement than prevails at present,
1. Decides to postpone until its fourteenth session
the consideration of items 21, 22 and 23 of the agenda
of the thirteenth session ;
2. Decides that these items should be placed on the
provisional agenda of its fourteenth session.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.

1800 (XDI). Report of the Economic and Socia)
Council ( chapter I, section VI) : queation of
increasing the membenhip of the Council
The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 690
B (XXVI) of 31 July 1958,
1. Recogniaes that, in view of the increase in the
membership of the United Nations since its establishment, an increase in the membership of the Economic
and Social Council is desirable in order to achieve a
wider representation and thus to make the Council a
more effective organ for carrying out the obligations
• See resolution 1337 (XIII).

placed upon it under Chapters IX and X of the Charter
of the United Nations, and that such an increase should
be so designed as to preserve the expeditious conduct of
the work of the Council;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fourteenth session the item entitled "Question of amending the United Nations Charter, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 108 of the Charter, to
increase the membership of the Economic and Social
Council".
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.

1301 (XDI). Measures aimed at the implementa•
tion and promotion of peaceful and neigh•
hourly relation11 among State&
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1236 (XII) of 14 December
1957,
Considering the paramount importance of ensuring
international peace and security,
Realizing the urgent need of finding solutions to contemporary problems which stand in the way of the promotion of friendly and neighbourly relations among
States,
Welcoming the trends towards greater interchange
among Member States in various fields,
Recognizing that the United Nations plays an increasingly important part in international co-operation,
negotiation and conciliation,
Recogniaing furthermore that in the observance of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations lies
the best basis of ensuring the conditions essential for
the nations and peoples of the world to live and to assist
each other in mutual tolerance and understanding for
the benefit of all,
1. Reaffenns the purposes and principles of the
United Nations;
,
2. Calls upon Member States to live together within
the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Urges all Member States, while making full use of
Article 33 of the Charter, to resort to the Organization
for the peaceful solution of problems which interfere
with friendly and neighbourly relations among States
or threaten international peace ;
4. Calls upon Member States to take effective steps
towards the implementation of principles of peaceful and
neighbourly relations;
5. Recommends that all Member States should take
practical measures or make arrangements in conjunction with and not inconsistent with the programmes of
the United Nations and its specialized agencies to foster
open, free and friendly co-operation and understanding
in the fields of economy, culture, science, technology
and communications ;
6. Welcomes with satisfadion agreements between
Member States which are working or will work towards the attainment of the aims envisaged in the
present resolution.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
