General Assembly-Thirty-thin! Session

70

since 1967 and declares that any attempt to restrict,
or to atta~h conditions to, the free exercise of the
right of return by any displaced person is inconsistent
with that inalienable right and inadmissible;
2. Deplores the continued refusal of the_ Israeli
authorities to take steps for the return of the displaced
inhabitants;
3. Calls once more upon Israel:
(a) To take immediate steps for the return of all
the displaced inhabitants;
( b) To desist from all measures that obstruct the
return of the displaced inhabitants, including measures
affecting the physical and demographic structure of the
occupied territories;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting
with the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, to report to the General Assembly by
the opening of the thirty-fourth session on Israel's
compliance with paragraph 3 of the present resolution.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978

33/113.

Report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of
7 December 1973, 3240 B (XXIX) of 29 November
1974, 3525 B (XXX) of 15 December 1975,
31/106 B of 16 December 1976 and 32/91 A of
13 December 1977,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter of the United
Nations and other instruments and rules of international law is among the basic purposes and principles
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,19
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose territories have been occupied by Israel since June 1967
are parties to that Convention,
Taking into account that States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article 1 thereof,
not only to respect but also to ensure respect for the
Convention in all circumstances,
1. Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949, is applicable to all the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Strongly deplores the failure of Israel to acknowledge the applicability of that Convention to the
territories it has occupied since 1967;
3. Calls again upon Israel to acknowledge and to
comply with the provisions of that Convention in all
19 United

Na,tions, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Urges once more all States parties to that Convention to exert all efforts in order to ensure respect
for and compliance with the provisions thereof in all
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Jerusalem.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/5 of 28 October 1977,
Expressing grave anxiety and concern over the present serious situation in the occupied Arab territories
as a result of the continued Israeli occupation and the
measures and actions taken by the Government of
Israel, as the occupying Power, and designed to change
the legal status, geographical nature and demographic
composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,20 is applicable to all the Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967,
l. Determines that all such measures and actions
taken by Israel in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have no legal validity and
constitute a serious obstruction of efforts aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in
carrying out such measures, in particular the establishment of settlements in the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories;
3. Calls upon Israel to comply strictly with its
international obligations in accordance with the principles of international law and the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
4. Calls once more upon the Government of Israel,
as the occupying Power, to desist forthwith from taking
any action which would result in changing the legal
status, geographical nature or demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
5. Urges all States parties to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War to respect and to exert all efforts in
order to ensure respect for and compliance with its
provisions in all the Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, including Jerusalem.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
C

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as the principles and
provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
20 Ibid.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 21 as well as of
other relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject, in particular resolutions 32/91 B and C of 13 December
1977, as well as those adopted by the Security Council,
the Commission on Human Rights and other United
Nations organs concerned and by the specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories, 22 which contains, inter alia, public statements made by leaders of the Government of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories for its
efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the
General Assembly and for its thoroughness and impartiality;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow the Special Committee access to the occupied
territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to allow the Special
Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation
by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, and other applicable international
instruments, and condemns in particular those violations which that Convention designates as "grave
breaches" thereof;
5. Condemns the following Israeli policies and
practices:
(a) Annexation of parts of the occupied territories;
( b) Establishment of new Israeli settlements and
expansion of the existing settlements on private and
public Arab lands, and transfer of an alien population
thereto;
( c) Evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied
territories and denial of their right to return;
(d) Confiscation and expropriation of private and
public Arab property in the occupied territories and
all other transactions for the acquisition of land involving the Israeli authorities, institutions or nationals
on the one hand, and the inhabitants or institutions of
the occupied territories on the other;
(e)

Destruction and demolition of Arab houses;

(f) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) Ill-treatment and torture of persons under
detention;

(h)

Pillaging of archaeological and cultural prop-

erty;
(i) Interference with religious freedoms and practices as well as family rights and customs;
(j) Illegal exploitation of the natural wealth, resources and population of the occupied territories;
21 Jbid.
2 2 A/33/356.

71

6. Reaffirms that all measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied
territories, or any part thereof, including Jerusalem,
are null and void, and that Israel's policy of settling
parts of its population and new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and of the relevant
United Nations resolutions;
7. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6
of the present resolution;
8. Reiterates its call upon all States, in particular
those States parties to the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
in accordance with article 1 of that Convention, and
upon international organizations and the specialized
agencies not to recognize any changes carried out by
Israel in the occupied territories and to avoid actions,
including those in the field of aid, which might be
used by Israel in its pursuit of the policies of annexation and colonization or any of the other policies and
practices referred to in the present resolution;

9. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue
to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, to consult,
as appropriate, with the International Committee of
the Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of
the welfare and human rights of the population of the
occupied territories and to report to the SecretaryGeneral as soon as possible and whenever the need
arises thereafter;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to investigate the treatment of civilians in detention
in the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
11.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a)
To render all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to
the occupied territories, with a view to investigating
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;

( b) To continue to make available additional
staff as may be necessary to assist the Special Committee in the performance of its tasks;

( c) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
of the Special Committee, and of information regarding its activities and findings, by all means available
through the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat and, where necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special Committee which are no longer
available;
( d) To report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the tasks entrusted to him in
the present paragraph;

12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Report
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of
the Occupied Territories".

87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
