United Nations

A/RES/69/192

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 January 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2014
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/69/489)]

69/192. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
The General Assembly,
Guided by the principal purposes of the United Nations, as set out in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,1 and inspired by the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, without distinction of
any kind, and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,
to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained and to
promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Bearing in mind the long-standing concern of the United Nations for the
humanization of criminal justice and the protection of human rights,
Aware that the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners2 remain
the universally acknowledged minimum standards for the detention of prisoners and
that they have been of value and influence in the development of correctional laws,
policies and practices since their adoption by the First United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in 1955,
Mindful that, in the Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for
Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World, 3 Member States recognized that an effective,
fair, accountable and humane criminal justice system was based on the commitment
to uphold the protection of human rights in the administration of justice and the
prevention and control of crime, and acknowledged the value and impact of the
United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice in
designing and implementing national crime prevention and criminal justice policies,
laws, procedures and programmes,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
3
Resolution 65/230, annex.
2

14-67681 (E)

*1467681*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/192

Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners

Taking into account the progressive development of international standards
pertaining to the treatment of prisoners since 1955, including in international
instruments such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 4 the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights4 and the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment5 and
the Optional Protocol thereto,6 and other relevant United Nations standards and norms
in crime prevention and criminal justice related to the treatment of prisoners, namely,
the procedures for the effective implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners,7 the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons
under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, 8 the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials, 9 the Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners, 10 the
Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials,11
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile
Justice (the Beijing Rules),12 the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles
Deprived of their Liberty, 13 the United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of
Juvenile Delinquency (the Riyadh Guidelines), 14 the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules),15 the United Nations
Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women
Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)16 and the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on
Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems,17
Mindful of its resolution 67/166 of 20 December 2012 on human rights in the
administration of justice, in which it recognized the importance of the principle that
persons deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all
other human rights and fundamental freedoms, except for those lawful limitations that
are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, and took note of general
comment No. 21 on the humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty, adopted
by the Human Rights Committee,18 as well as Human Rights Council resolution 24/12
of 26 September 2013, 19 in which the Council noted the work of the open-ended
intergovernmental Expert Group on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners, reiterating that any changes should not lower any existing standards but
should reflect recent advances in correctional science and best practices,
_______________
4

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
6
Ibid., vol. 2375, No. 24841.
7
Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/47, annex.
8
Resolution 43/173, annex.
9
Resolution 34/169, annex.
10
Resolution 45/111, annex.
11
Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana,
27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.2, annex.
12
Resolution 40/33, annex.
13
Resolution 45/113, annex.
14
Resolution 45/112, annex.
15
Resolution 45/110, annex.
16
Resolution 65/229, annex.
17
Resolution 67/187, annex, including principles on persons who are detained, arrested, suspected of, or
charged with a criminal offence punishable by a term of imprisonment or the death penalty.
18
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40),
annex VI.B.
19
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
5

2/5

Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners

A/RES/69/192

Recalling its resolution 65/230 of 21 December 2010, in which it requested the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to establish an open-ended
intergovernmental expert group to exchange information on best practices, as well
as national legislation and existing international law, and on the revision of existing
United Nations standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners so that they
reflect recent advances in correctional science and best practices, with a view to
making recommendations to the Commission on possible next steps, and requested
the Expert Group to report to the Commission on progress in its work,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/188 of 20 December 2012 and 68/190 of
18 December 2013, entitled “Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners”, as well as its resolution 68/156 of 18 December 2013, entitled “Torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment”, in particular
paragraph 38 thereof,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 67/184 of 20 December 2012 on
follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice and preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, it decided that one of the workshops to be
held within the framework of the Thirteenth Congress would be devoted to the topic
“Role of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal
justice in support of effective, fair, humane and accountable criminal justice
systems: experiences and lessons learned in meeting the unique needs of women and
children, in particular the treatment and social reintegration of offenders”,
1.
Notes with appreciation the further progress made during the third meeting
of the open-ended intergovernmental Expert Group on the Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners, held in Vienna from 25 to 28 March 2014;20
2.
Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Brazil for its financial
support for the third meeting of the Expert Group;
3.
Acknowledges the work done by the Expert Group at its previous
meetings, held in Vienna from 31 January to 2 February 201221 and in Buenos Aires
from 11 to 13 December 2012;22
4.
Also acknowledges the work accomplished by the Secretariat in preparing
the relevant documentation, in particular the working paper for the third meeting,23
as well as the determined progress achieved at the meetings of the Expert Group in
reviewing the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;2
5.
Expresses appreciation for the important submissions and suggestions of
Member States pursuant to the request to exchange information on best practices
and on the revision of the existing Standard Minimum Rules, as reflected in the
working paper submitted to the Expert Group at its third meeting;
6.
Reiterates that any changes to the Standard Minimum Rules should not
lower any of the existing standards, but should reflect the recent advances in
correctional science and good practices so as to promote safety, security and
humane conditions for prisoners;

_______________
20

See E/CN.15/2014/19 and Corr.1.
See E/CN.15/2012/18.
22
See E/CN.15/2013/23.
23
UNODC/CCPCJ/EG.6/2014/CRP.1.
21

3/5

A/RES/69/192

Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners

7.
Recognizes the need for the Expert Group to continue to take into
account the social, legal and cultural specificities, as well as human rights
obligations, of Member States;
8.
Notes that the revision process should maintain the existing scope of
application of the Standard Minimum Rules;
9.
Acknowledges with appreciation the important contributions received
from the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 24 the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, as well as other submissions received for consideration
from a number of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, and
invites them in this regard to continue to be actively involved in the Expert Group
process, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of
the Economic and Social Council;
10. Acknowledges that the revision of the Standard Minimum Rules is a timeintensive exercise of crucial importance, emphasizes that efforts should be made to
finalize the revision process, building on the recommendations made at the three
meetings of the Expert Group and the submissions of Member States, for
consideration at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, to be held in Doha in 2015, and also emphasizes that the concern
for a speedy process should not compromise the quality of the outcome;
11. Decides to extend the mandate of the Expert Group, authorizing it to
continue its work, with the aim of reaching a consensus, and to present a report to
the Thirteenth Congress, for the information of the workshop on the role of the
United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice in
support of effective, fair, humane and accountable criminal justice systems, and to
the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-fourth
session for consideration, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
required services and support are provided;
12. Invites the bureau of the third meeting of the Expert Group to continue to
be involved in the revision of the rules by preparing, with the assistance of the
Secretariat, a revised consolidated working paper, in all official languages of the
United Nations, consisting of the draft revised rules, which should reflect the
progress achieved so far, including the recommendations made by the Expert Group
at its meetings held in Buenos Aires in 2012 and in Vienna in 2014, also taking into
account proposals for revision put forward by Member States in relation to the areas
and rules identified by the General Assembly in paragraph 6 of its resolution
67/188, for submission to and consideration by the Expert Group at its next
meeting;
13. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of South Africa for its
intention to host the next meeting of the Expert Group, and welcomes any support,
in particular financial support, that other interested countries and organizations may
wish to provide;
14. Invites Member States to actively participate in the next meeting of the
Expert Group and to include in their delegations persons with a variety of expertise
from relevant disciplines;
_______________
24

4/5

A/68/295.

Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners

A/RES/69/192

15. Encourages Member States to improve conditions in detention,
consistent with the principles of the Standard Minimum Rules and all other relevant
and applicable international standards and norms, to continue exchanging good
practices, such as those regarding conflict resolution in detention facilities,
including in the area of technical assistance, to identify challenges faced in
implementing the Rules and share their experiences in dealing with those challenges
and to provide relevant information in that regard to their experts participating in
the Expert Group;
16. Also encourages Member States to promote the implementation of the
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),16 as well as the United
Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty;13
17. Recommends that Member States continue to endeavour to reduce prison
overcrowding and, where appropriate, resort to non-custodial measures as
alternatives to pretrial detention, to promote increased access to justice and legal
defence mechanisms, to reinforce alternatives to imprisonment and to support
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, in accordance with the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules);15
18. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue to promote the
use and application of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention
and criminal justice by, inter alia, providing advisory services and technical
assistance to Member States, on request, including assistance in crime prevention,
criminal justice and law reform, and in the organization of training for law
enforcement, crime prevention and criminal justice personnel and support in the
administration and management of penal and penitentiary systems, thus contributing
to the upgrading of their efficiency and capabilities;
19. Reaffirms the important role of the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice programme network and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council in
contributing to the dissemination, promotion and practical application of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, in accordance with the
procedures for their effective implementation;7
20. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
resources for the purposes outlined in the present resolution, in accordance with the
rules and procedures of the United Nations.
73rd plenary meeting
18 December 2014

5/5
