S/PV.8470

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8470th meeting

Tuesday, 26 February 2019, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to West Africa (13 to 17 February 2019)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05530 (E)
*1905530*

S/PV.8470

Security Council mission

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to West
Africa (13 to 17 February 2019)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the co-leads of the Security Council
mission to West Africa from 13 to 17 February, that
is, the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Adom.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
joint initiative of Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea,
the representatives of the Member States of the Security
Council carried out a visit to West Africa, with my
country, Côte d’Ivoire, being one of the two legs of the
visit. To recall, the visit was devoted to experiences
and best practices with regard to the transition towards
peacebuilding in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, two
countries that hosted United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Those two countries experienced different
routes out of crisis; and, owing to their own potential and
the challenges they face, they are today experiencing
different rates of economic and social development.
In accordance with the usual practice, I should like to
provide the Security Council with a brief account of our
stop in Abidjan, which is the economic capital of Côte
d’Ivoire.
The Security Council delegation arrived in Abidjan
on the evening of 14 February and was received in
audience on 15 February from 8.30 to 9.30 in the morning
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, and by Vice-President
Daniel Kablan Duncan from 10 to 11. Speaking on
behalf of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, Minister
Marcel Amon-Tanoh outlined the strategy for ending
the crisis and consolidating peace in Côte d’Ivoire,
based in particular on the triad of economic recovery,
national reconstruction and national reconciliation.
He stressed that the success of that approach was
primarily dependent upon strong national ownership
2/6

26/02/2019

of the crisis-resolution process, the leadership of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, and his Government’s constant commitment
to implementing peacebuilding priorities. He cited as
an example the reform of the security sector and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme — 72 per cent of which is being financed
by their own funds — which allowed the Government
to establish security and stability in the country and
restore confidence among foreign investors.
Speaking on the national political situation, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs reassured our delegation
that Côte d’Ivoire was aware of the impatience on the
part of some actors in the international community, who
nevertheless recognize the remarkable progress made
since 2011. Consequently, he reassured the Council
delegation of the efforts made by the Government to
safeguard social peace, including the organization
in 2020 of transparent and credible presidential
elections, which he said constituted an additional step
in entrenching security, democracy and peace in Côte
d’Ivoire. The Minister also stressed that the period
from 2019 to 2020 would be devoted to stepping up the
efforts of the Government in the social domain, with a
view to a better distribution of the fruits of economic
growth, which averaged 8 to 9 per cent over the past
five years.
At the subregional level, while recalling the
leadership of President Ouattara, who headed up
the Economic Community of West African States in
the early hours of the Malian crisis — the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire reaffirmed his
country’s commitment to playing a leading role in
finding solutions to current security challenges and
promoting peace and economic and social development.
In his audience with the Council delegation,
Vice-President Duncan reiterated national priorities
for strengthening security, peace and development in
Côte d’Ivoire. Aid for the return of refugees, DDR, the
fight against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, the promotion and protection of human rights,
the fight against corruption, the strengthening of the
gender dimension in conflict prevention and economic
and social development efforts were the main focus of
his address to Council members.
While stressing that Côte d’Ivoire ranks among the
top 10 most reforming countries in the world according
to the Doing Business index, and the top four with
19-05530

26/02/2019

Security Council mission

the strongest economic growth, according to the Mo
Ibrahim Foundation, the Vice-President confirmed
that the years 2019 and 2020 would see an increase in
the social offerings provided by the Government. The
Ivorian Government intends to devote 726 billion CFA
francs to social programmes, with education and health
as priority areas.
Following the audience with the Ivorian
Vice-President, the Council delegation took part in
a round table co-facilitated by Mr. Babacar Cissé
and Mr. Yacoub El Hillo, respectively, the Resident
Coordinators of the United Nations Development
Programme in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. Mr. Cissé
stressed the quality of the links between the United
Nations system and the Ivorian Government in preparing
for the withdrawal of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire and in transferring residual activities to
the United Nations country team. Their joint efforts
focused on social cohesion and national reconciliation,
the strengthening of the rule of law, the fight against
gender-based violence, security institutions, including
DDR, and the improvement of civil-military relations.
Mr. Cissé also recalled the pleas with bilateral and
multilateral partners to mobilize the necessary funding
for the implementation of the priorities of the national
peacebuilding strategy, while emphasizing the crucial
role of the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. That
support, along with good coordination of the efforts of
the country team with the Ivorian Government, made
it possible to reinforce the momentum towards peace
established following the end of the post-electoral crisis.
For his part, Mr. El Hillo said that, after 25 years
of being on the agenda of the Security Council, Liberia
had committed itself to the path to peace, stability
and economic development. He acknowledged,
however, that, owing to structural fragilities linked
to its history and cycles of political instability and
community violence, unlike Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia
still faced enormous challenges in consolidating
peace. He emphasized that the drastic fall in economic
growth — from 8 per cent to 1 per cent — the persistence
of the root causes of the conflict, the difficulties in the
national reconciliation process and the weakness of
post-crisis accountability, the weaknesses in border
control and maritime security to prevent all sorts
of trafficking, were all vulnerabilities that must be
resolved in order to avoid a resurgence of the Liberian
conflict. With regard to the role of the United Nations
country team, Mr. El Hillo stated that this crucial

S/PV. 8470

element of the United Nations presence in a post-crisis
country should be the subject of a prior assessment of
its capacity to fully carry out its responsibilities in the
context of peacebuilding assistance.
On the whole, we very much hope that the
exchanges that followed the presentations by the two
Resident Coordinators will serve to provide a better
understanding of the challenges and opportunities for
peacebuilding in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.
The Council visited the Republic of Guinea Bissau
during the latter part of its mission, with regard to
which, Mr. President, it falls to you to provide an outline
to the Council. For the moment, as the Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire, I would like to express
the sincere thanks of the Ivorian Government to the
Security Council for having chosen our country for its
visit to West Africa.
I cannot conclude my remarks without thanking
the United Nations staff, including those from the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
whose discretion and high sense of duty — and I think
members will agree — assuredly helped make the visit
a ringing success and fruitful exercise.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Adom for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Equatorial Guinea.
First of all, I join Ambassador Adom in reiterating
my sincere thanks to Côte d’Ivoire, with whom we made
up a very united team to lead the visit. I also thank the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau for the warm reception,
as well as the members of the Secretariat who worked
on the organization and smooth roll-out of the visit,
both in New York and on the ground. I am referring,
of course, to the staff of the Security Council Affairs
Division, with special thanks to Nikolai Galkin and his
team, Annika Kohnert and Wifag Hadra in particular.
My thanks also go to all the personnel deployed and
involved in the preparation of the mission, namely, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), with special recognition
to the Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and United Nations Resident Coordinator,
Mr. David McLachlan-Karr, the UNIOGBIS political
staff, the Travel, Shipping and Visa Unit and the
interpreters and the security officers who accompanied

19-055303/6

S/PV.8470

Security Council mission

us on the mission. The work of the entire great team
was truly exemplary and key to the success of the visit,
which took place from 13 to 17 February. On behalf
of everyone, I express our deep gratitude to the team
and we hope to continue working with the Secretariat to
draw all possible lessons from the mission.
After Côte d’Ivoire, the Security Council mission
continued on to the second phase of its visit to West
Africa by travelling to Guinea-Bissau from 15 to
16 February to assess, together with the main political
and civilian actors, the current political situation,
especially the ongoing electoral process, the role of
UNIOGBIS and humanitarian and security issues. In
Guinea-Bissau, the members of the Security Council
met with a large number of stakeholders, including
Prime Minister Aristides Gomes, with the attendance
of some members of his Government, and the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, David
Mclachlan-Karr, as the Special Representative was
absent from Guinea-Bissau.
We also had very useful and in-depth discussions
with representatives of partner organizations involved
in the peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau, the
diplomatic corps and the group of five regional and
international partners, comprised of the African
Union, the European Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United
Nations. The delegation also met with the President
of the National Assembly, the leaders of the political
parties with and without parliamentary representation,
the President of the National Electoral Commission, the
Vice-President of the Supreme Court of Justice, in the
absence of the President, who was travelling abroad,
and civil society representatives. In addition, we also
had the opportunity to speak with His Excellency the
President of the Republic, Mr. José Mário Vaz.
The Security Council went to Guinea-Bissau, on
the one hand, to call on all political stakeholders to
work to preserve the still-fragile achievements on their
way to peace, stability and prosperity and to overcome
their differences by always prioritizing inclusive
dialogue, and on the other hand, to support the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau in launching its electoral campaign,
which took place on 16 February, with a view to holding
the legislative elections on 10 March and the subsequent
presidential elections later this year, in accordance with
the legal framework. We all hope that the elections will
be peaceful, free, transparent and credible, and that they
4/6

26/02/2019

will contribute to putting a definitive end to the chronic
instability and institutional crisis of the country.
In their meeting with Prime Minister Aristides
Gomes, the members of the Security Council
underscored the importance of the upcoming elections
in promoting key institutional reforms, as stipulated in
the Conakry Agreement of 2016, including reforms in
the security, justice and public administration sectors.
The Prime Minister described the Government’s
commitment to ensuring that the electoral process
was transparent and the results credible by noting two
important instruments that were signed at the National
Assembly headquarters the day before our arrival, in
the presence of President Vaz: the 2019 stability pact,
which emphasizes the need for institutional reforms,
and an electoral code of conduct, in which competing
political parties pledge to respect election results.
The Prime Minister outlined a number of
challenges to holding legislative elections, including
such major difficulties as electoral financing, which
he stated is due to the failure of donors to honour
their commitments. Prime Minister Gomes stressed
that the Government was facing pressure in trying to
handle social grievances and maintain a consensual
electoral process.
During their meetings, the Council members tried
to clarify Prime Minister Gomes’s assertions about the
shortage of funds for the elections. UNIOGBIS and
the National Electoral Commission confirmed that
donors had provided $2 million above the $7.7 million
fund established by the United Nations Development
Programme for the elections. They argued that the
Government was not covering the expenses for which it
was responsible. As was discussed at the meeting with
the United Nations country team, as well as during
other meetings, after three and a half years the political
crisis has ended up adversely affecting the economy by
exerting budgetary pressure on the Government due to
a decrease in State budget revenue.
The members heard assessments of possible
attempts to obstruct elections during their meetings with
the international community, political parties and civil
society. However, several of those speakers said that
this included senior Government officials. The leader
of the main opposition party, the Partido da Renovação
Social, drew attention to concerns about irregularities
in the electoral process. That idea was also underlined
by several other opposition political parties, as well as
19-05530

26/02/2019

Security Council mission

civil society organizations; they pointed in particular
to discrepancies in the voter census, as only 735,000
voters had been registered. Prime Minister Gomes and
the President of the National Electoral Commission
explained that ECOWAS was auditing the voter registry
and that once the audit was complete, the Gabinete
Técnico de Apoio ao Processo Eleitoral — the office
for technical support in the electoral process — would
correct any anomalies that had been identified.
During the visit, the presence of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB), a military
force of 600 personnel, was visible. In the meeting
with the group of five, the ECOWAS representative
noted that the Mission was costly and could be
withdrawn in September 2019. Meanwhile, UNIOGBIS
recommended the maintenance of ECOMIB in GuineaBissau, given that its role in the current context remains
highly necessary.
Another issue raised during the visit was the
constitutional reform envisaged in the Conakry
Agreement to clarify the powers of the President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister. The representatives
of the group of five warned that the priority should be
the holding of legislative and presidential elections, as
the parties had strongly opposing ideas with regard to
reform. However, we were informed of the possibility
that the reform of the Constitution would be pushed after
the renewal of Parliament and that the Government was
considering that possibility, which would be carried out
by referendum.
On the other hand, our speakers highlighted the
fact that Guinea-Bissau’s problems have historically
not been with the holding of elections, but in the
post-electoral period. In that connection, there were
discussions that revealed the weakness of GuineaBissau’s institutions. In that regard, the need for the
United Nations to continue to support Guinea-Bissau
was highlighted.
At our meeting with Mr. Cipriano Cassamá, the
President of the National Assembly, he said that a
reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS should provide for
continued assistance to address issues such as drug
trafficking, child trafficking and corruption. The
civil society representatives, while expressing their
appreciation for the support of the international
community over the years, made strong appeals to
the mission for the continued presence of the United

S/PV. 8470

Nations to provide solid support to Guinea-Bissau in
the implementation of its reforms.
Among other issues, the role of the military was
brought to the attention of the members of the Council
and it was emphasized that it had been constantly
removed from political disputes since the restoration
of constitutional order in 2014. A representative of
the group of five stressed that security sector reform
depended on donors financing the pension fund.
During the meeting with civil society organizations and
President Vaz, Security Council members were asked
to lift the travel ban sanctions that the Council had
maintained against the 10 military officers involved
in the April 2012 coup. Several speakers said that the
sanctions should be applied to those who had caused
the most electoral delays, who were not members of the
military but rather the politicians.
It should also be noted that Council members met
with representatives of civil society organizations. They
discussed, among other issues, the humanitarian and
security situation, in particular the issue of women’s
participation at all levels of the decision-making
process in the areas of peace and security, including
security, economic and social structures, which very
often prevent many women from participating in
elections. Security Council members encouraged the
Government and other parties to continue to redouble
their efforts to strengthen the political participation of
women in all electoral and political processes. In that
regard, they commended the adoption of the Parity Law,
which seeks to ensure a minimum quota of 36 per cent
representation of women in elections, local Governments
and appointments to the National Assembly.
The last meeting of the members of the Security
Council was with His Excellency President Vaz at the
presidential palace on 16 February, which coincided with
the start of the electoral campaign. Council members
reiterated that the purpose of the Council’s visit was to
help Guinea-Bissau emerge from the political crisis and
the importance of the legislative elections to be held on
10 March, as well as the presidential elections. President
Vaz responded by giving priority to the legislative
elections, which would be followed by a programme of
institutional reforms. The Council members stressed to
President Vaz the importance of dialogue in resolving
the crisis and highlighted the regional and subregional
repercussions of the political stalemate, the threat of
transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau, drug
trafficking and the fear that terrorists and extremists

19-055305/6

S/PV.8470

Security Council mission

would take advantage of the situation to further
destabilize Guinea-Bissau and the region. That was the
message that we conveyed to all political and civilian
actors with whom we met.
We believe that the outcome of the visit is entirely
positive. All our counterparts were receptive. It is
now up to all political forces to set the country on
the path to peace, stability and the strengthening of
democratic institutions.
Allow me to conclude this report by expressing
my sincere thanks to all Security Council members,

6/6

26/02/2019

whose active participation, collaboration, flexibility
and understanding in the face of the very busy agenda
of the visit allowed it to go smoothly.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to express
appreciation to all members of the Security Council
and the Secretariat who participated in the mission
for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

19-05530
