-----------------lII'.i'IlIi£llliI. .

p • •_------...

IMI'lIIIim'!IIil,..;'

"I.

678th

United Nations

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING
(O!Jening Meeting)
T"uesday. 17 September 1957,
at3 p.m.

ASSEMBLY
TWELFTH SESSION
Official Records

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Caairman of the delegation of Thailand. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . • •

1

Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation. • • • • • • • • •

1

Address by Prince Wan Waithayakon, Temporary
President, Chairman of the delegation of Thailand •

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the twelfth session
of the General Assembly
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee • • • •

2

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President. • • • • • • • • • . • . . • . • •

2

Address by Sir Leslie Munro, President of the twelfth
session of the General Assembly •••.'. . • . • • • • •

4

Statement by the President regarding the procedu.1;"e
for the admission of the Federation of Malaya to
membership in the rTnited Nations • • • • . • • • • • . •

5

Agenda item 25:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
Admission of the Federation of Malaya to membership in the United Nations. • • • • . . • • • • • • • •

5

President: Sir Leslie MUNRO (New Zealand).
Tel"pcrary President: Prince WAN WAITHAY AKON
(Thailand).

AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of Thailand

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declartl open the
twelfth regular session of the GeneralAssembly of the
United Nations.

AGENDA ITEM 2

Middle East and in Hlli,gary. The General Assembly
prior to the eleventh session had already adopted
appropriate resoltuions on those two questions, but they
remained to be implemented. That was the task of the
eleventh session.
5. In my speech of acceptance of the high office of
President [574th meeting], I expressed my confidence
that the United Nations had stood out as an efficient and
effective instrument of peace, and in this connexion I
paid a warm tribute to the outstanding l'ol~ played by
the Secretary-General and his associaten. My confidence has been justified.
6. The resolutions on the questJ.on of the Middle East
have been complied with, and this reflects great credit
on the part of the Powers concerned. Their compliance
redounds' to their honour and good name, and their
action is warmly appreciated by the world at large.
7. The Suez Canal was cleared in less time and at
less expense than had been expected, and the United
Nations is to be congratulated on this fine performance.
8. It is also a general source of satisfaction that the
Government of Egypt has accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in
legal disputes arising between the parties to the Convention of 18881/ in respect of the interpretation or
application of its provisions.
9. The United Nations Emergency Force has rendered
a signal service to the cause of peace by helping to
restore tranquillity in this region. It has deserved well
of the United Nations and we owe it a great debt of
gratitude. May the tranquillity t.'lus restored be turned,
"in spite of an overcast horizon, i'lto a more permanent
condition of peace in due time.
10. With regard to the Hungarian Question, compliance
with the Assembly resolutions has yet to come. The
General Assembly has, by resolution 1133 (XI),
appointed me its Special Representative to negotiate for

Minute of silent prayer or meditation

15.
ru
be
co
In
th
Co
Ic
So
an

16
pr
I'

11 Convention respecting the free navigation of the Suez
Maritime Canal, signed at Constantinople on 29 October 1888.

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: linvitether-epre-

sentatives to stand and observe one minute of silence
dedicated to prayer or meditation.
The representatives stoad in silence.

The printed Official Records of the General Assemblyare published in fascicle form, the record
of each meeting being issued separately. In order
that the fascicles may subsequently be bound in
volumes by organ and session. the pagination is
continuous throughout each series of records of a
single body. At the end of the session, a prefatory
fascicle is issued for each series, containing a
table of contents, list of members, agenda and
other prefatory marter.
After the .close of the session, collated sets of
fascicles will be placed on sale for the general
public.

Address by Prince Wan Waithayakon, Temporary
Presldent,Chairman of the delegation of. Thailv ~
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The eleventh

session of the General Assembly came to aclose only
a few days ago. This shows that the General Assembly
has work to do which takes more time and more
continuing effort than previously.
4. The fact is that the eleventh session had to
continue the work of the two emergency special
sessions in dealing with the tragic situations in the

17.
th
As
94

pr
ha

18
of

19
S
at
eu
th

co
1

A!PV.678

of

wh

General Assembly - Twelfth Session - Plenary Meetings

2

the achievement of the objectives of those resolutions.
Ir :£eed, the freedom of the Hungarian people as a problem of humanity is a cause which all Members of the
United Nations should have at heart, and it should be
possible to harmonize the actions of nations to this end.
11. The admission of one more State, the eightysecond, to membership in the United Nations is being
recommended: it is the Federation of Malaya, a close
neighbour and friend of my country, whose attainment
of independence is a tribute to the exemplary application of the principle of self-determination contained
in the Charter of the United Nations.
12. The General Assembly, at its eleventh session,
called for a peaceful p just and democratic solution for
the questions of Algeria and Cyprus, and it is my
earnest hope that further progress will be made toward
that end during the twelfth session.
13. Finally, I Wish to reiterate that, ifapositive step
forward could be taken in the matter of disarmament,
it would be hailed by the whole wO.l'ld.

14. May the twelfth session of the General Assembly,
half of whose Member States are represented by their
Foreign Ministers, be blessed with every success in its
deliberations for the peace, freedom, justice and welfare of mankind.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the twelfth session
ef the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

15. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the
rules of procedure provides for the appointment, at the
beginning of each session, of a Credentials Committee
consisting of nine members proposed by the President.
In accordance with this rule, I should like to suggest
that the follOWing Members serve on the Credentia Is
Committee for the twelfth session: Burma, Canada,
Iceland, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
16. If there is no objection, I shall consider the
proposal approved by the General Assembly.
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President

17. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The election of
the President of the twelfth session of the General
Assembly will be held in accordance with rules 31 and
94 of the rules of procedure. I invite the Assembly to
proceed to the vote by secret ballot. The ballot papers
have been distributed.
18. I call on the representative of Mexico, on a point
of order.
19. Mr. PADILLA NERVO (Mexico) (translated from
Spanish): I must apologize to the Assembly for speaking
at Wastage in the proceedings. I know that it is not
customary to do so; it has never happened during all
the years I have had the honour of representing my
country in the Assembly. I am well aware of rule 94
of the Assembly's rules of procedure, according to
which all elections shall be held by secret ballot and

there shall be no nominations. I do not intend to speak
on that point.
20. My Government, like all the other Governments
represented here, has a commitment regarding the
candidates for the presidency and it will fulfil that
commitment, as will all the others. I feel, however,
that the Assembly should not be divided on this issue.
The vote might carry with it political implications
which are far from our minds.
21. Both candidates are deserving of our full conSideration and respect. We are familiar with their ability
and integrity, but the Assembly should, I believe, give
complete authority to its . I3xt President. Like his
predecessors, he must be above the battle and act
impartially in dealing with all the problems submitted
for our consideration. Like Prince Wan Waithayakon,
the President of the eleventh session, and like preVious
Presidents, he will have to rlischarge his high office
in full compliance with the principles of the Charter
and the provisions of the rules of procedure.
22. For these reasons, I take the liberty of suggesting

that one of the candidates should stand down, thus
enabling us to elect the next president of the Assembly
by a unanimous vote. I know that sucha gesture would
be welcomed by the Assembly. In so dealing with this
matter - which is not political-we would begin our
work in unity and amity instead of being divided and
finding oUl'selves in the position of having to cOluer
victory upon one candidate and inflict defeat upon the
other.
23. I believe that the legitimate aspirations of the
candidates will be supported by the delegations on a
future occasion. For my part, I can say that my country
will support the candidate who decides to Withdraw,
thus enab~ing us to give greater backing and authority
to the President who will be elected for this session.
The withdrawal of one candidate would be an expression
of the unity and the spirit of friendliness which exists
in this matter - for this is not a debate on a political
issue. Thus, all the Members of this Assembly could
write and work in an atmosphere of harmony that
might be an augury of a brighter future for the United
Nations and for the world.

24. Mr. MALIK (Lebanon): I listened with great care
to the statement that we have just heard from our
colleague and former PreSident, Mr. Padilla Nervo. I
think the arguments that he adduced are sound and
should be fully considered. Basing myself upon his
statement, together with the expressions in it regarding
the future, I wish to make the following declaration.

25. The deliberations of the General Assembly affect
the peace of the world, and therefore the President of
the Assembly, to 'be able to guide our proceedings with
the requisite authority and prestige, must enjoy the
broadest and, if possible, the unanimous supportofthe
Assembly.
26. Now the Assembly has \oefore it two candidates, and
we know that the house is fairly evently divided between
them. In the space of a few months we have been able to
gather considerable support, which by itself would have
justified our pressing for a contest on the floor.

Z7. However, considerations of strength or weakness
are not the only, nor even the most important, considerations in this situation, for during our campaign
it became apparent also that most of those who were

unable to vote for

by a most genuine

real unhappiness
28. In these circ

situation of the w
divided hearts i
product of human

29. We of the Go
express our deep
encouraged and s
as to those who
their sincere man
of harmony, conco
my good friend Si
and I am sure he
on my support. I
support from all
his exalted leader
shall have a splen
30. And so, my f
session of the Ge
for without real
action
there ca
United Nations.
D

31. Mr. ROMUL
gation wishes to
renWlciation just
distinguished chai
32. As an old f
Organization, Ic
Malik than to sa
statesmen of our t
of the General As

33. It is in reco
I wish to put on rec
that the General A
avail itself of the
man for its Pre
justice to Mr. Mal
General Assembly

34. Mr. nULLE
Organization is .
members those \I
President of the GI
one of them speak:
whom it has been
United Nations wa:
his statesman-like
tion to the principl
I know that we all
future to serve thi
of his act here tod
35. Mr. TSIANG (
Ralations of Mex
gestions which h
Assembly one mo
expressed are tho
be a privilege for
for President of
interests of harm
privilege for my
he should offe),' h
President of L'le G
36. Mr. DE F
from French): I

678th meeting - 17 September 1957
unable to vote for us were, at the sarn!) time, animated
by a most genuine goodwill towards us. They expressed

real unhappiness at not being able to support us now.
28. In these circumstances: l.tnd in the present critical
situation of the world, a divided house conta,ning also
divided hearts is obviously not the best possible
product of human wisdom.
.
29. We of the Government and delegation of Lebanon
express our deepest gratitude to all those who have
encouraged and supported us in this matter, as well
as to those who have so profoundly heartened us by
their sincere manifestation of goodwill. In the interest
of harmony, concord, amity and peace, I am yielding to
my good friend Sir Leslie Munro. I shall vote for him,
and I am sure he knows that he can completely count
on my support. I hope he will receive the maximum
support from all sections of the Assembly, for under
his exalted leadership there is no question but that we
shall have a splendid session this year.
30. And so, my friends, let us inaugurate this twelfth
session of the General Assembly with an act of unity,
for without real unity - unity of spirit and unity of
action ~ there can be no real peace and certainly no
United Nations.
31. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): The Philippine delegation wishes to note with admiration the gesture of
renunciation just shown by Mr. Charles Malik, the
distinguished chairman of the Lebanese delegation.
32. As an old friend and colleague of his in this
Organization, I .can think of no higher tribute to Mr.
Malik than to say that he is one of the outstanding
statesmen of our time who would honour tlie presidency
of the General Assembly at any time.
33. It is in recognition of his indisputabkmeritsthat
I wish to put on record the earnest hope and expectation
that the General Assembly, will, at some future time,
avail itself of the services of so able and deserving a
man for its President, both as a simple matter of
justice to Mr. Malik himself and as an act by which the
General Assembly would honour itself.
34. Mr. DULLES (United States of America): This
Organization is fortunate that it has among its
members those who are well qualified to serVEl as
President of the General Assembly. We have just heard
one of them speak: Mr. Malik, a man of great eminence
whom it has been my privilege to know even before the
United Nations was formed. He has shown, I think, by
his statesman-like act toda.y, his devotion and dedication to the principles and ideals of the United r~ations.
I know that we all rejoice that he will be able in the
future to serve this Organization, the more DO because
of his act here today.
35. Mr. TSIANG (China): The Secretary for External
Relations of Mexico, in putting before us the suggestions which he made, has renderec. the General
Assembly one more service. The sentiments that hs
expressed are those of my delegation. Indeed, it would
be a privilege for my delegation to vote for Mr. Mal1k
for President of the General Assembly. He has, in the
interests of harmony, decided to withdraw. Itwillbe a
privilege for my delegation to support him whenever
he should offe:!.' his services to us in the capacity of
President of the General Assembly.
36. Mr. DE FREITAS-VALLE (Brazil) (translated
from French): I should like to add a few words on

3

behalf of Brazil to what has already been said. His
long years of service to the United Nations entitle Mr.
Malik to our wholehearted respect and gratitude. His
outstanding ability and his devotion to the cause of the
United Nations are deeply appreciated in Braz:il, his
countrymen are well liked in our country and their
descendants have become integrated into our national
life. We hope that Mr. Malik will be available at a
future session to serve in the office for which he was
so well qualified a candidate and which he has now so
graciously renounced.
37. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): We owe a deep debt of gratitude to Mr. Malik
for the gesture ,le has made today, affording a further
instanc~ of his high-mindedness and his subtle grasp
of the most complex situations. Many countries, including my own, would _ ashe saw, and as Mr. Padilla
Nervo pointed out in his able statement, for which we
thank him _ have been loath to choose between two
candidates such as Mr. Malik and Sir Lesile Munro
and, by voting for one, to have seemed to be voting
against the other.
38. On this as on other occasions, Mr. Malik has
endeavoured to avoid the creation of a situation which
would have divided the Assembly. He was anxious to
permit the Assembly to open, as he said himself, in
unity and concord. We fully and wholeheartedly
associate ourselves with the remarks of Mr. Romulo,
Mr. Dulles and the representatives of China and Brazil.
Like them, we hope that in the near future the Assembly
may be able to take advantage of :Mr. Malik's talents,
learning, philosophy, political experience and experience of the United Nations, as well as of his
impartiality and the statesman-like qualities of which
he has just given additional proof to the Assembly.
39. Mr. CASEY (Australia): I appreciatetheopportunity of joining in the many expressions of appreciation
of the high-minded and selfless attitude which Mr.
Malik has just demonstrated to us.
40. It was a matter of very considerable distress to
me, and I know to a number of other representatives,
that the Assembly might be called upon to choose
between two gentlemen of such high distinction and
achievements as Sir Leslie Munro and Mr. Charles
Malik. As the representative of Mexico has said, there
is obvious advantage and merit in unanimity in this
case, since unanimity clearly adds to the authority of
the income Presideht.
41. This high- minded and selfless attitude of Mr.
Malik in standing down today has, I believe, added
appreciably to his prestige in the United Nations and
elsewhere, now and in the future.
42. A long time ago - in fact, fourteen years ag\j. ~
I had some association with the Middle East and with
Lebanon. At that time, I became acquainted with a
number of those who now occupy the highest positions
in Lebanon. Mr. Malik, as a great many, if not all, of
us know, as a :man of high distinction and :reputation,
which go far outside his own country. He is one of t.'le
best speakers in the United Nations. He is notable,
perhaps, for his calm and philosophical analysis of
world affairs.
43. In conclucUng this ... ,~_)f statement of a.ppreciation,
I would say that Mr. Mailk has L"lcreased in stature R..'1d
in prestige by his selfless and high-minded action
today.

4
44.
rep
exp
Ass

4

General Assembly - Twelfth Session - Plenary Meetings

44. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): I wish to join
representatives who have spoken before me in
expressing appreciation of what occurred in the
Assembly a few moments ago.
45. It is the General Assembly's good fortune that in
anyone year there are a number of representatives
able to fill with distinction the office of President. It
is quite normal that in the process of election, under
the democratic procedures we have adopted, there
should he more than one person willing to serve in
this place. We recognize that those who are willing to
be elected offer to perform a service for the United
Nations. When we all know - whether it is officially
stated or not- that there are two distinguished leaders
in the Assembly who are available for the office of
President, it becomes very difficult to choose between
them. Moreover, as the Secretary for External
Relations of Mexico has pointed out, an election in such
a case would not be a unanimous one. We are therefore
grateful to Mr. Malik for having spared us this
difficult ta!Sk and for having enabled the Assembly to
proceed to the election of its President. I wish to
express my appreciation to Mr. Malik for standing
down.
46. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The Assembly
will now proceed to the election of the President.
At the invitation of the Tem ra
President Mr.
Padilla Nervo Mexico and Mr. Luns Netherlands
acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.

Number of ballot papers:
81
Invalid ballots:
o
Number of valid ballots:
81
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
78
';9
Required majority:
Number of votes obtained:
SIR Leslie Munro (New Zealand) • • . . • . .• 77
Mr. Charles Malik (Lebanon) • • . • • • . . •• 1

•

Havin~obtained the

required majority, Sir Leslie
Munro
ew Zealand) was elected President of the
twelfth session of the General Assembly, and took the
Chair.
Address by Sir Leslie Munro, President of the Twelfth
'session of the General Assembly

U

47. The PRESIDENT: I need hardly say how profoundly
I am moved by this occasion. Before I speak, as I want
to speak, of the words that have been uttered by my most
distinguished friend Mr. Malik, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Lebanon, I would like to acknowledge what
has been said by the Secretary for External Relations of
Mexico, by, the Secretary of State of the United States of
America, by the heads of the delegations of the
Philippines, France, China and L'ldia and s it goes
without saying, by the Minister of State for External
Affairs oil Australia.
4
8. I aDl very conscious of Mr. Mnlik's mag;nanimity
and of Ms high- mindedness in withdrawing his candidature before this election. His action, which is consistent
with aU that we in this Assembly know and I1dmire in
him, is one in accol'dancewiththehighesttraditions of
the G'eneral Assembly. I can assure the Foreign

example of disinterestedness and selflessness is a
personal inspiration to me.
49. I am profoundly sensible of the honour which my
fellow representatives have conferred upon me. Hook
upon my election as a tribute to my country and to the
efforts it 11&.s always made to play a construcUve part
in the activities of this Organization. I shall in all
humility use my utmost endeavours to justify the confidence reposed in me by the Assembly and to carry out
impartially the duties which I have assumed.
50. In approaching my task I am fortified by the
knowledge that I shall be able to count on the cooperation and the support of all members of the
Assembly. We are enjoined under our Charter to have
as our common purpose the preservation of peace and
the enlargement of human welfare. It is my hope that
the work of this twelfth session will advance these
noble purposes and that it will reflect in a practical way
our common attachment to the principles of the
Charter.

51. Like all my distinguished predecessors, whose
record of sei'vice provides me with both guidance and
inspiration, I shall be sustained in the discharge of my
responsibilities by the certainty that I can rely on the
invaluable advice and assistance of our SecretaryGeneral and his most excellent staff.
52. We meet with the memory fresh in our minds of
a period of acute uncertainty and tension in major
areas of the world. During the last twelve months,
problems of the utmost gravity have confronted the
United Nations. Our Organization has not failed to
respond. The achievements of the eleventh session,
which followed hard on the heels of two momentous
emergency sessions, are none the less real for being
limited. 'When full allowance has been made for their
limitations, these achievements emphasize anew the
position which the United Nations has come to occupy
in the settlement of disputes and the quest for an
international order based on justice. We must pursue
the quest with unflagging determination.
53. In that quest, our Organization has made and wil1
continue to make an essential contribution in all the
diverse fields of international activity. We should, as
oUl' Secretary-General has pointed out in the introduction to his annual report, "recognize the United Nations
for what it is - ' an admittedly imperfect but indispensable instrument of nations in working for a
peaceful evolution toward a more just and secure world
order" [A/3594/Add.l. p.3].
54. The session we are now beginning is not to be
distinguished from those preceding it in the range or
complexity of the issues it presents. The record shows
that the responsibilities resting on this Organization
are not episodic, but cumulative. The UJ'l..ited Nations
must do its work in a divided world in which for ten
years the nations bave been Without dependable safeguards against the catastrophe of total war. It is a
Diatter for deep concern that many stubborn problems
should elude soluUon and should each year reappear on
our af~enda in onf~ form or another" A constant effort
is therefore requlred if there ~s to be any enlargement
of gains painfully made and painfully maintained.
55. Nor has the need diminished for vigilance in
establishing ,.ealis~ic priorities in applying the test

~~~~~~~~~::-~~~~~l!:~;::~~~'::~:::~"~~'=:'~~::~~~~
to the initiatives that are proposed and
-~-- -~----- .:::.--.J:
~o~
'-:,~-:~·:.:_:~Jr --~:c':._.: -,-:_:'~_.' ':::;'-:
,

0

__

.____

in avoiding the imp
resources of the 0

56. It seems per
concern which has
most awesome tec
the nuclear age 0
greatest threat in
close attention sho
operation in the
purposes. A welco
been the esta'1lis
Energy Agency,
when the Second
Peaceful Uses of A
It is moreover gr
Committee on the E
progress in its se
will form the basi
Assembly next yea
57. It is naturalal
both conventional
nent place in the d
of the Assembly.
necessary for me t
nor to dwell on its
must all share the
sound and workable
be in its initial s
every increase in
modern weapons.
58. The peoples 0
fear, from the bur
search for a soluti
be exantined here
the patience, on th
of us all.
59. I venture to
qualities will not
our business and
General Assembly,
ments of the Unite
60. In that hope I
work.
Statement by the
for the admlsslo
membership In th

61. The PRESIDE·
one which I am veIj
Assembly: it is thl
Malaya to members
62. The Security
mended [A/3654]
Federation of Mala~
Organization. Toda
a draft resolution
Ceylon, Ghana, In
United Kingdom [A
63. I understand
desire also expres
decision should be
of the Federation of
in order that we
the beginning of the
participation in OU
broadar question of

678th meeting - 17 September 1957
in avoiding the imposition of excessive demands on the

resources of the Organization.

5

the United Nations appears as item 25 of the prOVisional
agenda [A!361 0]. I will therefore propose that, bearing
in mind the provisions of rules 40 and 67, item 25 be
considered as included in the agenda, for the limited
purpose of acting immediately upon the application of
the Federation of Malaya [A!3652J.

56. It seems pertinent to refer here to the universal
concern which has accompanied the world's latestand
most awesome technological revolution. The advent of
the nuclear age offers the greatest promise and the
greatest threat in human history. It is natural that
It was so decided.
close attention should be devoted to strengthening coAGENDA ITEM 25
operation in the use of atomic energy for peaceful
purposes. A welcome and a decisive step forward has
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
been the esta'1lishment of the International Atomic
ADMISSION OF THE FEDERATION OF MALAYA TO
Energy Agency,
.1e further advances can be expected
MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNITED NATIONS
when the Second International Conference on the
64. Mr. LLOYD (United KINGDOM): May I just say a
Pe~ceful Uses of Atomic Energy is convened next yea!'.
It IS moreover gratifying to note that the Scientific word of congratulation to you, Mr. President, upon your
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation is making electioll. There are many reasons why I should do so progress in its series of fact-finding surveys which our old friendship, a high regard for your personal
will form the basis for the Committee's report to the qualities and a deep admiration for your country, one of
t.i.e Commonwealth family. I hope, and I am sure that
Assembly next year.
all my fellow representatives hope too, that you will
57. It is natural also that the problem of disarmament
have a most successful term in the office which you are
both conventional and nuclear, should be given a prOmi~ so well qualified to hold.
nent place in the deliberations of t.1ti.s twelfth session
of the Assembly. Time is not on our side. It is not 65. But my congratulations to you in no way detract
necessary for me to stress the urgency of the problem from the warmth of the feelings of the United Kingdom
nor to dwell on its formidable diffic.ulties. Surely we delegation and its respect for Mr. Charles Malik,
must all share the conviction of the need to reach a another old friend of mine in this Organization and for'
sound and workable agreement.; however limited it may his country. I agree with everything that has ~en said
be in its initial stages, it becC'lmes more press:lg with about him. He is certainly a man endowed with all the
every in~rease in the enormc,usly destructive power of qualities needed by a President of the General
Assembly, and his action today has added to the lustre
modern weapons.
of his great reputation.
58. The peoples of the world long for a release from
fear, from the burden of a terrible uncertainty. The 66. With regard to the item now before the General
search for a solution of this and of the other issues to Assembly, less than three weeks ago the Federation of
be examined here must make the heaviest demand on Malaya achieved independence and at its own request
the patience, on the good will and on the understanding was received into our Commonwealth of Nations, with
th6 consent and warm welcome of all the Governments.
of us all.
The Federation of Malaya thus became the tenth mem59. I venture to hope, as your President, that these ber of that expanding community of independent and
qualities will not be found lacking as we proceed with democratic States to which my country is proud to
our business and that this, the twelfth session of the
belong.
General Assembly, will in its turn add to the achieve67. The Government of the Federation of Malaya
ments of the United Nations in the cause of peace.
immediately applied to the United Nations for member60. In that hope I call upon the Assembly to begin its ship. Within a week, the Security Council met to
work.
consider this application and unanimously adopted a
Statement by the President regarding the procedure resolution - which t.i.e United Kingdom tor;ether with
for the admission of the Federation of Mal~ Au~tralia, had been proud to sponsor - ~ecommending
to me General Assembly that the Federation of Malaya
membership in the United Nations
should be admitted to membership in this Organization.
61. The PRESIDENT: The next item on the agenda is Today we are about to take the final step in that
one which I am very happy to place before the General process of. admission.
Assembly: it is the admission of the Federation of 68. This has been done at the earliest opportunity in
Malaya to membership in the United Nations.
the twelfth session, immediately after the election of
62. The Security Council has unanimously recom- the President, so that the Federation of Malaya will be
mended [A!3654] to the General Assembly that the enabled, without delay, to take its part in our delibeFederation of Malaya be admitted to membership in the rations. We believe that through this Organization the
Organization. Today the Assembly will take action on Federation will gain strength and friendship, butitwill
also have an individual and responsible contribution to
a draft resolution submitted bv
Australia
J
' Canada ,
Ceylon, Ghana, India, New Zealand, Pakistan and the make to our work. Her Majesty the Queen, in her
Independence Day message to the Head of State of the
United Kingdom [A!3655!Rev.l].
Federation, said:
63. I understand that there is a general desire a
"I am confident that Malaya will respond worthily
desire also expressed in the Security Council th~t a
io
the challenging tasks of independence and that she
decision should be taken with respect to the ad~ssion
will
continue to show to the world that example of
of the Federation of Malaya at the earliest opportunity
moderation and good will between all races that has
in order that we may welcome its representatives at
been so marked a feature of her history."
the beginning of the session and benefit also from their
partici~,tion in our work from tha veri outset. The
69. We in the United Kingdom have no doubt about
broader question of the admission of new Members to the qualifications of the Federation of Malaya for

6

me
for t
ship
peo
mea
of th
ackn
adm
foun
its
in g
70.
ber
help
othe
Nati
71.
have
won
agai
deli
Brit
We
or
dec
forc
pro
72.
of t
sen
Kin
inde
ber
that
in

74.
the
Cey
Unit

A

Ja
was

In
Lt
land

Pa

gual
Syti
Soci
Uni
Uni
Yug
tral
Bur

6

General Assembly - Twelfth Session - Plena1'Y Meetings

membership. British people have worked in, with and
for the Federation over the past eighty years in friendship and co-operation with its people. We know the
people of Malaya well. If I may say so, we take a
measure of pride in the fact that, as the Prime Minister
of the Federation of Malaya has himself so generously
acknowledged, we have handed over a legacy of good
administration and a sound economic and constitutional
foundation on which the state can strengthen and fortify
its independence, and we are sure that tins legacy is
in good hands.
70. The Federation, as an equal and independent member of the Commonwealth, can rely on the continued
help and support of the United Kingdom and of the
other Commonwealth countries, both here in the United
Nations and in other ways.
71. May! make just one further point. Some people
have congratulated the Federation of Malaya on having
won its fight for independence. Well, thatfightwas not
against us, the British. We have, as a matter of
deliberate policy, sought to guide the peoples of the
British Empire to self-government and independence.
We have not always agreed with them upon the timing
or the precise methods, but it has been, and is, our
declared and deliberate course of policy - a policy not
forced upon us but voluntarily undertaken, and we are
proud of it,
72. This is the forth occasion since the first session
of the General Assembly in 1945 upon which a representative of Her Majesty's Government in the United
Kingdom has had the honour of proposing a newly
independent member of the Commonwealth for membership in the United Nations, and it is our intention
that there shall be other such memorable occasions
in the future.
73. I am therefore honoured and glad to recommend to
the General Assembly the draft resolution which other
members of the Commonwealth have joined in sponsoring. I am sure that the General Assembly will accord
a unanimous vote in favour of this draft resolution,
and that that unanimity will be an auspicious introduction to the entry of the Federation of Malaya into
the United Nations. In moving this draft resolution, I
repeat once more the heartfelt good wishes of the
people of the United Kingdom for those of the Federation of Malaya.
74. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to vote on
the draft resolution submitted by Australia, Canada,
Ceylon, Ghana, India, New Zealand, Pakistan and the
United Kingdom [A!3655!Rev.l].
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Japanrl having been drawn by lot by the President,
was ca ed upon to vote first.
In favour: Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia,
LibYa, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Paki~ . . an,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugual, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burm;l., Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cam-

bodia, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, F'inland, France, Ghar.a, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Il'an, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.
The delegation of the Federation of Malaya was
escorted to its plice in the General Assembly hall.
75. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the Assembly, I
have the great honour, in sincerity and in friendship,
to welcome to our membership the new State of the
Federation of Malaya.
76. It is very proper, on this happy occasion, that I
should recall the record of the Federation of Malaya' s
uninterrupted progress towards independence, the
great responsibility and statesmanship exercised by
the Malayan leaders, and the harmony and co-operation
existing between the Federation of Malaya and the
United Kingdom, with whose guidance and help the new
State has taken its place in the community of nations.
77. I am confident that our Organization will substantially gain by this addition to our numbers of
another Member dedicated to the purposes of the
Charter.
78. Mr.ISMAIL (Federation of Malaya): On behalf of
the Government of the Federation of Malaya, I would
like to express our gratitude to the President and to
the other representatives gathered here for their warm
welcome. I would like particularly to express our
thanks to the members of the delegation of the United
Kingdom and the other Commonwealth countries for the
draft resolution which preceded our admission to
member(3hip in the United Nations.
79. It is with pride and hUmility that I speak before
you today so soon after the emergence of the Federation
of Malaya as an independent and fully sovereign country
on 31 August 1957. I speak here today in this, the
greatest assembly of nations, as the representative of
a small nation, a nation of only 6 million people, living
in an area of only 50,000 square miles. The acceptance
by the General Assembly of the membership of the
Federation of Malaya in the United Nations confers on
my country a privilege and a right which we shall
cherish. At the same time, it confers on my country,
small though it is, a great responsibility which we
envisaged when we set out, with determination and
singleness of purpose, on the road to independence.
80. Although our material wealth and our standardof
living compare very favourably with those of many
nations in the world today, as a small nation, our basic
strength lies not in these material things, but in the
moral character and purposes of our people. We have
in Malaya three major racial groups: the Malays, the
Chinese and the Indians, who have lived together for
generations in peace and harmony. Neither the difference in religion and cultural background, nor the
difference in their eeonomic and social status, has
created an insuperable barrier towards the national
unity of these races. Our great desire is to have the
right and the good fortune to live as a free, independent
and united national among the free nations of the world.
The achievement of this desire, through peaceful and
constitutional means, through friendly negotiation and a
spirit of compromise, is the result of the abiding moral

strength inherent
nities living in Mal

81. VVe suggest tt
as to all small na
our people tllat we
the responsibility
Nations bestows UI
Abdul Rahman Putr
Independence for t
Federation of our
shall be forever
independent State f
and justice and eve
of its people and thl
all nations.
82. Our King, at
this to say:

"It is the intent
most friendly ter
My Government
well-being of eve
Continuing, His Ma.

"My Governme
embodied in the
if the Federatic
Organization, m
country should pli
limited resource
many internation
auspices of the U
83. It is now my
new independent
solemnly in the Ge
of the Governmen
Malaya: with the g
cillles and further
Charter.
84. With pride and
responsibility befor
today. With God's
trust that is placed
'85. Mr. CASEY (A
well, Mr. President
haps more appropri
of the Australian de:
your election to
Assembly, I canno
presents itself to ID<
sincere congratulat:
to the General Assl
office.
86. 1 am also gra1
few words of welel
Federation of Mall:
Meinber into the U
sequence. The ent
Federation of Mala
assumption of natior
is a matter of part
benause over the ye~
been a very close
Australia in directi
moment.
87. Only a week (
representing my cm

678th meeting - 17 September 1957
strength inherent in each of the three racial communities living in Malaya today.
81. We suggest that, to a small nation such' as ours,
as to all small nations, it is in the moral strength of
our people tlJat we shallfind the inspiration to shoulder
the responsibility which membership in the United
Nations bestows upon us. Our Prime Minister, Tunku
Abdul Rahman Putra, declared, in the Proclamation of
Independence for the Federation of Malaya, that the
Federation of our eleven states, with God's blessiIig,
shall be forever a sovereign, democratic and
independent State founded upon the principle of liberty
and justice and ever seeking the welfare a...1. d happiness
of its people and the maintenance of a just peace among
all nations.
82. Our King, at the opening of our Parliament, had
this to say:

nIt is the intention of my Government to be on the
most friendly terms with all countries in the world.
My Government stands for peace, freedom and the
well-being of every country of the world. n
Continuing, His Majesty further said:
nMy Government will adhere to the principles
embodied in the Charter of the .United Nations and,
if the Federation is elected a Member of that
Organization, my Government intends that this
country should play its part within the bounds which
limited resources must dictate in the work of the
many international bodies which operate under the
auspices of the United Nations. YI
83. It is now my duty as the representative of the
new independent Federation of Malaya, to affirm
solemnly in the General Assembly the aim and object
of the Government and people of the Federation of
Malaya: with the grace of God, to observe the principles and further the purposes of the United Nations
Charter.
84. With pride and joy, and an awareness of the grave
responsibility before us, we take our place amongyou
today. With God's blessing, we shall not fail in the
trust that is placed upon my country and my people.

'85. Mr. CASEY (Australia): Although I realize very

well, Mr. PreSident, that there will be other and perhaps more appropriate opportunities for me, on behalf
of the Australian delegation, to welcome very warmly
your election to the presidency of the General
Assembly, I cannot let this first opportunity that
presents itself to me go by without saying one word of
sincere congratulations to you and, if I may say so,
to the General Assembly, on your assumption of that
office.
86. 1 am also grateful for this opportunity to say 9.
few words of welcome to the representative of the
Federation of Malaya. The admission vf any new
Member into the United Nations is an event of consequence. The entry of a new Member such as the
Federation of Malaya, follOWing to closely upon its
assumption of nationhood only two or- three weeks ago,
is a matter of particular significance for Australia,
because over the years, over the generations, there has
been a very close association between Malaya and
Australia in directions that I need not detail at this
moment.
87. Only a week or ten days ago, I returned from
representing my country at the hldependence celebra-

7

tions at Kuala Lumpur, where I was one of the many
proud witnesses of the achievement of nationhood by a
people to whose development we in Australia like to
believe we have made some contribution in recent
years. There were representatives of a great many
countries - of at least thirty or forty ,countries, I
should think - at those celebrations. r ht:\ard from a
number of non-Corcmonwealth representati'lfes expressions of surprise that the handing over of power by
the United Kingdom to the Federation of Malaya was
accompanied by so friendly a spirit. I was glad to be
able to explain that this was not a matter for surprise
to those of us who are members of the Commonwealth,
that it was merely the normal and traditional working
of the process of evo~,ution from a colonial status to
self-governing independence, of which the Federation
is but the most reeent example and of Which, as all of
us know, there were the oilier examples quite recently
of our friends froJIll Ghana and, before that, of course,
of India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Burma and many others
before that, and" as the Foreign Secretary of the
United Kingdom said today, there are probably a
number still to come.
88. This must 'be a proud day for my f~iend Mr.
Ismail the first Ambassador from the Federation of
Malay~ to the UJllited States and the first Permanent
Rspresentative of the Federation to the United Nations.
Mr. Ismail has had more than a passing acquaintance
with my coui'1f;ry, Australia. He was, with his
distinguished Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman
Putra, and others; among the architects of the nationhood of the Federation of Malaya, and, as I have said,
he must be a proud man to be the first to represent
his country in this great world Organization.
89. As I have said, the addition of any new Member
to our ranks is a matter of impc_ tance. For Australia,
and for the Commonwealth more generally, the
attainment by the Federation of Malaya, first, of
independence within the Commonwealth, and now of
membership in the United Nations, is a matter for
sincere cong;ratulation, and~ on my own behaJi and.on
behalf of the: Australian delegation and the Australian
Government ~.nd people, I should like to extend our
sincere and warm congratulations to the Federation of
Malaya.

90. Mr. SMITH (Canada): Mr. President, will yc:u
allow me to add to the words of congratulation which
have been addressed to you in respect of your election
to the presidency. I do not subtract in any way from ~e
warmth of my felicitations when I express to this
Assemblv the high regard in which Mr Malik is held
by the Canadian delegation. We salute Mr. Malik f~r
his unselfish action this aftemoon in withdrawing his
candidature for the presidency.
0

91. A !lew weeks ago, a member of ilie Canadian
Governrnent, Mr. J. M. :Macdonnell, was present as a
represemtative of my country at the impressive
ceremonies at Kuala Lumpur on the occasion when the
Federa.tion of Malaya became one of the independent
membflrs of the Commonwealth of Na.tions. At that
time, the Canadian Government expressed its pleasure
in welcoming the Federation as another indepen::lent
member of that Commonwealth. I reiterate ;~t
welcome today to the representative of the Federation
of Malaya, who has taken a seat in the General
Assellllbly. It is most gratifying to me personally that
my fllrst utterance in the Assembly should be, on this

<"

96.
cordi
each
Mala
Dutc
a fa
servi
and
posit
Conr
the G
life

ever
very
congon L'1
and a

8

General Assembly - Twelfth Session - Plenary Meetings

happy occasion, to welcome a n~w member of the 97. Even a larger number of Ceylonese have made
Commonwealth to membership in the United Nations. their home in Malaya, and they threw themselves in
The Canadian Government considered it an honour to with the lot of that country. I believe they have done so
take part in the historic cere~onyat Kuala Lumpur, with distinction. They have also occupied important
and it is for me a great privilege and pleasure to places in the legislature of the land and in very
express today Canada's gratification over the election important public positions. Our friendship will endure
of the Federation of Malaya to membership in the forever.
United Nations.
98. On behalf of the GovernmentandpeopleofCeylon,
92. Progress toward the goal of self-government and I take very great pleasure in conveying to my colleague
full independence in Malaya has been an orderly and Mr. Ismail our sincerest congratulations andfelicitaconstitutional development, purposefully supported and tions. I have not the slightest doubt that the Federation
assisted by the United Kingdom at every stage. This of Malaya will play a vital role in the maintenance of
evolution is one which Canadians are especially able peace and justice in the world"
to appreciate and understand. We qualify very readily 99. Mr. ADJEI (Ghana): On behalf of the delegation of
as expert witnesses in this context. Our own growth to Ghana, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. PreSident, on
nationhood followed the peaceful pattern of gradual your
election as President of this twelfth session of
adjustment of responsibilities and relationships in a the General
We hope that, under your wise
friendly and co-operative way. And it is, I think, fair g-.:ddance, theAssembly.
deliberations of the Assembly will prove
to observe that the relationship between Canada and to be a useful and constructive element in the maintethe United Kingdom which developed over the years of nance of international peace and security.
our evolution to nationhood has set, to some extent, the
pattern for what is now the worldwide association of 100. It is indeed a pleasure and a special privilege to
free nations to which we are proud to belong, and that me to join my colleagues, the other Members of this
is another example of the British policy that produces Assembly, in welcoming the Federation of Malaya into
growth from colony to nation rather than the retro- the membership of this great assembly of nations.
gressive step of going from nation to colony.
I
Perhaps more readily than any other Member, my
93. In warmly welcoming the Federation of Malaya to delegation understands the justified pride and sense of
full sovereignty J national freedom and membership in achievement which our colleagues from Malaya feel at
the United Nations, the Canadian delegation is also this time. It was not so long ago that we ourselves,
applauding the United Kingdom for the enlightened Ghana, were graciously welcomed into the membership
attitude which has helped the Malayan people in their of this Assembly. It is therefore with great pleasure
own efforts to achieve this happy result. Speaking for and pride that, on. behalf of the Government and people
Canada, I can say that we are sure that this new State of Ghana, I welcome our colleagues from Malaya to
will make a most useful contribution to the work of the Membership in this Assembly.
United Nations and therefore to that long- sought goal, 101. By a coincidence of history, the State of Ghana
the peace of the world.
and the State of the Federation of Malaya can be re94. Mr. GUNEWARDENE (Ceylon): Mr. President, garded as twins, having attained independence in the
may I at the very outset congratulate you on your same year and practically in similar circumstances.
election as President of the Assembly. Knowing you as We hope that the time will not be far distant when all
I dO,I have not the slightest doubt that you will guide colonial territories in Africa and elsewhere will also
the Assembly with decorum, dignity and ir.npartiality attain their independence, as Ghana and Malaya have
now done, and take their rightful places in this great
and bring credit to all of us.
family
of nations.
95. It is a matter of great joy to me as representative
of my country to offer our very sincere felicitations 102. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): Mr. Presid", t,
to the Federation of Malaya on its admission the I would like on behalf of my delegation to take ~~
United Nations. We attached so much importance to the oPpo1"tunity of my presence on this rostrum so early
occasion of the independence of the Federation of in the proceedings of the Assembly to offer you our
Malaya that the Prime Minister of Ceylon, Mr. good wishes on your election to the ll..!gh office of
Bandaranaike himself, felt it his duty to be present at President of the Assembly. I feel sure that in
expressing this I am expressing not only the view of
the celebration.
my delegation, but also of my country, that the
96. Our relations with Malaya have been long and representative of New Zealand should take the Chair
cordial. For centuries we have enjoyed friendship with of the Assembly this year.
each other. In OUI' small country there exists a
Malayan community. The Malays came as early as the 103. India has co-sponsored the draft resolution
Dutch period, and during the British time there was before the Assembly [A/3655/Rev.l] along with the
a famous Malay regiment which did very great United Kingdom and other members of the Commonservice. Their descendants have adorned the public wealth for the admission of the Federation of Malaya
and social life of our country. They have held high to membership in the United Nations. It is a happy
positions of trust and responsibility in the Supreme augury for us that so early in this session we are
Co~rt, the Foreign Service and many departments of
welcoming the eighty-second Member, anewMember~
the Government. They threw themselves fUlly into the to the United Nations, thus making a further advance in
life of the people and they identified themselves with the process that began about two years ago when some
every progressive cause in our country. J:t gives us sixteen new Members were admitted.
"Iery great pleasure indeed, therefore, to be a.ble to
congratulate the Federation of Malaya very sincerely 104. With Malaya my country has very ancient and
on the achievement of its objectives of inde!lendence historic con,nexions. In the third century before
Christian era, before the emissaries of the Emperor
and admission to the United Nations.

Asoka of that timE
operation in this la
have it that,by over
now submerged, tr~
and MaJaya of that d
Malacca we traded
between thE:! two ter
movement of popula
the~e are some 70
are either citizens (
Malaya.

105. In welcoming
membership in the
recall the fact that
the exercise of its
co-operation, has e
territories to becom

106. On this occasi
not present in the A
One is the present
of Malaya, Tunku At
manship and patier
Kingdom and the s
Federation, to overe
achievement of inde
tending over severa
107. The other na
that of -other states
missioner for the
Malcolm Macdonald
then seemed the im!
communities and tel
for independence.

108. It wvuld not
moment to say tha
racIal stocks that e2i
given the will and t
to be united in a for
of the Commonwea
instance which has
are happy to feel tha
act of faith in the Un
other members of
years ago, when 1
dependent decided U!
pressure from the
wealth to reDUUn in
stands justified tom
Commonwealth has 1
United Nations at t
welcomed by the ot]
predecessors.
109. This is a furth
the liberation of co
small pieces of terr'
and we hope that th
have assisted in.the
will not be found wa
accomplish the sam
tories.
110. On behalf of ]X
sented by one of my
ence celebrations in
our congratulations
which has now been

sa

678th meeting - 17 September 1957

9

Asoka of that time went to preach peace and cooperation in this land - long before that - geologists
have it that, by overland route on the continent that is
now submerged, trade was carried on between India
and Malaya of that day. Later on, through the straits of
Malacca. we traded with China, and this connexion
between the two territories was later cemented by the
movement of populations. So today in this vast land
the!'e are some 700,000 people of Indian origin who
are either citizens of or domiciled in the Federation of
Malaya.

the world. I am sure that it will be welcomed in
Malaya as it will be in my country.

105. In welcoming the Federation of Malaya to
membership in the United Nations, we are happy to
recall the fact that once again the United Kingdom, in
the exercise of its sovereignty and by the process of
co-operation, has enabled one of its former colonial
territories to become an independent nation.

112. Mr. MACDONALD (New Zealand): May I take
this first opportunity of addressing a word of appreciation to Mr. Charles Malik of Lebanon for his action in
the Assembly today. What he did could not have been
an easy decision for him to make, buthe made it very
obviously in the interest of unity, and unity is of great
importance to the work of the United Nations. My
delegation, and indeed I think I can safely say the whole
Assembly, has reason to be grateful to Mr. Malik for
what he has done.

106. On this occasion, the names of two men, who are
not present in the Assembly, come foremost to mind.
One is the present Prime Minister of the Federation
of Malaya, Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra, whose statesmanship and patience has enabled both the United
Kingdom and the several States that compose the
Federation, to overcome the difficu!ties that made the
achievement of independence a very long process extending over several years of negotiation.
107. The other name that comes to one's mind is
that of -other statesman, a Scotsman, the High Commissioner for the United Kingdom in India, Mr.
Ma.lcolm Macdonald, who a few years ago startedwhat
then seemed the impossible task of welding the various
communities and territories of Malaya in preparation
for independence.
108. It wvuld not perhaps be inappropriate at this
moment to say that, irrespective of the different
raCIal stocks that exist in the territory, it is possible,
given the will and the desire to co-operate, for them
to be united in a form of independence within the aegis
of the Commonwealth of Nations. This may be an
instance which has lessons for all of us. We in India
are happy to feel that the process that we began as an
act of faith in the United Kingdom and in ourselves and
other members of the Commonwealth eight or nine
years ago, when the territories that became independent decided upon their own free will and with no
pressure from the older members of the Commo~­
wealth to remain in the fraternity - that act of faith
stands justified today. Now the tenth member of the
Commonwealth has been admitted as a Member of the
United Nations at the dawn of its independence and
welcomed by the other States in the same way as its
predecessors.
109. This is a further step in the Asian revolution and
the liberation of colonial peoples. Now two or three
small pieces of territory have yet to take this course,
and we hope that the United Kingdom and others that
have assisted in the process of the liberation of Malaya
will not be found wanting in the processes which will
accomplish the same thing in regard to other territories.
110. On behalf of my Government, which wa.s represented by one of my colleagues at the recent independence celebrations in the Federation of Malaya, we offer
our congratulations and we hope that the resolution
which has now been adopted will be welcomed all over

111. That chapter of history which began 171 years
ago, when the British went to this place and established
a colony, and which has passed through various
vicissitudes is now completed. We have no doubt that
the attainment of independence by the Federation of
Malaya is not merely the achievement of that country
and the United Kingdom, but is also one of great credit
to the world, and its admission to the United Nations is
again to us as it is to that country.

113. Naturally it is a source of pride to me as a New
Zealander to see a fellow countryman, in the person of
Sir Leslie Munro, in the position of President of the
Assembly. He is well known in his native country of
New Zealand. He is well known to many of the people
here, and I feel sure that they, with me, will feel
confident that he will guide the destinies of the
Assembly ably and well during the time that lies ahead.
114. It was with the warmest pleasure that the New
Zealand delegation joined with the other Commonwealth
co- sponsors in submitting the draft resolution just
adopted by the Assembly and recommending the admission of the Federation of Malaya to membe:'\'ship in the
United Nations. Two weeks ago the Security Council
indicated in a unanimous vote its approval of the
Federation's application. The Assembly has now in like
manner welcomed the new State to this Organization.
115. I am confident that t.lJ.e Federation of Malaya will
bear with distinction the duties and responsibilities it
has assumed on its entry into the United Nations.
Together with representatives from the Commonwealth
and from many other nations. I was privileged to be
present at the celebrations which were held in Kuala
Lumpur to mark the achievement of independence by
the Federation of Malaya. I was able on that happy
occasion to convey to the new state the good wishes
and sincere congratulations of my own Government and
people. My visit serviced also to confirm impressions
of previous visits that I had made there that the leaders
of the Federation, with the ass=~tance of the United
Kingdom, have achi&ved outstanding success, in the
face of considerable obstacles, in creating a nation in
a country inhabited by diverse races. The existence in
the Federation of Malaya of a democratically elected
Assembly and of a Government firmly established and
enjoying wide support throughout the country is another
indication of the eminent fitness of that State to join
the community of nations.
116. That the ne';¥ State is so soundly established is
due also to thG wise manner in which the United Kingdom carded out its responsibilities in Malaya. I feel
that this is a proper ~casion on which to pay tribute
to the United Kingdom for the guidance and assistance
it has given to the ltiaders and people of the F Jeration
in their path to independence. Malayan state..!lmen at the

10
ceremo
help th
I was
which
Federa
117. T
develop
own co
happily
commo
much
betwee
Zealan
penden
bel' of
bring
relatio
bel' of
will ha
that it
118. I
Zealan
of the
119.
behalf
your el
tbR.t th

in Sou
of your
120. I
Mr. M
modati
in the i
121. I
delegat
in wel
Malaya
into th
taken
Organi
history
admiss
Nation'
of spec

122. ']
dependl
deter m
lng an
chosen
which i
acting
there i
of othe
simila

123. i
compli
once a
renunc
territo
auspic'
it is n
Power
that re
today
of this

10

General Assembly - Twelfth Session - Plenary Meetings

ceremonies in Kuala Lumpur freely acknowledged the
help they had received and will continue to receive, and
I was happy to note the close and friendly relations
which exist between the United Kingdom and the
Federation.
117. Through improved communications and other
developments in the post-war world, the peoples of my
own country and of the Federation of Malaya have
happily been brought into closer association. Om:
common membership in the Colombo Plan has done
much to increase the understanding and friendship
between us. It was particularly gratifying to New
Zealand that the Federation should, in obtaining independence, elect freely to become an independent member of the Commonwealth. Our joint membership will
bring New Zealand and the Federation into a still closer
relationship. The Federation is the fourth Asian member of this unique family of nations, and I know that it
will have a valuable contribution to make. I believe also
that it will have much to gain from this partnership.
118. It is, thus, with great pleasure that the New
Zealand delegation desires to welcome the delegation
of the Federation of Malaya into this Assembly.
119. Mr. AHMED (Pakistan): Mr. President, may I on
behalf of my delegation offer you our congratulations on
your election as President. My delegation has no doubt
tbat the Gen(\ral Assembly has rightly placed its trust
in.you and tha,~ you will discharge the responsibilities
of your office,gith wisdom and distinction.
120. I should like at the same time to pay a tribute to
Mr. Malik for the spirit of self-abnegation and accommodation shown by him in Withdrawing his candidacy
in the interest of international amit}T.
121. It is a matter of very great pleasure to my
delegation to associate itself with the other delegations
in welcoming the representative of the Federation of
Malaya to our midst. With the entry of the Federation
into the United Nations, another step forward has been
taken towards the universalization of this great
Organization. Bound as our two countries are by'ties of
history, culture, religion, and common ideals, the
admission of the Federation of Malaya to the United
Nations as an independent State is for Pakistan a cause
of special rejoicing.
122. The Federation of Malaya has attained its independence in accordance with h'le principle of selfdetermination of peoples through friendly understanding and negotiation with the United Kingdom. It r.as
chosen to remain within the Commonwealth of Nations,
which is a unique association offree and equal partners
acting in concert for the common good. Here again
there is a link with Pakistan, as indeed with a number
of other Asian countries whuse history has followed a
similar course.
123. i feel that this is an appropriate moment to
compliment the Government of the United Kingdom on
once again making possible, by yet another fine act of
renunciation, the orderly transformation of a dependent
territory into an independent State. This is a great and
auspicious occasion for the Federation of Malaya, for
it is now established as another self-governing Asian
Power. It has elected of its own free-will to belong to
that ];"emarkable family, the Commonwealth, and it has
today been elected, by unanimous consent, a Member
of this wider international f~.mily, the United Nations.

124. The good wishes of us all here are with the
people of the Federation of ~alaya.
125. Mr. AIKEN (Ireland): I have great pleasure in
joining with the other delegations in welcoming to this
Assembly the new State, the Federation of Malaya. We
in Ireland wish this new Member every success and
we wish its people all prosperity and happinesi:>.
126. May I also congratulate the United Kingdom on
its wise and generous stai:esmanship, which has made
possible the independence of the Federation of Malaya.
We hope that the example which the United Kingdom
has set in t ..'lis case will be Widely followed. It is ail
example of the practical and sincere application of one
of the fundamental principles of the Charter, the
principle of the self-determination of peoples.
127. The contrast between what has been done in
Hungary and what has been done in Malaya cannot fail
to impress us all profoundly.
128. We hope that the logic of what has been done in
Malaya may become the univarsal law applicable to
every other situation in every part of the world.
129. Mr. SHUKAIRY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,I
have a word for you. Brief as it may be, it is a word
of congratulation to you and to your country on the
happy occasion of your election to the presidency of
the General Assembly. I recall at this moment your
presidency of the Security Council two years ago when
we were pleading a highly contested question. You
conducted the business of the Security Council in that
bitter atmosphere with great fairness and a sense of
justice. I have no doubt in my mind that as President
of the Assembly you will continue conducting the work
of the General Assembly on the highest level of fairness
and equity.
130. It was predicted that, as a result of thtol determination of its people and its Government, our sister
nation in Malaya would soon enjoy sovereignty,
statehood and membership in the United Nations. There
is hardly a more pleasant duty for the Government and
people of Saudi Arabia, and for the Arab and Moslem
people at large, than that of welcoming the new State,
the Federation of Malaya, as a Member of the United
Nations.
131. It is nota sheer formality of Assembly procedure
that the delegation of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
admission of the Federation of Malaya to membership
in our Organization. As an Asian country, as a country
with ancient and persisting cultural and spiritual ties
with Saudi Arabia and the rest of the Arab world~ my
Government and people fully share in our joy at the
emergence of the Federation as a worthy member of
the international community.
132. In years to come - as in years past _ the
thousands of Malayan pilgrims at Mecca will share with
us not only their traditional wisdom, not only their
newly .acquired political status and international
personality. As such, their contribution to the peaceful
and humanitarian objectives of the annual gatherings,
sacred as they are, in our holy places, will certainly
be full and complete.
133. Saudi Arabia and other Arab States on this
solemn occasion earnestly hope that the admission of
the Federation of Malaya tC'lIlembersNp in the United
Nations will be followed, and, we hope, soon followed,
by the admission to 11~mtq~!'ship of other Asian and

African nations, suc
mention other natior
to achie""e independE

ii

,..1

134. But of paramo
of people everywher
determination. Thif
evolution of the pr
credit should be gi
by world public opin
of the aspirations
sovereignty and indE

135. Finally, on be
congratulate the F
dependence and welc
Nations. We send ou
of the Federation,
admiration and our

136. Mr. SASTROA
to associate my de
extending to Sir Le
his election as Pres
delegation has con:
possesses a thorou
the problems of thi
th~ history of mal
Assembly's agenda,
lish workable and m
in the 'most difficult
137. The fact that
achieved its indep
Federation of Mala.
cannot but be a se
delegation. But, bey(
joy in seeing the F
among us. Malaya
country with which,
enjoyed the closest
These ties of frienc
sure, not only endu
the future.
138. We have many
and people of the
Federation and IndoI1
old culture and tradi
in the arena of worlc
atomic age, as unde
natural resources ar
countries. We share,
initiative generated
liberation. Happily I
Federation the strug
government was ach
ful, United Nations
example will soon 1:
countries still strug
independence.
139. Indeed, we hav
language. Thus, th
conlmonly harboure
expressed by the s
recently - on 31 All
gained its freedom
reality for it, the pe(
say, celebrated tha
people of the Federa
....' ..

--.,•.

678th meeting - 17 September 1957
African nations, such as Algeria and Somaliland, not to
mention other nations which at present are struggling
to acnieve independence and sovereignty.
134. But of paramount importance is the final triumph
of people everywhere to fulfil L'163.r basic need for selfdetermination. This occasion indicates that, in the
evolution of the present state of world affairs, due
credit should be given to the part played in this body
by world public opinion in l>ringingaboutthefulfilment
of the aspirations of peoples for freedom, liberty,
sovereignty and independence.
135. Finally, on behalf of all the Arab States, I wish to
congratulate the Federation of Malaya on its independence and welcome it to membership in the United
Nations. We send our heartfelt greetings to the people
of the Federation, along with an expression of our
admiration and our best wislms.

11

140. Today is another day of rejoicing for the Federation of Malaya, as its struggle for independence
culminates with its entry into the United Nations as a
Member state. Today, too, the Government andpeople
of Indonesia rejoice with the Government and people of
the Federation.
141. To the Federation of Malaya and its eminent
statesmen and people we send our warmest congratulations and best wishes. We are convinced that it will
make an important contribution to the family of nations
and, together with all the Member States, will work
towa rds a ....ealization of the noble ideals of the United
Nations, so that peace and freedom may prevail
everywhere, for the WelfarE.l of mankind.

142. Mr. ROMULO (philippines): I should like, on
behalf of the delegation and the Government of the
Philippines, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your election. Your personal record as the repre136. Mr. SASTROAMIDJOJO (Indonesia): First, I wish sentative of New Zealand in the Security Council anu
to associate my delegation with other dele~.tions in in the General Assembly and New Zealand's services
extending to Sir Leslie Munro our congratulations on to the cause of peace have earned for you this exalted
his election as President of the General Assembly. My position.
d.elegation has come to know him as a friend who
possesses a thorough familiarity with all aspects of 143. There is more to the admission of the Federathe problems of this house, an intimate knowledge of tion of Malaya than the fact that it has become the
eighty- second Member of the United Nations. Its
th~ history of many of the items included in the
admission
marks the passing of an era in Asia: the era
Assembly's agenda, and a remarkable ability to establish workable and mutually satisfactory compromises of West.ern colonialism. With the independence of the
Federation, no li.i8.jor area of the Asian mainland is
in the ·most difficult situations.
now a colony of a Western Power.
137. The fact that yet another nation of Asia has 144. When my country, the Philippines, was given
achieved its independence, that the people of the . independence in 1946, the United Kingdom and the other
Federation of Malaya have been reborn in freedom, colonial Powers of Europe followed suit by granting
cannot but be a source of deep gratification to my freedom to India, Ceylon, Burma, Indonesia and Indodelegation. But, beyond that, we feel a special pride and China, including the French protectorates of Cambodia
joy in seeing the Federation of Malaya seated here and Laos. The fact is that since 1946 more than half
among us. Malaya is our nearest neighbour and. a of the world's population, inhabiting twenty~five
country with which, since time immemorial, we have nations, has emerged free and independent. That is a
enjoyed the closest ci,utural and economic relations. point to underscore now. The march of freedom conThese ties of friendship and co-operation Will, I am tinues, and Western colonia~ism has accepted the
sure, not only endure, but also grow and prosper in reality of the emergence of Asian nationalism and has
the future.
voluntarily withdrawn.
138. We have many things incommonwiththecountry 145. The Philippines is happy to welcome the Federaand people of the Federation of Malaya. Both L'le tion of Malaya. IndiaandCeylonclaimthattheir people
Federation and Indonesia, while having deep roots in an went to Malaya. Our claim in the Philippines is that
old culture and tradition, are relatively young countries our ancestors came from Malaya. As fellow-Malays,
in the arena of world affairs. Together, weenterl'}d the we arc proud of their achh~vement, and we wish them
atomic age, as under-industrialized but, in terms of Godspeed as they embark on their new adventure of
natural resources and manpower, potentially very rich self-guidance.
countries. We share, I believe, the enthusiasm and bold
initiative generated by our struggle for national 146. The Federation of Malaya has a. well-organized
liberation. Happily I can nota that in the case of the and competent civil service, inherited from the
Federation the struggle for national freedom and 8elf- Br-itish, who, let it be satd in all fairness, sent their
government was achieved without warfare, in a peace- best men to help the new nation gradually rise to
ful, United Nations way. I sincerely hope that this freedom. We pay our tribute to Her Britannic Majesty's
example will soon be emulated in the case of other Government and to the people of the United Kingdom for
countries still struggling for self~determination and this new token of their liberalism. So wealthy is this
great peninsula of Malaya in the two strategic comindependence.
modities ot rubber l.I.nd tin that it was predicted ~'
139. Indeed, we have with Malaya even a kinship of some th"l.t the United Kingdom would never let Malaya
language. Thus, the love of freedom not only is go, because it was the biggest dollar-earner' of the
commonly harboured in our hearts, but also is entire British Commonwealth of Nations - the fngure
expressed by the same word: merdeka. And when, was almost $400 million a year. And yet, as th~ worl'
recently - on 31 August - the Federation of Malaya sees today, through a voluntary act the Unicl:il Jack ha.
gained its freedom, when independence became a come down from that flagpole at Kuala Lumpur, to be
reality for it, the people of my country, I am happy to replaced by the banner of the Federation of Malaya:
say, celebrated that day with the Government and eleven red and white stripes, with an eleven-pointed
people of the Federation.
star and crescent on a blue bactground.
c;-'-.' -~'7':'.:'C:_~-'-: ..... ~.- .•.•...,:.-•.'7 '.,,;' .. :-.~-- "0
_>~~.~ .~.,.~._.

.~_.~ • . ::.i.

1; ... -"

e'

I

12

I

General Assemblv - Twelfth Session - Plenary Meetings

147. The Philippines on this occaJ;ion saJ.utes both . among them. It is therefore quite natural and logical
flags: the one, the symbol of a country that has that the establishment of a new independent State, the
rendered service to the world by giving birth to several Federation of Malaya, should be gr1eeted with joy'in
independent Asian nations; and the other, the symbol of the Soviet Union.
the hopes and 1the ideals of a noe\V Malayan nation
d
d
d
155. It is well known that the inde1pendence of the
etermined to take care of its own estiny an to Federation of Malaya within the British COII1~onwealth
achieve the genius of its race.
of Nations was achieved a.s the result of many years of
148. Prince WAN WAITHAYAKON (Thailand): Mr. heroic struggle by the valiant Malay people against the
President, may 1, on behalf oftte delegation of Thailand, foreign colonists, who hindered the e~onomic and social
e:ll..'iend to you, sir, our warmest congratulations onyour advancement of the country.
election to the high office of the President of the
twelfth session of the General Assembly. There is no 156. The admission of the Federation of Malaya into
('ne to whom I would hand over the gav~l with greater the United Nations and the establishment and developpl.easure or confidence than yourself. I am sure that ment of friendly relations with all countries, irrespecyou will bring great success to the proceedings of this tive of their social systems, on U.~ basis of respect for
twelfth session, and you have the very best wishes of the principles of equal rights, State sovereignty ar<:i
non-intervention in domestic affairs can have a
the delegati,..m of Thailand.
beneficial effect on the further development of the
149. And now, as an immediate neighbour of Malaya, cou.ntry. This will enable the Federation of Malaya to
may I claim the privilege of extending the warmest make its contribution to the cause of developing
welcome to the Federation of Malaya on the occasion practical co-operation among the cOlllltries of Asia
of its admission to membership in the United Nations. and of the whole world; the cause of strengthening
The Federation of Malaya is not only a good neighbour peace and security.
and friend of Thailand, we consider it a sister nation
157. The Soviet delegation regards the unanimous
and~ in fa.ct, the two countries are sister natior.,s bound
together from time immemoxial by ties of the closest support .~or the admiSSion of the Federation of Malaya
friendship, ties which it ls the policy et" my country to to the United Nations as a new manifestation of the
develop, and r am sure that that policy \ ' reciprocated solidarity of Member States with respect of the
principle of the universality of t.'le United Nations. The
on the side of Malaya as well.
Soviet delegation expresses the hope that in the future
150. I had the privilege of attending t.'1eindependence also this principle will be taken as the basis for the
celebl'a±ions in Kuala Lumpur and I was most favoursettlement of the question of the admission of new
ably impressed by the peaceful attainment of independ- Members to tile United Nations.
eh...e in accordance with the principle of self-determination as contained in the Charter of t.'le United 158. We sincerely wish the Malay people, which has
Nations. Above all, I was impressed by the cordiality embarked upon the first stage of independent existence,
of feeling between the Federation of Malaya and the every success in rapidly achieving econoU'ic inUnited Kingdom. I think that it :reflects great credit dependenc,e anci the development of th~i'!: country in
on both the Fede!'ation of. Malaya and the United every field, increasing their prosperity and developing
Kingdom that the Federation was brought into the their national culture.
United Nations in this way.
159. The Soviet delegation welcomes the rep:-esentatives
of the Federation of Malaya who are here today
151. I tso had the privilege of attending the opening
of Par.lia.ment and of hearing the statement of policy and wishes them success and fruitful activity in tile
in the speech from the throne and I WclS greatly application of the loft'] principles of the United Nations
impressed - as no doubt all the others who were th(lre witn respect to the maintenance and strengthening of
on that oc(;asion were also impressed - by the universal peace.
mode:eation and wisdom of the policy stated. And so I 160. Mr. DULLES (United States of America): Mr.
am sure, and I can assure the GeneralAssembly, Umt President, the United St';l.tes warmly welcomes the
the Federation oi Malaya will play an important part L.'1 presence amongst us of the new State, the Federation
the Unii:~d Nations towards the cause of world peace and of Malaya.
freedom.
161. I recall that) when I first began work with the
152. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist United Nations, there were only fifth Members. Now
RepUblics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, there ar~ eighty-two. Of the increase~ twenty are
allow me first· of all to congratulate you on your nations which have peacefully won their independence
el~ctioIi as President of me twelfth session of the
during these last, post-war years.
General Assembly of our Organization.
162. The people of Malaya hav!:' already shown in their
153. .The Soviet Union deleg~::ion~ on behalf of the struggles against communist t~rrorists that they have
Soviet people' and t119 Government' of .the USSR, the qualities needed to sustain indElpendence in the
sincerely cong:ratulares the Malay ceople and its hard world of today; and the United Kingdom has shown
Government on the admission of the Federation of the statesmanship to recognize those qualities and to
Malaya to the .United Nations. Tho freedom-loving give them their due. There is need in the world for
those qualities. r.me! f "that statesmanship.
peoplesw~lcometheachievemElni of independence by
yetaIl0ther. nationaf the Asian continent.
163. Mr. EBAN (l<:n:rtel): Mr. President, my delegation
1:!54. Since L'le· earliest days of it~ existence, the desires to ct;ngl'ilhJate ';Ol1 warmly on your elevation
Soviet Union has been opposed in principle to oppres- to the office h >1 ':Hf[!\l" f of President of the General
sion of any fO:t'ID by one nation against another. It has Assembly. Th"ci('- 'ii~ho have been your colleagues, both
!:onsistently f..pplied the principles of the full equality here and in other spheres, have learned to admire the
of allpeoples Qnd of friendship and mutual assistance high qualities of statesmanship and integrity which

have today ea
our Members.

164. Israel j
by other dele

admission to

165. One of
United Nation
constant inter
towards seJiThis process
broad and l'
communities
cultural tradi
the responsibi
ments such as
threshold of
emotion when
behalf of the
doubt that the
maintain and
Members of
tinctive and
confidence, Is
the Federatio
nations.
166. Mr.
Spanish): May
delegations,
on yourwell-d
to the office 0
General Asse
167. Sir Les
throughout th
as President
honour to the
the intellectua
distinguished
168. May I
congratulatior
delegations t
Malaya on tile
country to me
also to e..~end
the United
given proof of
the liberation I
and preparati
responsible.
169. Mr. S .
outset permit
to the high offi
My delegation
of work at
intrinsic abili
post you now
'170. I wish t
welcome to
Federation of
great imDO,
statehood by
fact that His
spacial mes
eve of the ind
Litho. in U.N.

678th meeting - 17 September 1957
have today earned the unanimous acknowledgement of
our Members.
164. Israel joins in the tribute of welcome extended
by other delegationEl to the Federation of Malaya on its
admission to memt~l~shi:p in the Unitad Nations.
165. One of 1:)1 'C'. t impressive contributions of the
United Nations .~ ...ntarnational harmony has been its
constant interest in the orde:rly evolution of peoples
towards self-govenlment and sovereign independence.
This process of emancipation has been especially
broad and rapid in the continent C'f Asia where
communities representing so many civilizations and
cultural traditions have in recent years entered upon
the responsibilities and rights of sovereignty. Governments such as my ')wn which have recently crossed the
threshold of independence are moved by a special
emotion whenever they are able to raise their hand on
behalf of the independence o~ other states. We do not
doubt that the Federation of Malaya will at all times
maintain and pursue friendly relati.ons with all other
Members of the United Nations and will bring a distinctive and valuable ~ontribution to our work. In that
confidence, Israel holds out a fraternal hand to welcome
the Federation of Malaya i.'lto this f,amily of sovereign
nations.
166. Mr. URQUIA (El Salvador) (translated f!'om,
Spanish): May ! first, on behalf of the Latin-American
delegations, warmly congratuL'i1.te you, Mr. President,
on your well-deserved and virtw~Jly unanimous election
to the office of President uf the twelfth session of th,
General Assembly.
167. Sir Leslie MunrCl is an outstanding figure known
throughout the United Nations and we are certain that
as President of the General Assembly he will do
honour to the traditions of his country and demonstrate
the intellectual and other gifts which have made him a
distinguished diplomat.
168. May I also convey my delegation's warmest
!::ongratulatior J and those of the other Latin-American
delegations to the dele~tion of the Federation of
Malaya on the admission, by a unanimous vote, of that
country to mem.bership in the United Nations. We wish
also to extend our congratulations to the delegation of
the United Kingdom, whose Government has once again
given proof of the ideals by which it is led in promoting
the liberation of the peoples for whose administration
and preparation for independent statehood it has been.
responsible.
169. Mr. SHAHA (Nepal): Mr. President, at the very
outset permit me to congratulate you on your election
to the high office of President of the General Assembly.
My delegation has no doubt that your long experience
of work at the United Nation,s combined with your
intrinsic ability and merit amply qualify YOll for the
post you now hold.
'170. I wish to take this opportunity to say a word of
welcome to the newly admitted Member state, the
Federation of Malaya. My Government attaches very
great importance to the achievement of independent
statehood by the Federation, and it is shown by the
fact that His Majesty the King of Nepal has sent a
spacial message to the Head of the new State on the
eve of the independence celebl'ations ~ Kuala Lumpur,
Litho. in U.N.

13

which were attended by one of the members of my
Government. I want to be very brief and wish the new
state Godspeed as it enters into a new era of independent nationhood.
171. U THANT (Burma): Before I make a brief congratulatory statement, let me say how gratified my
delegation is Mr. President, at your election to i:..lti.s
exalted office ofthe President of the GeneralA.;sembly.
172. Let me join other delegations in congratulating
the Federation of Malaya on its admission to the
United Nations. Malaya and Burma, which I have the
honour to represent, are not only close neighbours, but
our two countries share the co:oo.mon strains of
historical processes - our independence, our bondage,
our struggles a.'1.d our ..riumphs.
173. In this connexion, let me take tll.isopportunityto
express the heartfelt thanks of the country I represent
to the United Kingdmn Governmentfor its magnanimity
and foresight in according independence to the Federation of Malaya, which has now attained a sovereign
status without the shedding of a single drop of blood.
My delegation has no doubt that the admission of the
new independent State of the Federation of Malaya to
this world organization will be a force for peace. My
delegation joins other delegations in wishing it a peacefu~ and prosperous future.
174. Mr. TSIANG (Chtna): Mr. PI'esident, mydelegation wish~s to add its congratulations to the many that
.u have rereived upon your electionto the presidency.
is a great honour you personally and your country
...chly deserve. My delegation pledges you its support
and co-operation in the dischaJ:ge of y'our tasks.
175. In the Security Council it was my privilege- and
I regarded it as a privilege - to vote for and speak in
favour of the admission of the Federation of Malaya to
membership in the United Nations. Similarly, today
we are happy becauw~anewnation,anew Asian nath.m,
a goodly percentage of whose people is of Chinese
origin,· has been born. We are happy that that independence was peacefully achieved, without opposition
or struggle between the United Kingdom, on the one
~Iide~ and the Federation of Malaya on the other. It was
a splendid example of a change from a colony to an
independen\ nation,.· with the co-operation of both
authorities.
176. I was deeply impressed by the tribute which the
Prime Minister of the Federation paid to the United
Kingdom on 31 August, when independence was celebrated. Indeed, this event is a credit bothto the people
of the ::-'ederation and to the Government and people of
the United Klng~.om. In fact, in the post-war period
th&l'e has been no fightlilg between the United Kingdom
and Malaya.
177. There has been much fighting and much bloodshed, but that VIas between the subversive agents of
international communism and the freedom-loving
people of Malaya. Fortunately, on the whole, that
!;t;ruggle has been won by the latter.
178. My Government and my people wish the Federation of Malaya peace, freedom, independence and
prosperity in all the years to come.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
7'itlOl-November 'S~1-2,250
