S/PV.8687

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8687th meeting

Monday, 16 December 2019, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Norman-Chalet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2019/935)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40933 (E)
*1940933*

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

to detect and eliminate multiple and fraudulent votes.
Candidates and other political stakeholders have had far
greater access to information than in previous elections.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2019/935)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Afghanistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Ms. Aisha Khurram,
Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/935, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: When I previously addressed
the Security Council (see S/PV.8613), the people of
Afghanistan were preparing to vote in the country’s
fourth presidential election since 2001. The election
took place as scheduled on 28 September. Turnout on
the day was modest, dampened by security threats and
low voter mobilization in many areas. The preliminary
results were to be announced on 19 October. However,
they are yet to be announced. The primary reason for
the delay is to ensure that the electoral process is as
transparent and credible as possible, even at the expense
of time.
From a technical perspective, the presidential
election this year improved considerably on past elections
in Afghanistan, with much greater transparency. The
use of biometric voter verification devices seemed
largely effective in detecting and deterring fraud, and
several new monitoring mechanisms throughout the
process have enabled the electoral management bodies
2/22

16/12/2019

After election day, the Independent Election
Commission (IEC) retrieved electoral materials and
tallied results forms in the presence of candidate agents
and observers. Results forms and data, which were
electronically transmitted, were matched and processed
at the newly established Digital Audit Verification
Support System. Deduplication of biometric data to
identify multiple voters and data comparison between
the tallied results and Digital Audit Verification Support
System were completed. Their primary objective was
to detect potential fraud and exclude fraudulent votes
from the count. The Electoral Complaints Commission
(ECC) also adjudicated more than 4,000 election dayrelated complaints.
Nevertheless, the electoral process has not been
without problems. Some candidates and their supporters
have expressed concerns concerning the technical
aspects of the process and the lack of public information.
There have been numerous exchanges between the
electoral management bodies and candidates, both
orally and in writing. That process entailed the blockage
of audit and recount in seven provinces by supporters
of some candidates. It also added to the delay in the
announcement of the preliminary results. However, the
process finally resulted in the resumption of audit and
recount in the remaining seven provinces yesterday, on
15 December. We now expect to hear the preliminary
results in the near future.
In the process, the United Nations technical experts
and international commissioners have had extensive
consultations and worked closely with the IEC and the
ECC at both the commissioner and Secretariat levels. I
acknowledge and commend the leadership exhibited by
both the IEC and the ECC. I felt a strong sense among
all stakeholders that Afghan ownership has to be
maintained throughout the electoral process, and that
the Afghan leadership and ownership of the process
would need to take root in the Afghan political scene.
I call on all stakeholders to enable the electoral
institutions to exercise their responsibilities in full,
including by addressing all complaints through
the appropriate legal and institutional channels.
Once electoral complaints have been adjudicated in
accordance with the law, I urge the candidates and their
supporters to accept the outcome. When the election is
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

completed with credibility, it will become a milestone
in the history of establishing a representative political
system of the country.
The war continues to take an appalling toll on
civilians living in Afghanistan. The third quarter of
2019 saw the highest number of civilian casualties since
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
began systematic recording 10 years ago. Over the
months of October and November, we saw a slight
decrease in overall numbers, but that is not enough. I
am particularly concerned about the ongoing deliberate
attacks on civilians and an increase in civilian casualties
from non-suicide improvised explosive devices and
aerial operations. Escalating violence in order to attain
a position of strength in peace negotiations — causing
many civilian casualties — is unacceptable. Many
more concrete efforts to reduce civilian casualties are
required by all parties.
I am also alarmed by the increased threat to aid
workers in Afghanistan, which has affected the United
Nations family in the past month. It is with profound
sadness that I note the death of United Nations staff
member Anil Raj, who was killed while travelling
in a United Nations vehicle in Kabul. Mr. Raj was a
highly capable professional and a well-liked colleague.
His death has been deeply felt by the United Nations
family in Afghanistan. I also note with indignation
the death of Dr. Tetsu Nakamura, whose assassination
was a profound shock to the Afghan people and the
humanitarian community in Afghanistan. Sadly, those
were not the only violent attacks on aid workers since my
previous briefing. There is no conceivable justification
for attacks on humanitarian workers, whether they be
Afghan or international.
I am similarly concerned about the rise in
threats and attacks against human rights defenders in
Afghanistan and those with different political views. To
name a few, a member of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission was killed by the Taliban
earlier this year, and two human rights defenders
became incommunicado and were arbitrarily detained
by the National Directorate of Security as they were
courageously investigating allegations of sexual abuse
of children in Logar province.
Targeting and attacking such representatives of
civil society is totally unacceptable. We will continue
to work closely with a range of interlocutors to
strengthen human rights protection for those striving

S/PV. 8687

to create a more just and equitable society. In that
context, I would like to welcome the recent “A” status
re-accreditation of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission.
Whatever the outcome of the presidential election
might be, peace will be the issue of paramount
importance to the new Administration. Even while we
await the outcome of the elections, efforts to achieve
peace have not ceased. Talks between the United States
and the Taliban have resumed. Efforts are under way
to continue the intra-Afghan dialogue. President Ghani
outlined his thoughts on peace at the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process Ministerial Conference. Those efforts
reflect the strong yearning for peace by all, particularly
the people of Afghanistan.
Through past efforts in the peace process, some
key issues have emerged that need addressing to make
substantive progress. They include the reduction of
violence and achieving a ceasefire, as well as finding
agreeable ways to build on gains made in the areas of
human rights, justice and governance. Those issues
are fundamental to the life and well-being of the
Afghan people. Therefore, the peace process must by
necessity be Afghan-owned. It is imperative that the
new Government establish inclusive mechanisms
through which the views and interests of the entire
spectrum of the Afghan society, including women and
youth, are justly reflected.
But we all know that peace in Afghanistan has
wide-ranging implications for the region and beyond.
It is a key issue that affects the stability of the region.
It is also an issue fundamental to international efforts
to counter terrorist groups, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province. Peace in
Afghanistan would create opportunities for accelerated
development and enhanced connectivity of the region
and provide common benefits to the people and countries
in the region. The strategy for peace therefore needs to
have a broad base of support. All peace efforts made by
the Afghans and other various stakeholders, including
regional countries, should be closely coordinated in a
way that creates synergy.
I would like to emphasize the importance of women’s
participation in all the activities of Afghan society. In
this context, I welcome and thank Afghanistan and the
United Kingdom for creating the Group of Friends of
Women in Afghanistan. I also note that the Parliament
of Afghanistan passed a resolution on 25 November,

19-409333/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

calling for the protection and promotion of women’s
rights and for the inclusion of women in the peace
process. Those are strong expressions of commitment
to supporting Afghan women, particularly in
promoting their participation in the peace process and
in addressing the continuing pervasiveness of violence
against women and girls.
Incorporating the voices of the next generation will
also be crucial. On this note, I would like to warmly
welcome Aisha Khurram, the newly appointed Youth
Representative for Afghanistan. I know that she has
engaged seriously with a broad spectrum of youth in
Afghanistan, and I look forward to hearing her remarks
later in this meeting.
Afghanistan will need to continue its reliance on
the support of external donors, both for its immediate
humanitarian needs and to support longer-term
economic development. We expect to have an important
ministerial conference next year. It will be the first
ministerial-level conference on the development
of Afghanistan for the new administration. It will
also likely be the last pledging conference for the
remainder of the transformation decade ending in
2024. I should like to point out that in order to make
meaningful progress in the field of development and
reforms, Afghanistan must take positive and tangible
steps on the fundamental issues of anti-corruption and
accountability, including the issue of impunity. On the
humanitarian front, the United Nations, working with
the Government and non-governmental organizations,
expects to reach 7.1 million people by the end of 2019 in
371 out of 401 districts of Afghanistan, exceeding the
annual target due to a massive drought response. Next
year, we hope to reach at least 7.1 million people and,
to achieve this, we hope to raise $733 million. We look
forward to and appreciate the Council’s support.
As Afghanistan awaits a new Government,
the country and its international partners together
have an opportunity to address key challenges and
promote rightful causes in shaping a better future for
the country. The key issues are peace, development,
poverty reduction, human rights and accountability.
If the country is to succeed in addressing these issues
in the next years, the immediate goal is to deliver a
credible election whose results reflect the genuine will
of the Afghan people and are accepted by the broad
range of stakeholders, particularly the candidates. The
United Nations will continue to work with all those
4/22

16/12/2019

concerned, both Afghans and international partners, to
achieve peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Khurram.
Ms. Khurram: Early one morning, a young father
was taking a walk with his children in the quiet of his
village. As the father slowed to fix his ride, he told his
children to go on ahead. Only a few moments had gone
by when a horrific sound shook their fragile little hearts
beating apace. As they rushed back to their father, they
saw him torn to pieces and what was left of him on fire.
They hurried to put out the fire consuming what was
left of their beloved guardian, and then they rushed to
gather up his remains. Sohaila, who is only two, and
Wajidullah, aged four, have yet to realize they were the
victims of a drone strike.
A few short miles from this scene, there is
an orphanage where I have visited the orphans of
war. Most of them are victims of suicide bombing
attacks — a scene that has forever changed my life. I
heard one child, Royina, speak for the rest, her words
cracking everyone’s heart in the room as she spoke of
her miseries. Another, Zuhra, only nine years old, lost
her father in a rogue suicide bombing attack in Kabul.
That was the moment they each lost not only a parent
but their future, a breadwinner who should have held
their hands throughout their childhood. Now, eyes
filled with tears, one cried out the words: “How can I
think of the future? I do not want to just peddle away
my childhood on the streets.”
I am privileged to address the Security Council in
my capacity as Afghan Youth Representative to United
Nations. The events that I described at the beginning of
my speech are not stories from the last century or from
the medieval era. This humanitarian catastrophe is the
reality of our age, and for this we all will be judged
by history, just as history has judged those before us,
for the injustice that we allow and for the silence that
we choose to keep. Are we still deluded that we will
be forgiven?
Such scenes are rare for many people in this world,
but we are living this reality. More than 100 people are
killed or wounded on a daily basis in my country. They
have families. It is hard to explain what they feel and
go through when they see the dead bodies of their loved
ones. Civilians, in particular youth and children, have
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

become witnesses and victims who are often caught in
the increasingly ruthless violence carried out by the
warring parties.
This war has crushed hopes, destroyed dreams
and snuffed out innocent lives, but amid this chaos we,
the Afghan youth, commend resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted by this very Council, which has bestowed upon
me the privilege and the responsibility to deliver the
genuine messages and share the concerns of Afghan
youth, mindful of the enormous challenges of our
moment in history. I applaud the Afghans for their
efforts, progressive thinking and organization, and the
German Embassy in Kabul, which, in collaboration
with the United Nations, has provided this remarkable
opportunity to Afghan youth.
Violence across Afghanistan underscores the urgent
need to end the conflict through a negotiated settlement.
This war is an imposition upon the Afghan people, the
product of a great game, and we have been dragged into
it and made its primary victims by no will of our own.
Eighteen years of ground and aerial operations have not
succeeded in bringing an end to the conflict. We want
a peace that is balanced and sustained so as to prevent
crises like these from ever happening again.
We meet at a time when Afghanistan is in a
critical but highly uncertain situation. The ongoing
peace process, presidential elections and the possible
withdrawal of foreign troops are combining to define the
fate and future of our country at a time when Afghans
are deeply frustrated and weary of the continued
violence. This is not just a war on terrorism anymore;
this is now a war against innocent civilians who want
nothing but peace. And the most heartfelt cries one will
hear from Afghan victims suffering from this calamity
will be their pleas to stop the war and cease the killings.
Afghan villages are no threat to anyone.
Afghanistan is one of the most youthful countries
in the world, with 63 per cent of its population under 25
years old. Therefore, the greatest price for this conflict
is not paid by politicians or battlefield elites; it is paid
by Afghan children and youth. Violent conflict has
plagued our country for decades, and that exposure to
violence and uncertainty has shaped the lives of young
Afghans. I am here for them today because this is also
their United Nations, and my generation trusts that the
truth alone will ensure international action.
The message I deliver today on behalf of
Afghanistan’s younger generation is one of hope, but at

S/PV. 8687

this critical moment in time, hope has been overtaken
by the fear — the fear of being excluded, forgotten and
sacrificed. Over the past two months, I have redoubled
my efforts to reach out to as many young people as I
could. I have been to several universities, academic
institutions, orphanages and community groups. I
have launched an online survey and created a hashtag
on social media with the name of #AfghanYouthCall.
I have met young people from almost every province
of Afghanistan in the Afghanistan National Youth
Assembly for Peace. I have travelled outside Kabul
province and organized round table discussions. As I
travelled — mile after mile, door after door, community
after community — all I found was a shared craving
for peace. One common message echoed over and over
again — “We want peace, a safe life and access to
education, and we want to have a voice in the decisions
that affect our future.”
Right now, reconciliation and peace are
Afghanistan’s highest priority, and the key to ensuring
sustainable reconciliation is to ensure that the voices
of Afghan youth from both sides of the conflict are
considered in the peace process. Since this peace belongs
to the people of Afghanistan more than to anyone else,
it should bear our endorsement. Our endorsement alone
will ensure the legitimacy of any deal reached during
the peace process. And that endorsement, in particular
that of the Afghan youth, will have to be earned. And it
will be earned only if the miles we have walked on the
path to progress are respected; only if our achievements
are preserved and our rights protected.
It has been almost a year since peace negotiations
between the Taliban and the United States took place
in Doha. The young people of Afghanistan want a
transparent and vigilant mechanism that protects their
rights and achievements in any possible peace deal,
because where we are today is the product of great effort
and sacrifices. In this crucial moment of our history, we
ask the Security Council to make untiring and sincere
efforts, to play an active role and become the guarantor
of our rights in any future peace agreement. My people,
my fellow Afghan youth want the Security Council to
commit to peace. They want an end to suicide bombings
attacks, air strikes and night raids now. And we believe
that the future will be forged by deeds, not simply
words. Speeches alone will not solve our problems; it
will take sincere efforts and persistent action to bring
peace and stability back to Afghanistan.

19-409335/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

16/12/2019

My fellow Afghan youth demonstrate the marvel
of human resolve — at a time of widespread violence
and humanitarian catastrophe — to rebuild, to learn, to
love and to live. Our schools, universities and academic
institutions were bombed, and hundreds of our fellow
young people lost their lives, but the next morning we
went back to our classrooms. Those bombs, bullets and
attacks could never silence us. We went back every day.
We coped with the risks because we understand that
no matter how much our lives are threatened on a daily
basis, we have no future without an education. I assure
the Council of the strong resolve of Afghan youth to
rebuild their country. They are driven to build their
country under fire if they must; they will continue to
attend school while being bombed, if they must. We do
not want future generations to look back and wonder
why we refused to act or why we failed to pass on to
them a situation that they deserved to inherit.

for the Security Council to play a proactive role in
the Afghan peace process; secondly, the preservation
of our rights and achievements in any possible peace
agreement guaranteed by the Security Council; thirdly,
an immediate end to the ongoing violence and a countrywide ceasefire; and fourthly, the substantive inclusion
of all Afghan youth, including young Taliban members,
in the peace process.

Although there will be setbacks, false starts and
tough days ahead, we will never waver in our pursuit
for peace. We have a youthful, productive and dynamic
population that not only craves peace but fearlessly
works for it at every level. Afghanistan’s first robotics
girls team, comprised of young girls, participated in
their first global challenge, tasked with building a robot
for a competition. They have captivated the public with
their inspiring message of hope and determination.
They have proved that after years of darkness, young
Afghan boys and girls across the country can finally
take charge and aspire to be the masters of their
own destiny.

The President:
her briefing.

The message I should take back today to my fellow
young Afghans should be one of reassurance that they
are being heard and that a war so futile and aimless
will no longer darken their days, rattle their nights and
destroy their lives. If humankind is to prevail over the
ill will of a few, then I must here and now secure a
commitment from the international community, from
this very Council — a resounding confirmation that
we do stand for human rights, that every innocent life
matters and that humanity will prevail over all else.
It is here and now that I must secure the Council’s
commitment to advancing the peace process, with the
primary objective of preserving human dignity and of
ending this infamous humanitarian catastrophe. Those
are the values that must prevail over national interests.
Let me put forward four pillars that I believe are
fundamental to the future we want for the young people
of Afghanistan and generations to come: first, the need
6/22

We, Afghan youth, are committed to building
a society of coexistence, peace and tolerance. We
stand together with young people all over the world
to advance the cause of humankind. Let us build a
peaceful and prosperous world together. So, bolstered
by my generation’s will and commitment to effecting
positive change, I call on the global community to join
and support us in building the future that my generation
so richly deserves.
I

thank

Ms.

Khurram

for

I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to first
congratulate you, Madam President, on your competent
leadership during your country’s presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I also
thank you for organizing today’s briefing. The United
States has been a strategic partner of the Afghan people
in our quest for prosperity and stability.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2019/935) and welcome his Special Representative,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, whom I thank for his
comprehensive briefing and, more broadly, for his
effective leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Mr. Yamamoto’s
experience and able guidance of the work of UNAMA
at an important crossroads in the history of Afghanistan
are commendable and exemplify the long-standing
commitment and cooperation between the Governments
and the people of Japan and Afghanistan.
When talking about the situation in Afghanistan, it
is important to show the full picture, one that underlines
not only the threats affecting our country, but also the
achievements reached over years of hard work and
sacrifice. Ms. Aisha Khurram, one of today’s briefers,
presents a picture of the new generation of educated
Afghan women playing an active and influential role,
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

not only in our local society, but at the international
level as well. As our first female Youth Representative
to the United Nations, she is the voice of the post-2001
generation — a generation that is committed to the
values of democracy, multilateralism and peace. She
represents a new Afghanistan that is striving to not
only protect the gains of the past 18 years, but to build
upon them. It is truly a testament to the evolution of a
new country.
Reflecting on that evolution requires us to
remember our difficult journey to where we are today.
In 2002, with the support and assistance of the
international community, a new era of State-building
and reconstruction that established the foundations for
democracy, the rule of law and our modern institutions
began. The adoption of a comprehensive Constitution
opened the doors to the establishment of a republic that
defends the equality of all its citizens. That new republic
called for equal provision of health services, education
and security, while instituting a democratic system of
Government that gave our people the opportunity to
elect their leaders for the very first time in decades,
with presidential and National Assembly elections in
2004 and 2005, respectively.
The pursuit of democracy and the strengthening
of our national institutions continued with the first
peaceful transfer of power, following the presidential
elections of 2014 and through the consolidation of our
security forces in 2015, after resuming responsibility
for full security from NATO. We then decided to
embark on a bold journey towards economic growth
and self-reliance through the start of our transformation
decade 2015-2024 — an important goal, in which we
re-envisioned an Afghanistan as a country no longer
reliant on aid and insisted on a country capable of
leading itself into an era of stability and prosperity.
That has required us to take steps in developing the
legal and governance foundation for the benefit of the
well-being of our people and strengthening our State.
As part of those efforts, over 400 pieces of legislation
were passed to modernize and expedite the effectiveness
of our institutions. The success of those reforms is
evident, and we can highlight the important growth
of internal revenue by over 90 per cent since 2015, as
an indicator. Efforts were also redoubled towards the
strengthening of the independence of the judiciary,
and key legislation was implemented to better tackle
corruption as a cornerstone for enhancing the rule of
law in Afghanistan.

S/PV. 8687

In September, another decisive step was taken
towards the building of a stronger, self-reliant
Afghanistan. The holding of presidential elections
represented a rejection by the people, both the elders
and the young, of the ideology of extremism, as they
withstood the threats of the Taliban to empower the
republic and the strong values of democracy. That
election was safeguarded by the heroism of our Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, and I want to
take this opportunity to once again reiterate their
bravery and effective work in allowing our people to
cast a vote for the future of our country.
As we wait for the results, it is now the critical
responsibility of the Independent Election Commission
(IEC) to deliver the results of each vote cast by the
people of Afghanistan. We are a committed and patient
partner in that demanding task, and we hope that they
are able to announce the results as soon as possible. In
the meantime, we continue to call on all candidates to
allow the IEC and the Electoral Complaints Commission
to carry out their obligations according to the existing
mechanism and election law.
Since his first day in office, President Ghani has
placed peace at the top of the national agenda. He
shared his peace plan in the Kabul process and the
Geneva conference and announced unconditional peace
talks with the Taliban. As part of that, we thank our
international and regional partners who have responded
to our call for peace and provided assistance to building
an environment conducive to Afghan-led and Afghanowned direct talks between the Taliban and the
Government. Particularly, allow me to highlight the
role of the United States in those important efforts.
As a next step in the process, President Ghani
announced in October a seven-point peace and stability
plan to move the process forward. The elements of
that plan focus on building consensus on drivers of
conflict at the national and transnational levels and
emphasizing mechanisms to support an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process. The plan emphasizes
guaranteeing non-repetition of conflict and a credible
system of verification in dealing with threats posed by
transnational terrorist networks, transnational criminal
organizations and non-State actors. Finally, on a postpeace future, it addresses the need for a development
plan, while also stressing the need for institutional
reforms to strengthen governance, fight corruption and
address post-conflict grievances.

19-409337/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

16/12/2019

As part of the critical work to implement that new
peace road map, the Government has identified three
immediate concrete steps to better coordinate efforts
and define priorities for the achievement of peace.
Those include the hosting of mini jirgas to determine
priorities of the mechanism to end the conflict, the
formation of an alliance consultation group that engages
the special representatives of our 12 to 15 countries in
consultations on the way forward for peace, and the
holding of additional intra-Afghan dialogues. We look
forward to the cooperation and input of our international
friends and partners as part of that framework, and we
hope that those efforts will further serve to successfully
move the peace process forward.

operation in north-eastern Afghanistan, our security
forces effectively eliminated the presence of Da’esh.
More than 243 Da’esh fighters and their families
surrendered in Nangarhar province.

As we move in that new direction, it must be
highlighted that we are committed to achieving
enduring peace and stability in the country as a
common goal and a shared aspiration of the people and
Government of Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts
of our regional and international partners in seeking to
facilitate an environment for direct talks between the
Government and the Taliban, but we also remain firm
that a willingness to move that process can come only
in the form of an immediate ceasefire by the Taliban.
The gains of the past 18 years, particularly those
of women, must also be protected and expanded on
further. That is the shared view of the Afghan society
and the international community as well.

Particularly on the latter, a comprehensive regional
approach that truly addresses the issue in all its
stages, from production to consumption, is urgently
needed. In our response to that problem, we have made
strides, conducting close to 3,000 operations this year,
seizing and destroying thousands of drugs and their
precursors in the process and arresting almost 800
individuals involved in that crime. Nevertheless, the
efforts of one country alone will be futile in the face of
a multinational threat that connects criminal networks
around the region, if the larger root causes are not
appropriately addressed. Regional platforms, such as
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, are good examples of what
could be an effective mechanism to help us strengthen
our cooperation in better countering those threats.

Just last month, we launched the Group of Friends
of Women in Afghanistan, along with Ambassador
Pierce, who I once again thank for her dedication
and support to women in Afghanistan. The message
of support and solidarity by respective ambassadors
coming from different countries and cultures and the
leaders of non-governmental organizations and other
organizations was loud and clear in that we cannot
have long-lasting and consequential peace without
the participation of women and the maintenance of
their rights.
While peace remains our main objective, the
Government is also focused on protecting our territory
against all terrorist threats, including those created
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da’esh. Currently, the
Taliban remains the main umbrella organization that
provides an enabling ecosystem for Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and others to launch their attacks against the security of
us all. As such, we continue to engage the Taliban in the
battlefield to prevent it from gaining any ground, while
we diminish its control in various areas. In a recent
8/22

Afghanistan appreciates the support of NATO
forces under the Resolute Support Mission, which
continue to train our security forces, while also
providing advice and assistance in the fight against
that terrible threat. Looking forward, our focus should
be on not only defeating terrorists on the ground, but
also on countering their extremist ideologies and the
sources of financing from their nexus with organized
crime and the illegal narcotics trade.

The selfless commitment of international humanitarian
workers in our country is a real inspiration to all
Afghans to continue our efforts to build a self-reliant
and prosperous Afghanistan. We are forever indebted
to those brave individuals, and we are determined
to build on their work to achieve the goal of a
prosperous Afghanistan.
In that context, I would like to pay tribute to the
work of Dr. Tetsu Nakamura and Mr. Anil Raj. In the
past weeks, enemies of Afghanistan targeted and killed
those two individuals, who had focused their career on
bettering the lives of Afghans. Mr. Raj, an American
citizen and a staff member of the United Nations
Development Programme, was attacked along with
two of his local colleagues. Dr. Nakamura, a Japanese
citizen who also held honorary Afghan citizenship,
known as Uncle Murad to those he worked with,
dedicated decades of his life to assisting Afghans in the
construction of irrigation canals. The Afghan people
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

still mourn his loss and he will be remembered as a
symbol of love and friendship between the peoples of
Japan and Afghanistan.
I will conclude by saying that we have come this far
through the steadfast commitments and goals set since
2002 to achieve a secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
Many Member States ask a genuine question in
wondering if they have done the right thing and made
the right investment. I would answer yes. They have
made the right investment by making the impossible
possible. The presence today of two women from
Afghanistan to proudly present the new nation and
the new Afghan economy is the impossible thing that,
together, we made possible.
It is now time to redouble those efforts and look
to the next step as an opportunity to strengthen and
preserve the democratic values and gains that we have
earned through the sacrifices of the Afghan people
and our international partners. We are determined to
move this unfinished mission forward and to continue
working to make Afghanistan a self-reliant, prosperous
and peaceful country.
The President: I now give the floor to those
Council members who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me start by
commending Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto for his briefing today, as well as for
his work, the dedication he has shown, his patience, his
persistence and his advice. Through him. I would also
like to thank the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its work. We believe
that UNAMA continues to play a very important role
for us in monitoring the situation. We are very happy
that in September, together with Indonesia, we were
able to rally everyone’s support for a new mandate
for UNAMA.
Let me start with the electoral process. What we
heard from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral regarding the recount is welcome news but, of
course, the electoral process took too long. It has to run
its course. The Independent Election Commission has
to do its work. But we need the process to end not only
so that we have the results but also for the assumption
of the new Government and the transfer of power. We
must end the period of uncertainty that we are still in
and decrease the volatility faced by the country.

S/PV. 8687

We are all struck by what we heard today from
the briefers about the civilian casualties. They are all
individuals. We heard about their fate from the Afghan
Ambassador, as well as the civil society representative,
who spoke of a young father who was killed. We have
heard that the civilian casualty rate is at its highest
as compared to other equally difficult periods. Aid
workers, human rights defenders and civil society
representatives seem to be the targets of the terrorists.
As Mr. Yamamoto said, there is no conceivable
justification for such attacks, which we must condemn.
Germany remains committed to Afghanistan. For
years, we have been the second-largest donor and we are
the second-largest troop-contributor. We feel involved
with the country and its fate. Germany facilitated
intra-Afghan talks in Doha. We are ready to continue
to be engaged and to organize further intra-Afghan
dialogues. In such dialogues, as well as those that we
conducted in Doha, we ensured the inclusion of women.
We believe that there should not be any negotiations
or talks on the future of Afghanistan without the
participation of women.
With regard to achieving sustainable peace in the
country, as in other conflicts, nothing can be achieved
through military means. We must ensure a negotiated,
inclusive political settlement that is Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led. As previous speakers have said, the
outcome of negotiations for sustainable peace in the
country must protect the rights of women. We must
ensure no backslide and go beyond what we have
achieved so far. There must be the full and effective
participation of women and young people in all areas of
Afghan society, including the political sphere. It is very
good that we have two women representatives from
Afghanistan among us, but it would also be wonderful
if they were ministers in an Afghan Cabinet made up of
50 per cent women.
I believe that the inclusion of women in an Afghan
Government would also ensure that it focuses on
contributing to the well-being of the country. I hope
that, as a result of the elections, we will not have long
negotiations but a clear result and the rapid formation
of a Government so that what the Ambassador said
the Afghan Government was ready to do, namely, to
provide services to the population and to ensure that
there are functioning institutions, the rule of law and
accountability and that there is no longer impunity
in the country, can be achieved. Only by establishing
such institutions can a Government carry out its work,

19-409339/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

provide jobs for all and ensure that good education,
universities et cetera exist.
Let me end with these remarks and again express
our wish that the elections finally come to an end, that
there is a new Government and that work starts again
for the benefit of the people of the country.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to start by
saying that, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), we welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2501 (2019), on the
renewal of the mandate of the 1267/1988 Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which will
contribute positively towards efforts to bring about
peace and stability. That is a good start and shows that
the Security Council is united in helping Afghanistan.
We would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto as well as Ms. Khurram
for their briefings. I also listened attentively to
Ambassador Adela Raz, the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, and thank her for her statement.
Afghanistan’s resilience in the face of the issues
described by the briefer is admirable. As crucial as
intra-Afghan reconciliation and a collective Afghan
effort are to achieving durable peace and development,
we in the Council must also be united and unremitting
in supporting Afghanistan. As I just mentioned, the
adoption of resolution 2501 (2019) is clearly a show of
our unity.
Indonesia remains fully committed to assisting
Afghanistan in restoring peace and normalcy. As
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto also said, which I heard clearly, there are
numerous positive developments. We concur with those
assessments, but the most important part is to build
on those gains. That is a significant point. We should
continue to build with care in the areas of human rights,
justice, good governance and, of course, inclusiveness.
We would like to highlight three additional points,
the first being the election. We welcome the presidential
election that took place on 20 September at 4,678 polling
centres across 34 provinces. A total of 2.69 million
Afghans voted amid grave security challenges.
Indeed, many more would have voted if there had been
better security. The election once again demonstrates
Afghans’ clear commitment to a democratic system.
We hope that the results will not be delayed further and
that once they are announced, all parties will address
any complaints they have through the appropriate
10/22

16/12/2019

channels and processes, in line with Afghanistan’s
legal framework. We also thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
support to both the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission. As the
country moves towards stability, UNAMA’s work will
continue to be indispensable, and in that regard I join
others in thanking Mr. Yamamoto and his team for their
excellent work so far. We of course hope that after the
election is finalized the future leaders of Afghanistan
will continue with national reconciliation efforts, good
governance and development as a priority, without
which it will be hard to achieve stability.
My second point concerns the security and protection
of civilians. Indonesia is deeply concerned about the
continued high numbers of casualties, particularly
among civilians. According to UNAMA, 41 per cent of
all the country’s recorded civilian casualties in the third
quarter were women and children. That is unacceptable.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/935) states
that the conflict in Afghanistan remains the world’s
deadliest for children. The numbers are heartbreaking
and include attacks on United Nations personnel and
innocent workers from humanitarian and international
organizations, which we condemn. In that regard, I
would like to express our condolences to the families
of Mr. Anil Raj and Dr. Tetsu Nakamura. That must all
end. Indonesia appeals urgently to all the parties to stop
the violence and to abide by international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
My third point is about the peace process and
the role of women and young people. We concur with
the Secretary-General’s observation that the current
moment represents perhaps the most significant chance
to date for a negotiated settlement. Underscoring the
importance of an intra-Afghan peace process that is led
and owned by the Afghans themselves, we emphasize
the need for the continued support of all the countries
of the region to the promotion of peace in Afghanistan.
Enduring peace and nation-building will also be elusive
if the role of Afghan women and young people does
not increase. We are glad that today we have Ms. Aisha
Khurram representing youth here and giving a clear
voice to the call for reconciliation and to us all. I hope
that all of us, not only here in the Chamber but outside
as well, will hear her appeal to us on behalf of the young
people of Afghanistan to continue helping in the peace
process. We salute her for the work she has done.
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

With regard to the role of women, Indonesia is
actively supporting activities that include capacitybuilding for Afghan women and their active participation
in the peace process. In Jakarta we recently hosted a
dialogue for Afghan women and women from every
party in Indonesia on the role of women in building
and sustaining peace. Afghan women from both rural
and urban regions discussed experiences and lessons
learned with their Indonesian counterparts, and
hopefully, as my colleague the Ambassador of Germany
mentioned, that can also lead to greater participation
by women in Afghanistan’s active political life.
Mrs. Marsudi, our Foreign Minister, is keen to remain
personally engaged in helping to facilitate Afghan
women’s robust participation in peacebuilding. She
has also joined the Group of Friends of Women in
Afghanistan, recently launched by my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives of Afghan and the United
Kingdom, whom we thank for that. I can assure them
that Indonesia will continue to contribute positively to
that effort. We believe in that cause, and we believe in
helping Afghanistan.
In conclusion, as we are almost at the end of 2019,
we pray that the new year will bring the normalcy and
peace that the people of Afghanistan have waited for so
long. While all Afghan stakeholders should resume an
intra-Afghan dialogue accompanied by an immediate
nationwide ceasefire, we should also work to contribute
effectively to helping Afghanistan emerge from its
challenges. Ms. Khurram has challenged us and clearly
articulated the hope of Afghan youth, so it is up to all of
us here to fulfil her dream and her destiny.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his analysis of
the processes unfolding in Afghanistan. We share many
of the views in the Secretary-General’s most recent
quarterly report (S/2019/935) and would like to make
the following comments.
We believe that UNAMA has an important role
to play in coordinating the international assistance
to Afghanistan. We have been carefully monitoring
the country’s tense situation. Needless to say, we
are very concerned about the major acts of terrorism
that have been occurring regularly in various Afghan
cities, including with the use of suicide bombers.
Unfortunately, we are still seeing record numbers of

S/PV. 8687

civilian victims, and women and children in particular.
Today Ms. Aisha Khurram shared heartfelt words and
testimony on the incalculable horrors that the ongoing
conflict has inflicted on the Afghan people. Indeed,
Afghan soldiers and police officers are dying at the
hands of terrorists, along with international workers,
including United Nations staff, as we heard from
Mr. Yamamoto. We are seriously concerned about the
continued presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. In spite of some
successes by the Afghan security forces, the insurgents
have been able to maintain their positions and
influence in the country. We are worried about ISIL’s
sleeper cells in north-eastern Afghanistan, as well as
their diversifying methods and channels for recruiting
civilians, especially Afghan youths. That represents a
real threat to the security of both Afghanistan and its
neighbours, the countries of Central Asia and Russia’s
southern regions.
We are also intensively monitoring developments
regarding the fight against drug trafficking in
Afghanistan. The drug threat remains a serious
problem not just for Afghanistan but for the region
and the whole world. Narcodollars are a source of
significant financial support for terrorism. We believe
it is extremely important to continue and to expand the
international efforts to combat that scourge. We are
ready to fulfil our obligations by assisting the collective
efforts against this threat, including through our active
participation in the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). Russia has put its promises into
practice through its efforts to train narcotics squads
from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of
Central Asia, as well as regular assistance under the
auspices of UNODC’s global Paris Pact Initiative. We
are also upholding our commitments in this area within
the framework of regional organizations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).
As a friend and partner to Afghanistan for
many years, Russia has traditionally advocated for
restoring the stable peace that this long-suffering
land has desired for so long. We consider promoting
an Afghan-led peace process especially important. We
are sincerely interested in achieving reconciliation and
a subsequent post-conflict settlement in the country
as soon as possible, and we are prepared to continue
providing comprehensive assistance in that regard.
That is what our efforts are aimed at, including

19-4093311/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

those based on the Moscow format and our help in
launching an intra-Afghan dialogue mechanism in
Moscow. We support a resumption of negotiations
between the United States and the Taliban. In that
context, we believe that the consultations among the
troika of the special representatives of Russia, China
and the United States involving the key regional
players are especially important to creating favourable
international conditions for further progress in the
national reconciliation process. We considered our
Pakistani partners’ participation in the troika’s past two
meetings, in Beijing in July and Moscow in October, to
be helpful.
Afghanistan is on the threshold of a new phase in
its life, in which the Afghan people themselves must
play the key role in solving the country’s problems. We
support efforts aimed at ensuring that the upcoming
Afghanistan peace process is as inclusive as possible
and that all social and political forces in the country,
including the opposition, are involved. The intra-Afghan
meeting organized by the Afghan diaspora in Moscow
in February, with the participation of the leading
political parties in Afghanistan and representatives of
the Taliban, was a clear embodiment of the principle
widely endorsed by the international community of
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned dialogue for the
settlement of the conflict in the country.
It is more urgent than ever to ensure that the
potential of regional organizations is fully utilized,
especially the SCO, and we note the participation of
Afghanistan in SCO meetings as an observer. We want
to particularly highlight the mechanism of the SCOAfghanistan Contact Group and its signing of a road
map with the Government of Afghanistan. We also
see opportunities opening up for strengthening the
cooperation between Afghanistan and the CSTO.
The situation following the outcome of the
28 September presidential elections needs particular
attention. It is regrettable that difficulties and delays in
the vote-counting process have led to a destabilization
of the internal political situation and to mass protests.
We affirm our principled position that the expression of
the will of the people should help to unite the country
rather than divide it.
There can be no military solution to the crisis
in Afghanistan. The only way to resolve it is to use
political and diplomatic means to reach an Afghanistanwide agreement. We firmly believe that all the peace
12/22

16/12/2019

initiatives and ongoing negotiations should serve to
unite the entire country and all Afghans, without
exception. It is close international cooperation,
particularly at the regional level, that will enable us to
achieve our common goal of restoring the country to a
land of enduring peace, stability and prosperity.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing and commends him for leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in the enormous amount of work it has done over the
years. We also listened carefully to the statements by
Afghan youth delegate Ms. Khurram and Ambassador
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations.
China has been following the developments in
Afghanistan closely. The realization of peace and
stability in that country is not only the goal that the
Afghan people strongly aspire to but also a shared
expectation of the countries in the region and the
international community. The results of Afghanistan’s
presidential elections have yet to be announced. Its
security situation is disconcerting, its peace and
reconciliation process beset by growing uncertainties
and its humanitarian situation dire. The international
community should therefore continue to provide
Afghanistan with support and assistance. We need to
continue to help it improve its security environment, as
the situation on the ground has recently been worsening,
with air strikes and search operations that have led to
a considerable increase in civilian deaths. Terrorist
groups remain active and drugs are still an important
source of funding for them.
As the Afghan presidential elections enter their final
stage, China applauds Afghanistan for the tremendous
efforts it has made to ensure their smooth conduct. We
respect the choice of the Afghan people and support
the work of the Independent Election Commission. At
the same time, we will be watching closely for any new
challenges to Afghan security and stability following
the release of the election results.
China calls for foreign troops to withdraw from
Afghanistan in an orderly and responsible manner
and for all Afghan political parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue in order to ensure a stable
and smooth transition of power. The international
community should provide training, funding and
technical support for capacity-building in the Afghan
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

National Defence and Security Forces and assist
the country in effectively countering terrorism,
transnational crime, drug trafficking and other threats.
We should provide rigorous support to Afghanistan
in advancing its peace and reconciliation process. The
international community and other countries in the
region have recently been actively promoting direct
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban,
lending impetus to the peace and reconciliation
process. China calls on all Afghan parties, including
the Taliban, to prioritize the interests of their country
and people, seize these historic opportunities and
engage in intra-Afghan talks in order to establish
an extensive and inclusive political framework as
early as possible and open the door to reconciliation.
China is a staunch supporter of the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process. We have been actively exercising
diplomacy and our good offices, and will continue to
engage the parties in talks through channels such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Contact Group
with Afghanistan, the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan
Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue and the China-United
States-Russia-Pakistan consultations on Afghanistan.
Our efforts are aimed at building regional consensus
and an environment that is conducive to peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan, while also providing a
platform for intra-Afghan talks.
It is important that we provide tangible assistance in
promoting Afghanistan’s socioeconomic development.
Its Government and people need continued attention
and significant assistance if they are to improve
their humanitarian situation, while help is also
needed to enable Afghanistan use its own advantages
and participate in regional economic cooperation
and connectivity in order to eradicate poverty and
overcome the challenges caused by natural disasters.
In our communications with Mr. Yamamoto, we have
expressed deep concerns about the worsening poverty
situation in Afghanistan, which deserves our joint
efforts. UNAMA should therefore play an active role
in that regard by implementing its mandate, supporting
Afghanistan in post-conflict reconstruction and
enhancing its cooperation with regional countries
and organizations.
To
boost
Afghanistan’s
socioeconomic
development, China will focus the assistance it
provides to the country on areas relating to people’s
lives. We have helped Afghanistan to build the Republic
Hospital, Kabul University and the Afghanistan

S/PV. 8687

Technical Vocational Institute. Every year, we provide
scholarships to Afghan students and treat Afghan
children with congenital heart problems. We have
also been carrying out regional cooperation projects
in disaster risk management and other areas. China
will continue to work with Afghanistan to actively
implement the China-Afghanistan memorandum
of understanding on jointly advancing the Belt and
Road Initiative, thereby supporting the country in its
reconstruction and integration into regional economic
development. Thanks to our concerted efforts, China
and Afghanistan have opened direct flights, established
direct transport links and expanded economic and
trade ties.
We stand ready to work with Afghanistan in a spirit
of consultation, cooperation and mutual benefit to
strengthen economic cooperation in the region, create
connectivity partnerships, promote regional peace
and stability through development and help to achieve
lasting peace in Afghanistan. Let us work together to
build a community united by the vision of a shared
future for all humankind.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Khurram for their
extremely helpful briefings and note how nice it is to
see Ms. Khurram here again. I would also like to thank
my colleague the Afghan Ambassador. We are very
pleased to be part of the Group of Friends of Women
in Afghanistan and find it heartening to hear so much
support from colleagues around the table. I thank
them very much for that. I am also very grateful to the
Indonesian Foreign Minister for her guidance.
I would first like to once again express our
enormous gratitude to the Special Representative for
the work that he and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are doing in
incredibly challenging circumstances. In a moment
I will turn to the three main issues concerning us
today — the peace process, the elections and economic
development — but before that I want to add the United
Kingdom’s voice to all those condemning last month’s
attack on a United Nations vehicle in Kabul and the
recent attack that killed Dr. Nakamura. We join all
those who lament the loss of those fine colleagues. We
send our sympathies and condolences to their families
and all those who knew them.
There is absolutely no justification for those
disgraceful acts of violence. The Taliban claims to

19-4093313/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

16/12/2019

speak for the people of Afghanistan and yet, if it does
not take part directly in such attacks, it certainly creates
an environment in which such attacks become possible.
In that connection, I would like to mention the Taliban
attack on Bagram last Tuesday, which killed two
civilians and injured many more. The United Kingdom
calls on the Taliban to end such attacks in order to give
Afghans a chance at the stable and just peace that they
so much deserve.

in 2016 will run out next year. The United Kingdom
supports the holding of a pledging conference in 2020
to address the financing gap and identify development
priorities for the remainder of the transformation
decade. We therefore welcome the work that UNAMA
is doing with the Afghan Government in preparation
for the 2020 ministerial conference on Afghanistan and
the initiation of discussions with potential hosts for
that event.

Turning to the peace process, we share the view of
other members that only a political process can deliver
a lasting and just peace and that the deal between the
United States and the Taliban is crucial to unlocking
intra-Afghan talks between the Government and the
Taliban. The United Kingdom also hopes that talks
can resume soon, but it is clear that the Taliban needs
to firmly commit to a concrete reduction in violence
as a matter of urgency. The Taliban needs to show
that it is serious about peace, the Afghan people need
respite from the awful violence and we need to create
a conducive environment for the crucial intra-Afghan
talks to succeed.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his detailed briefing. We have listened
to his remarks, which we endorse in full. We also thank
Ms. Aisha Khurram for her excellent presentation.

I have mentioned the vital role that women have
to play in the peace process and join my colleagues
in underscoring that once again. I wish to commend
UNAMA for the launch of the nationwide global open
days on women, peace and security at the symposium
in Kabul in October.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea regrets the low
turnout in the presidential elections on 28 September as
a result of the fear that the Taliban instilled in citizens
to dissuade them from going to the polls. Therefore, I
would like to take this opportunity to encourage the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission not to give up on conducting
a transparent, impartial and independent review that
safeguards the integrity of the electoral process and
to respond, in accordance with the law, to all electoral
complaints raised by candidates and others so that the
published results may be accepted by a majority of the
candidates and the Afghan people.

My second point concerns the Afghan presidential
elections. We join others in calling on all stakeholders
to respect and uphold the integrity of the electoral
management bodies as they work to complete the
process and deliver the results in a timely manner. We
welcome UNAMA’s continued engagement around the
elections with national and international partners and
likewise support its call for transparency, impartiality
and independence as the results are processed. It was
good to see that the Independent Election Commission
will be able to move forward with recounts in the
remaining provinces. We hope that the process will
unfold expeditiously and transparently and look
forward to preliminary results.

In addition, I would like to point out that Equatorial
Guinea, in its conviction that the peace process must be
inclusive and Afghan-led with a view to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict and a comprehensive political
solution, considers it particularly important that the talks
on a peace process continue. In that spirit, we welcome
all the efforts made to bring about a peace dialogue
between Afghans and the Taliban on 24 September
in Doha, as well as the meetings held with countries
in the region to strengthen the momentum of regional
cooperation through multilateral forums designed
to build regional consensus on peace and stability in
Afghanistan and the meetings held with other countries
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/935).

My last point is on Afghanistan’s economic
development needs. Regardless of what happens in
the months ahead, Afghanistan will continue to have
considerable economic development and humanitarian
needs, as the Indonesian representative so clearly set out.
Financial commitments made at the Brussels summit

In the same vein, we encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue to include women in peace
processes and ensure that they take a leading role in
negotiations. We welcome the Afghan Government’s
continuing efforts to improve legal safeguards to
eliminate violence against women and girls and the

14/22

19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

launch by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the second
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) on
12 November.
With regard to the humanitarian and security
situations in Afghanistan, we share Mr. Yamamoto’s
deep concern. Security incidents have increased by
13 per cent as compared to the same period last year.
Consequently, as stated in the report, between July
and September there was an alarming increase in
the number of civilian casualties recorded since the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) began systematically documenting them in
2009. Accordingly, we call on the parties to observe
international law and international humanitarian law
with regard to the protection of civilians.
Those incidents, coupled with drought, sudden
natural disasters, food insecurity and poverty, are
causing significant numbers of people to move and
confirm the considerable challenges facing Afghanistan,
which require the international community’s ongoing
attention and the provision of substantial support to
the Afghan Government with the aim of improving its
security environment.
As this is our last intervention on this issue,
I would like to conclude by again commending
Mr. Yamamoto for UNAMA’s continued commitment
and the important role it is playing in promoting peace
and lasting stability in Afghanistan. Furthermore,
we encourage the Afghan Government to continue to
work closely with UNAMA so that both, together with
the support of the international community, can meet
current challenges in Afghanistan.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today’s briefers. Poland highly values and welcomes
the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tadamichi Yamamoto to support
peace and development in Afghanistan. We praise his
dedication and commitment. I also thank Ms. Khurram
for her informative briefing and valuable comments on
the role of youth in Afghanistan.
Before I make my remarks on the current
situation in Afghanistan, I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. Tetsu Nakamura. The respected physician and head
of Peace Japan Medical Services, who had recently been
granted honourary Afghan citizenship for his decades
of humanitarian work in the country, should serve as
an example of dedication and commitment for all of us.

S/PV. 8687

The recent presidential election has proven that the
Afghan people highly value democratic principles and
their meaningful implementation. That is why, despite
challenging security circumstances, they decided to
actively participate in the latest round of presidential
elections. We all have to respect and acknowledge that
act of courage. The Afghan political elite cannot let the
Afghan people down. We have been following closely
all the events after the election, and we firmly believe
that only independent and impartial electoral bodies
can develop a solution to the existing situation. We
therefore call on all stakeholders and political leaders
to respect the verdict of the constitutional bodies.
Particular interests and ambitions should not hamper
the future of Afghanistan and its people.
We have condemned in the strongest terms the
ongoing terrorist activity targeting innocent civilians
and public facilities. The recent attack in Bagram,
which targeted a hospital, constitutes a grave violation
of international law. However, Poland strongly believes
that the peace process should continue. The current
situation can be resolved only through political means.
We support pursuing the Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process, but that should not be done at the
expense of the rights of women and minorities.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and
Ms. Aisha Khurram, Afghan Youth Representative
to the United Nations, for their comprehensive and
valuable briefings. I would like to echo those who
have spoken before me and express our gratitude to
Mr. Yamamoto for his work as Head of UNAMA. We
appreciate his vital role and dynamic efforts aimed at
supporting the Afghan people in particularly complex
political circumstances that have witnessed many
historic accomplishments.
As we meet here, three months after the presidential
elections in Afghanistan, I would like to commend
the Government and the people of Afghanistan for
successfully holding those historic elections. The
people of Afghanistan have written one of the most
beautiful and courageous pages in confronting all
challenges, threats and acts of violence by showing up
at the polling stations to select the President of their
country. We also salute the efforts of UNAMA and the
Independent Election Commission to monitor the voting
process and count the votes in those historic elections.

19-4093315/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

The end of the year is near and there are many
issues of concern in Afghanistan that we need to
tackle, in particular the peace process and the national
reconciliation efforts, in order to put an end to 40
years of unstable and challenging security and political
situations that have negatively impacted the lives of
Afghans. We call on all Afghans to engage in a frank
dialogue that supersedes any personal, confessional or
partisan differences. The priority in that regard should
be given to the interests of Afghanistan and its citizens
in order to put an end to armed confrontation once and
for all. The Security Council must continue to step up
efforts in support of the political process and call all
countries in the region to create favourable conditions
for peace in Afghanistan and the region.
In terms of the security situation, we share the
concerns of the Secretary-General about the instability
in Afghanistan, especially in the light of the ongoing
armed fighting in most of the country. Security-related
attacks have increased by 13 per cent as compared
to last year. In addition, UNAMA recorded 6,654
security incidents between 9 August and 7 November.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/935), those security incidents are generated
by armed clashes, which represent 55 per cent of the
violent incidents in Afghanistan, in addition to suicide
attacks, which represent 24 per cent of such incidents.
Those horrible figures demonstrate the magnitude of
challenges and responsibilities facing Afghanistan, the
countries of the region and the international community
as a whole. That demonstrates the need to achieve
an Afghan peace agreement that is supported at the
regional and international levels in order to put an end
to the violence once and for all.
Despite the challenges facing Afghanistan,
we appreciate the concrete steps that the Afghan
Government recently took to continue its efforts to
combat the scourge of drugs and terrorism in order to
re-establish its control and sovereignty over the entire
country. Afghanistan has also continued to seek to
amend and improve national legislation to put an end
to violence against Afghan women. We have noted with
satisfaction the continued engagement of Afghanistan in
dialogues with neighbouring countries and countries of
the region throughout various meetings and conferences,
which have led to continued cooperation with the aim of
achieving peace and stability in the region, enhancing
security cooperation and combating terrorism.
16/22

16/12/2019

As this is the last time that I take the floor on
this item of the agenda, I would like, in conclusion,
to reiterate the solidarity of the State of Kuwait with
the Government and the people of Afghanistan in
supporting them in all the challenges they are facing.
We support their efforts towards national reconciliation
on the way to achieving lasting peace and stability
through a negotiated political settlement that ensures
security, development and prosperity for the brotherly
Afghan people.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, wish to thank Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his insightful briefing. I also thank
Ms. Aisha Khurram, who gave us an opportunity to
hear the voice of the youth of Afghanistan, as well
as Ambassador Adela Raz of Afghanistan, who, as
usual, very eloquently advocated on behalf of her
country. I would also like to commend Mr. Yamamoto’s
commitment to an Afghanistan on the road to lasting
peace and thank him for his constant efforts.
Afghanistan will not be able to take that path
alone. The international and regional commitments to
the Afghan people must be unified and unfailing. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is the embodiment of that support on the
ground. Under the leadership of Mr. Yamamoto,
UNAMA has made outstanding progress in the area of
human rights, in particular in women’s rights, and the
path to democracy. We must maintain that progress.
As we await the results of the 28 September election,
I would first like to commend the men and women of
Afghanistan for the courage they showed in braving the
threats to go to the polling stations. Although certainly
lower than in previous elections, the level of electoral
participation was nevertheless encouraging, and
despite the technical difficulties, we can conclude that
the voting process was satisfactory.
But that is only a first step. The credibility of the
elections now depends on the results being announced
and accepted by all of the candidates. To that end,
the vote-counting process must be transparent. The
Independent Election Commission must communicate
more openly and systematically throughout the entire
vote-counting process in order to build that trust and
prepare for a conclusive announcement of the results.
The next Government can best ensure its success by
peacefully and democratically accepting the results.
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

The latter will have the difficult task of leading the
inter-Afghan peace process.
In order to ensure lasting results, that process must
be inclusive and leave no segment of the population
behind. In order to ensure lasting peace, we will also
need to maintain the gains made in the areas of justice,
the rule of law and respect for fundamental freedoms,
particularly the rights and freedoms of Afghan
women, which Ambassador Raz has been eloquently
defending here at the United Nations. In that regard,
I commend her, as well as Ambassador Pierce, on
their successful launching of the Group of Friends of
Women in Afghanistan, in which I am very honoured
to participate.
Further progress is also needed to improve
governance, eliminate corruption and combat drugs.
The continued elevated levels of violence in
Afghanistan remain a source of constant concern for
my country. Civilian casualties have reached their
highest level since 2009, as Mr. Yamamoto just recalled.
Combating terrorism must remain a priority. We have
just renewed the mandate of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, and the commitment of
the United Nations alongside the Afghan people in the
fight against terrorism must continue.
In that context, it is important that the discussions
between the United States and the Taliban lead to
a significant reduction in the violence in order to
make it possible to establish a ceasefire during future
inter-Afghan peace negotiations.
The civilian population, in particular women
and children, continue to pay a high price, which is
unacceptable. The attack on 3 December in Jalalabad
that killed Dr. Tetsu Nakamura, founder and senior
official of the non-governmental organization Peace
Japan Medical Services, as well as five Afghans, is
shocking, and France condemns it in the strongest
terms. International humanitarian law must be upheld,
and we are duty-bound to ensure that it is respected.
Humanitarian and medical personnel must be protected,
as must civilian and humanitarian infrastructure,
and unimpeded humanitarian access must be ensured
throughout Afghan territory.
Humanitarian response is essential but insufficient.
We also must heed and fully take into account the
aspirations of Afghan young people, as expressed
strongly by Ms. Aisha Khurram. The most important

S/PV. 8687

aspiration of young Afghans is an end to violence as
well as lasting peace, which will require a just and
inclusive process based on respect for the rights of all
and for basic equality between men and women. France,
which has long-standing and deep ties with the great
country of Afghanistan, will not waver in its support
for Afghanistan’s efforts to achieve that goal.
We around this table have converging goals and
messages, which is key. Indeed, it is our goal and our
common responsibility here in the Security Council to
create conditions conducive to peace and security, which
will make it possible for young people in Afghanistan
to take charge of their own destiny and together build
a better future.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We wish to thank Mr. Yamamoto for his
briefing and Aisha Khurram for her inspiring words. We
also take this opportunity to thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his years of service and his great dedication to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We wish to express our recognition to the Afghan
people for having decisively stepped up to exercise
their right to vote, despite the obstacles and threats to
their security. We extend that recognition to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces for their efforts
to ensure security during the electoral process. We
deplore the fact that consensus has not yet been reached
regarding the results of the elections. In that regard. it
is vital to preserve the integrity of the process and to
ensure that the electoral institutions fully exercise their
responsibilities. The concerns raised must be addressed
institutionally and through the appropriate channels.
We believe that the international community, including
the Council, must play a key role in accompanying
the process of building a definitive political solution
in Afghanistan.
The Dominican Republic therefore believes that
now is the time to redouble efforts to that end on the
basis of the achievements already made.
First, we believe that dialogue and direct
negotiations between the Government and the Taliban
are the best way to put an end to the conflict, which
continues to cost lives and delay the sustainable
development of the country, which the Afghan people
so strongly hope for.
Secondly, with respect to the security situation,
we are concerned about the high number of victims

19-4093317/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

resulting from the continued hostilities and attacks. No
political or peace process can move forward in a hostile
atmosphere. We would recall the parties’ obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and to refrain
from carrying indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
whom they have an obligation to protect.
We welcome the recent approval of the law on
the protection of children, which is another milestone
towards renewal and hope for children and all people
in Afghanistan. It is truly alarming that Afghanistan
continues to be the most deadly conflict in the world
for children, with more than 2,000 children killed
or injured in the first nine months of the year. We
categorically condemn such violations and attacks
against children. The only way to break with this
horrifying trend is for both the Government and the
Taliban to comply with peace initiatives aimed at
ensuring a permanent ceasefire.
Despite the difficulties that we have already
mentioned, we welcome the fact that the Government
continues to enhance measures aimed at eliminating
violence against women and girls. In that same vein, we
reiterate the need to achieve significant participation
by women in the peace process and in all areas of
decision-making in Afghanistan.
While progress has been made, much remains
to be done. Poverty, inequality, illiteracy, harmful
traditional practices and violent extremism mean
that women, particularly in remote provinces, are
vulnerable to violence and abuse. There is also a need
to foster economic development and job creation among
a population that is predominantly young and whose
participation continues to be crucial for peace and
development in Afghanistan.
The security risks faced by humanitarian personnel
in certain parts of the country are unacceptable.
During the most recent reporting period alone, six
humanitarian workers were killed, nine injured and 16
abducted. We urge all parties to the conflict to ensure
access and security for humanitarian personnel and
to be unstinting in their efforts to bring to justice the
perpetrators of such attacks.
In conclusion, we acknowledge the role played by
UNAMA to promote peace in the country. Its work and
its achievements in the various aspects of its mandate
must be further shored up, so as to guarantee an enduring
peace and a new future for the people of Afghanistan.
18/22

16/12/2019

Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing on the current
situation in the country. We also thank Ms. Aisha
Khurram, Afghan Youth Representative to the United
Nations, and Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations, for
the great relevance of their briefings, which prompt my
delegation to make observations regarding the political,
security and humanitarian aspects of the situation.
Concerning the political situation, my delegation
welcomes the fact that, despite a difficult security
backdrop characterized by deadly attacks and attempts
at intimidation, the Afghan authorities successfully
held presidential elections on 28 September. The
holding of the elections reflects the commitment of the
Afghan people to peace, progress and the building of a
democratic society.
However, the current impasse in the political process
as a result of the delay by the Independent Election
Commission in announcing the election results, three
months after the voting, remains a source of concern
for my country. It is therefore important that the results
of the election be published as soon as possible and that
the parties undertake resolutely to relaunch the peace
process, which is key to the lasting stability to which
the Afghan people aspire.
In that context, all initiatives aimed at promoting
peace in schools, university peace clubs and civilsociety groups, as well as the peace programmes
of most Afghan universities, are worthy of support
and encouragement. Côte d’Ivoire, which has always
advocated dialogue as the best method of resolving
conflict, welcomes the resumption of talks between
the United States and the Taliban three months after
their interruption, on 7 September. In this regard, we
invite the Taliban to demonstrate its determination to
participate in the negotiations by putting an end to the
violence and resuming direct political dialogue with
the Afghan authorities. My delegation also calls on all
countries of the region to support those talks so as to
ensure regional peace, stability and security.
With regard to the security situation, my country is
concerned about the continuing violence and insecurity
in Afghanistan. According to available information,
it is estimated that 40,000 civilians have been killed
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

since 2001 and more than 120,000 injured. Moreover,
since the beginning of the war, at least 62,000 Afghan
soldiers and police officers have lost their lives. The
year 2019 was particularly deadly, with 1,174 civilians
killed in the third quarter, which, according to the
United Nations, represents an increase of 42 per cent
from the previous year. My country therefore believes
that the efforts of the international community and,
above all, those of the Council must seek to end to
the deadly violence that will have a lasting impact
on the most vulnerable segments of the population,
particularly women and children.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
must recall that, 18 years since the fall of the Taliban
regime, the protection of civilians and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance remain significant challenges,
especially in provinces under Taliban control.
Accordingly, my delegation commends the outstanding
work of the United Nations and its partners in providing
relief to more than 3.5 million people in need. My
delegation urges the entire international community
to maintain its financial support for the humanitarian
response plan for Afghanistan in order to provide the
assistance necessary to populations in dire need.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore deplores the restrictions
on humanitarian agencies’ access to vulnerable
populations, as well as attacks on humanitarian
workers, which constitute a violation of international
humanitarian law. Côte d’Ivoire encourages the forces
engaged in Afghanistan to further strengthen joint
operations with the defence and security forces in the
provinces most affected by insecurity and calls on
stakeholders to honour their funding pledges to the
Afghan army.
Furthermore,
my
delegation
welcomes
Afghanistan’s continued commitment to regional
cooperation and welcomes in particular the opening
of the Torkham border crossing, a confidence-building
measure that sends a strong message with regard
to the implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which is likely
to contribute to the resolution of security issues in
the region.
In
conclusion,
Côte
d’Ivoire
commends
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto and the entire UNAMA
team for their tireless efforts to end the conflict in
Afghanistan and assures them of its full support in
carrying out their mission.

S/PV. 8687

Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and for the
comprehensive presentations by the briefers, who, from
their specific perspectives, described for us a situation
that calls urgently for the support of the international
community and Security Council action.
Peru notes with deep concern the worsening levels
of violence and suffering in various areas of Afghanistan
that have led to recent fatalities among civilians, many
of whom are women and children. We condemn in
the strongest terms the attack on a vehicle from the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which killed a member of its personnel and
wounded five others. We hope that this cowardly act
will be subject to exhaustive investigations leading to
the identification and appropriate punishment of those
responsible. We deplore the observed increase in the
number of fatalities and injuries among the civilian
population from July to September, the highest number
since UNAMA began keeping records.
The fragile situation compels us to emphasize
the urgent need to establish a minimal framework of
understanding that could help reverse the negative
trends on the ground and lead to the establishment
of direct negotiations between the Taliban and
Government representatives within the framework of
the intra-Afghan dialogue. To that end, we stress the
importance for those countries with the most influence
on the parties to exert the political pressure necessary
to set aside confrontational rhetoric and mutual
recriminations and address all differences through
diplomatic channels.
We also believe that such an undertaking must
necessarily be supported by the firm response of the
Council through the various means at its disposal. The
persistence of violence is unacceptable and requires
this organ to assume greater responsibility. To that end,
we believe that it is critical to allay the uncertainty
and unease spawned by the delay in reporting the
results of the presidential election held at the end of
September. We look forward to a timely solution to
the technical difficulties so that we can at least receive
preliminary results, in line with the proposal made by
the Afghan electoral institutions in mid-November.
We believe that it is imperative that this be followed
up by moderate, responsible and cautious action by the
relevant stakeholders that encourages the restoration of
a stable environment.

19-4093319/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

Achieving sustainable peace will require a broad
consensus based on a shared vision for the future. It
is therefore necessary that all segments of the Afghan
population be adequately represented, including
through the meaningful participation of women and
young people in political processes. We welcome the
initiatives of UNAMA under way, aimed at making
progress in that key area. We also believe that it is
vital for the international community to step up its
contributions to stabilizing and stimulating the local
economy, and to set up infrastructure and programmes
to create jobs and offer hope and opportunity to the
youngest members of the population.
In conclusion, I affirm Peru’s full support for
the renewal of the mandate of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which assists the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), and underscore the important work it is doing.
We also thank Special Representative Yamamoto and
his team for their commendable efforts and wish them
every success in continuing their work with resolve in
seeking peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing and his tireless efforts in the service of
realizing a prosperous and stable Afghanistan. We
welcome Ms. Aisha Khurram. Belgium attaches great
importance to the voice of young leaders like her.
Finally, I warmly thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for his detailed briefing.
We welcome the holding of the September
presidential elections. We support the important role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in the electoral process. The electoral
institutions must communicate proactively with all
stakeholders and safeguard the integrity of the electoral
process. In the coming days, when the results are
announced by the Independent Election Commission,
we encourage all parties to act responsibly, demonstrate
restraint and direct any future complaints through
existing legal mechanisms. With regard to the search
for peace, we remain convinced of the need for peace
talks and welcome the recent prisoner exchange as a
confidence-building measure. We fully support the
central role of the Afghan Government in the peace
process and call on the Taliban to engage in talks with
the Government.
20/22

16/12/2019

If a peace agreement is to be sustainable, it must
safeguard the gains made in terms of women’s rights at
all costs. Women must participate meaningfully in the
peace process. In that regard, we welcome last month’s
launch of the second national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
inclusion of Afghanistan in the joint United NationsEuropean Union Spotlight Initiative to combat sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls. We
are also encouraged by the recent inauguration in New
York of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan,
the goals of which we fully support.
The level of violence seen is totally unacceptable.
Afghanistan is the deadliest conflict in the world for
children, with more than 2,400 children killed or injured
in the first nine months of 2019. Belgium is committed
to facilitating negotiations on a consensual response
by the Council to the situation involving children
and armed conflict in Afghanistan. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service
and its partners to reduce the number of child victims
of mines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by enhancing child-centred
risk education.
Belgium notes with concern that explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
remain the second leading cause of security incidents in
Afghanistan and that their use is increasing. We invite
the Afghan armed forces, Afghan security services,
the NATO Resolute Support Mission and civilian
organizations involved in mine action in Afghanistan
to share information on IEDs and their precursors in
order to prevent, insofar as possible, their manufacture
and use by the Taliban and other armed groups.
We strongly condemn the attacks on United Nations
personnel, as well as on human rights defenders and
journalists, and call on Afghan authorities to spare no
effort to identify and bring the perpetrators to justice.
We reiterate that all parties are under obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and to take
immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. The
Government must redouble its efforts to implement its
policy of reducing the number of civilian casualties.
Ensuring justice for the victims and accountability
for the most serious crimes are prerequisites for
reconciliation. Those principles can be a valuable part
of a broader, situation-specific transitional justice
process for lasting peace.
19-40933

16/12/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

I conclude by expressing my gratitude to
UNAMA and United Nations agencies for their
efforts in Afghanistan to build peace and prosperity.
I am encouraged by the role of young people in that
regard. Belgium will also maintain its commitment
to Afghanistan in 2020, through its support for
European Union and United Nations programmes, as
well as through its participation in the NATO Resolute
Support Mission and its financial contribution to the
Afghanistan National Army Trust Fund.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me to
begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for his
briefing. In that regard, I would also like to commend
UNAMA’s personnel and Mr. Yamamoto for their
vital contribution to supporting Afghanistan’s efforts
towards restoring peace and stability in the country,
particularly with regard to the recent election process
and UNAMA’s efforts to support that process.
I would also like to extend our appreciation to
Ms. Khurram and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for their briefings.
With regard to the peace process, South Africa
encourages all Afghan stakeholders who are committed
to the nation’s peace talks to renew their efforts as they
rebuild trust and work towards peace and reconciliation.
That would also assist in promoting national unity
and cohesion, aimed at achieving a lasting political
solution. In that regard, the only way for Afghanistan
to achieve durable peace and stability is through a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghanowned political process, leading to a negotiated
settlement of the conflict.
My delegation is of the view that any engagement
towards long-lasting peace and security for the people
of Afghanistan should be considered. However, it is also
important that all sectors of the Afghan Government
and society be included in those discussions so as to
ensure that a comprehensive and inclusive peace is
established and sustained.
South Africa strongly believes that an integral aspect
of that engagement is the inclusion and participation of
women. The inclusion of women’s voices in the peace
talks is vital to ensuring that the significant gains in
women’s and girl’s rights are protected. The unique
perspectives of Afghan women would also provide
additional viewpoints that are necessary to the peace

S/PV. 8687

process. The efforts of the Afghan Government in
advancing those integral rights are welcomed and
encouraged to continue.
The continuing high levels of violence in
Afghanistan, particularly the indiscriminate attacks
perpetrated against civilians, women, children and
the elderly remain of concern to South Africa. The
continuing violence will undermine the progress
made in the political process. The effect of that
violence is particularly felt by the most vulnerable in
society, including women, children and those living
with disabilities. We call on all parties to ensure the
protection of civilians and to adhere to their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
The Afghan people recently went to the polls to
elect a new President. We hope that the Independent
Election Commission can conclude its important
work with regard to the electoral process and is able
to announce the results of the presidential elections in
due course.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States of
America.
The work done by Special Representative
Yamamoto over the past three and a half years has
required commitment, resolve and, I know, many long
hours. I thank him for his briefing and for the consistent
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for good governance, human
rights and development in Afghanistan. But, more
than that, I thank him for his leadership and service as
Special Representative.
I want to also thank Ms. Aisha Khurram for her
briefing today. I was struck by the way her comments
captured the important role she plays in Afghanistan. It
is only through the meaningful participation of young
leaders like her and women across Afghanistan that the
country will reach its full potential.
As we convene to discuss the importance of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
we extend our deepest condolences to the family and
colleagues of a selfless and dedicated American,
UNAMA employee Mr. Anil Raj, who was killed in
Kabul last month. We likewise extend our sympathies
to the loved ones of Dr. Tetsu Nakamura and his five
dedicated Afghan colleagues, who are mourned by

19-4093321/22

S/PV.8687

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghans of all walks of life. We strongly condemn
the senseless killing of those individuals, who were in
Afghanistan to serve its people.
The United States remains deeply committed to
Afghanistan. As Afghanistan continues its process of
auditing votes to ensure the credible outcome of the
presidential election, we call for the continued support
of the electoral bodies. We continue to call on all Afghan
candidates to engage with the audit process, file any
complaints through the legal channels and refrain from
any actions that would increase tensions.
As Afghanistan conducts its electoral process, we
also remain committed to our Afghan partners in their
efforts to combat security threats in the region, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province (ISIL-KP). Over the past few months,
successful Afghan and coalition counter-terrorism
operations against ISIL-KP have led to hundreds of
the group’s fighters surrendering to Afghan security
forces, all but eradicating their presence in Nangarhar.
A September operation in Helmand successfully
targeted a number of the senior leaders of Al-Qaida
in the Indian Subcontinent. Those who perpetuate
senseless violence against innocent civilians have no
place in Afghanistan’s future.
We are extremely concerned about the allegations
of sexual abuse of boys in several schools in Logar
province and the subsequent arbitrary detention of civil
society activists who reported the alleged exploitation
and violence. We call on all Government authorities to
take decisive action to hold perpetrators accountable
and to take immediate measures to ensure the protection
of victims and their families. Protecting the lives and
welfare of children must be a priority of all.
We also continue to strongly support the role played
by Afghan women in Afghanistan’s economic, political
and social advancement. As we have heard today,
Afghanistan has a powerful female voice here at the
United Nations in Ambassador Raz, which is a testament
to the Afghan Government’s efforts to promote female
leadership in the country. We commend Afghanistan’s
national action plan on women and peace and security
and emphasize the importance of implementation as

22/22

16/12/2019

one of the many concrete steps necessary to enhance
women’s meaningful participation in building an
Afghanistan that works for everyone. The United
States recently joined the Group of Friends of Women
in Afghanistan, which, as mentioned earlier, by the
United Kingdom and Afghanistan. We look forward
to working with other Permanent Representatives
in the United Nations to lift the voices of women in
Afghanistan and ensure they are heard.
We have heard directly from the citizens of
Afghanistan that they are ready for a peaceful and
democratic future. For our part, the United States
continues to support an inclusive Afghan peace
process. The goal of our efforts remains to enable direct
intra-Afghan negotiations among Afghan stakeholders,
including the Afghan Government, opposition political
leaders, civil society, particularly women, and
the Taliban. The purpose of those negotiations is for
Afghans to chart a political road map for the future
of their country, end the conflict, ensure Afghanistan
is never a platform for international terrorism and
preserve the gains of the past 18 years.
To that end, we restarted talks with the Taliban last
month. In order to create an environment conducive to
negotiations, we urge all sides to immediately reduce
the level of violence, culminating in a ceasefire.
Additionally, we call on the Government of Afghanistan
to swiftly appoint an inclusive national negotiating team
that will negotiate a comprehensive and sustainable
peace settlement with the Taliban. Peace in Afghanistan
is possible and we must all seize this opportunity.
In conclusion, let me again express my appreciation
to Special Representative Yamamoto for his work
over the years and his commitment to strengthening
the legitimacy of Afghanistan’s electoral process and
supporting the country’s peace process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
As there are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers, I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

19-40933
