20

General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

3. Requests the Secretary-General, the Executive
Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board, the Managing Director of the Special Fund and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic Energy Agency. to inform the Committee for Industrial Development on the assistance
rendered by these bodies to the economically less developed countries in t~e field of industrial development;
4. Requests the Committee for Industrial Development to study, in the light of information submitted
pursuant to paragraph 3 above, the flow of assistance
taking place at the present time under these programmes, and to submit to the Economic and Social
Council recommendations aimed at expanding these
activities for the benefit of these countries' industrialization;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its resumed thirty-second session, to direct the Committee for Industrial Development to give further consideration to the expansion of United Nations activities
in the field of industrial development, in particular to
the advisability of establishing a specialized agency or
any other appropriate body for industrial development,
and to prepare a special report on this question, including, if need be, recommendations regarding the
structure and scope of such an organization;
6. Further requests the Committee for Industrial
Development to submit its repor.t to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-fourth session, and
asks the Council to transmit that report, with its comrnen~s, to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1713 (XVI). The role of patents in the transfer
of technology to under-developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1429 (XIV) of 5 December
1959 on the possibilities of a further expansion of international contacts, as well as an increased exchange of
knowledge and experience in the field of applied science
and techt'l\'.)logy,
Taking· note of Economic and Social Council resolution 375 (XIII) of 13 September 1951 and of the reports on restrictive business practices prepared by the
Secretariat and by the Ad H oc Committee established
under the above-mentioned Council resolution, 19
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Conference
on the Application of Science and Technology for the
Benefit of the Less Developed Areas will be convened
under Economic and Social Council resolution 834
(XXXII) of 3 August 1961,
Bearing in mind that access to knowledge and experience in the field of applied science and technology
is essential to accelerate the economic development of
under-developed countries and to enlarge the over-all
productivity of their economies,
Realizing that the protection of the rights of the
patent-holders both in their country of origin and in
18

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Sixteenth Session, SupPlement No. 11 (E/2380); ibid., Supplement No. 11A (E/2379 and Add.1) ; ibid., Nineteenth Session.
Supplement No. 3 (E/2671); ibid., Supplement No. 3A
(E/2675); and document E/2443.

foreign countries has contributed to technical research
and, therefore, to international and national industrial
progress,
Affirming that it is in the best interest of all countries
that the international patent system should be applied
in such a way as to take fully into account the special
needs and requirements of the economic development
of under-developed countries, as well as the legitimate
claims of patentees,
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
appropriate international and national institutions and
with the concurrence of the Governments concerned,
to prepare for the Committee for Industrial Development, the Economic and Social Council, and the General Assembly at its eighteenth session, taking into consideration any pertinent discussions which might take
place in the United Nations Conference on the Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit of
the Less Developed Areas, a report containing:
(a) A study of the effects of patents on the economy
of under-developed countries;
( b) A survey of patent legislation in selected developed and under-developed countries, with primary
emphasis on the treatment given to foreign patents;
( c) An analysis of the characteristics of the patent
legislation of under-developed countries in the light of
economic development objectives, taking into account
the need for the rapid absorption of new products and
technology, and the rise in the productivity level of their
economies;
(d) A recommendation on the advisability of holding an international conference in order to examine
the problems regarding the granting, protection and
use of patents, taking into consideration the provisions
of existing international conventions and the special
needs of developing countries, and utilizing the existing
machinery of the International Union for the Protection
of Industrial Property.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1714 (XVI). World Food Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1496 (XV) of 27 October
1960 and Economic and Social Council resolution 832
(XXXII) of 2 August 1960 on the provision of Food
surpluses to food-deficient peoples through the United
Nations system,
Having considered the report of the Director-General
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations entitled Development through Food-A Strategy for Surplus Utilization, 20 the report of the Secretary-General entitled "The role of the United Nations
and the appropriate specialized agencies in facilitating
the best possible use of food surpluses for the economic
development of the less developed countries", 21 and
the joint proposal by the United Nations and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
regarding procedures and arrangements for multilateral
utilization of surplus food, 22
00
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Rome, 1961.
,n Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirtysecond Session, Annexes, agenda item 8, document E/3509.
"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 28, document A/4907.
