UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
_.- ..”

UN LlBPpIRY

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

, ‘, : ‘?Q?

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2240)

. ... . .. ... ... .. ... . ... .. .. ... ... . ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint -by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 June 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14022) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I
;‘.
1’ ‘I

SlPV.2240

NOTE

-

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United . .
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjlcial Records of the Security Council. The date i.: ..
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor- :
.‘. ; (
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
.system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions cf the Security: Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
,,,.
on that date.

:

,,.
..,’

<

I.1
/

,

c
.

:

.I

2240th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 27 June 1980, at 6.15 p.m.
*

Prddm:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
‘_
Provisional

agenda (S/&enda/2240)

1. Adoption of the agenda

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 June 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14022)
The meeting

wus called to order at 6.35 p.m.
Adoption

‘.

the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation c$ the President. Mr. Horrngcworr
(Benin), Mr. Kouyath (Guineu) und Mr. Blunkson
(Nigcviu) took the pluces reserwd for them ut the side
of the Council chumher.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
27 June from the Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia which rehds as follows:
“I wish to convey to you the desire of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to participate in the
debate on South African aggression against the
People’s Republic of Angola, without the right to
vote.

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 June 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/14022)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2237th meeting, I invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table and I invite the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, India, Mozambique, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Romania and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the iwitcrtion of the President, Mr. de Figucircdo
(Angola) took u place ot the Cotmcil t&e und Mr. Semi&i (Algeriu), Mr. Modisi (Botswmu), Mr. CorrZu
dr Costu (Brcrzil), Mr. Rou Koln-i (Cwbu), Mr. Mishru
(India). Mr. Lobo (Mozumhiquc).
Mr. Tinoco (Nicarugs), Mr. Nuik (Pukistun), Mr. Marinescu (Romania) and Mr. M&ezinoviP (Ylrgoslavicr) took the places
reservedfcw them crt the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Benin, Guinea and Nigeria in
which they request to be invited to participate in discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with

“For this purpose, the Council will be represented by a delegation headed by myself as Acting
President of the Council and including the following
representatives in the Council: Mr. Sreenivasan of
India, Mr. F. Star&v% of Yugoslavia.”
4. On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration
of matters on its agenda. In accordance with past
practice, I propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Acting President and the delegation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.
It w*s so decided.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
26 June [S//4026] from the representative of Tunisia,
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that during its
consideration of the item ‘Complaint by Angola
against South Africa’ the Security Council extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer for the League of Arab States to the United
Nations.**

tional legality with regard to Namibia, which South
Africa is using as a springboard for aggression against
Angola; the repeated violation of the sovereignty and
territorial
integrity of Angola; the violation of the
Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights; and the
maintenance
of the apartheid regime-all
of which
‘are examples that the South African Government
is
taking upon itself the right indefinitely
to commit
active aggression because it believes itself to be
assured of immunity.
Where does it obtain that assurance, and why is there so much enthusiasm in the
attempts to spare South Africa the total application
of the measures provided for in the Charter?

Unless I hear any objection I shall take it that the
Council agrees to that request.

6. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention of members to document S/14028, which contains
the text of a letter dated 27 June from the representative of South Africa addressed to the President of the
Council. I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/14030, which contains the
text of a letter dated 27 June from the representative
of Angola to the Secretary-General.
7. Mr. ESSAAFI
(Tunisia)
(interpretation
from
French): The Council is now quite familiar with this
alternation of debates and acts of aggression affecting
in turn southern Africa and occupied Palestine. We
have already said so, on 11 April last [2211th meeting],
and we concluded that this situation was extremely
.illuminating
for anyone who wanted to learn from it.

13. We believe that this new aggression against
Angola, in its scope and with the resources used, just
a few weeks after the adoption by the Council of
resolution 466 (1980) and of resolution 473 (1980),
really leaves no hope that South Africa will comply
with any measure decided upon by the United Nations
unless that measure is accompanied by the machinery
of binding sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII
of the Charter.

8. The escalation of aggression against Angola demonstrates once again that the retreat of colonialism
is nothing but an illusion for the African peoples and
that South Africa has certainly not drawn the conclusions which the United Nations itself has largely
drawn, although in terms of words, of course.

14. Before concluding, I should like to express the
hope that the Council will be able to take a decision
urgently in order to put an immediate end to aggression and to bring about the withdrawal of the troops
which have invaded Angolan territory and which are
still there. That measure is an urgent necessity, in our
view, because of the large number of civilian victims
and the degree of damage caused by that invasion.

9. The same strategy of invasion, the destruction of
civilian property and the stationing of troops is, as
we can see, repeated in Angola, and it is equally probable that in future it will spread to other countries of
the region. If legal scruples do not do much to prevent
this violation,
what must an African country do in
physical or military terms to deter South Africa?

15. I am instructed by the Group of Arab States to
assure the fraternal people of Angola of our wholehearted solidarity with them in their ordeal. In their
resistance and in their calmness, they may rest assured
of the constant and unswerving support of all peaceloving peoples, and they can rest confident in the
inexorable victory of justice, law and right.

10. It is quite obvious that this tragic situation transcends the framework of Africa alone,. as indeed
nazism overwhelmed the countries of Europe; it could
not be contained or reduced by the efforts of Europe
alone. That is why the urgent appeal to the United
Nations assumes its true significance, and the Security
Council therefore assumes a decisive role.

16. Mr. vanden HEUVEL
(United States of America): The most frustrating aspect of the long and
arduous attempt to bring South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia to a peaceful conclusion is that
progress towards a solution is too often accompanied
by behaviour that endangers the prospects of peace.
Today’s debate illustrates this point.

11. In such a context, the people of Angola first, and
all the African people whose hearts beat as one, attach
vital importance to the action of the United Nations.
We do not think it is enough to be listened to, or to
register often enough the expression of theoretical
support, but what we do need, very specifically, is to
ensure the security of our peoples, peace on our frontiers and respect for our rights and dignity. The evil
lurks within. As in the case of Europe formerly, we
know from our everyday experience that the proximity
of a racist regime is far from signifying peace.

17. Once again, we have reached a critical juncture
in the negotiations
towards a lasting settlement of
the Namibian dispute. Yet even now, with the possibility of peace so close, South Africa has launched
another military action into the territory of an independent nation that borders on Namibia.
18. South Africa’s attack on the People’s Republic
of Angola, launched from Namibia across an internationally
recognized border, was wrong. Its continued military presence in Angola is wrong. By its
behaviour,
South Africa is simply reinforcing
the
doubts of those who are sceptical about whether a
negotiated solution is truly possible.

12. The Council must first rise to the call for effective action in the face of the repeated and unbridled
outrages of the South African regime. Every responsible State must face up to its international obligations.
We are witnessing the constant violation
of intemas
2

.

19. When Ambassador McHenry explained the vote
of the United States on last April’s resolution condemning a similar excursion into Zambia [ihiti.], he
noted that no principle enshrined in the Charter is
more fundamental
to the maintenance of good relations between States than mutual respect for the
territorial integrity of all nations. South Africa’s disrespect for this principle is intolerable to the intemational community.
It is an affront to the people of
Angola, with whose suffering and loss the people of
the United States deeply sympathize. We should and
do condemn it.

26. This is not the first time that this has happened.
Ever since its emergence and its victorious liberation
from Portuguese colonialism,
the People’s Republic
of Angola has consistently had to deal with threats of
,aggression, raids and armed incursions of all kinds by
the armed forces of the minority racist regime in
Pretoria, and it has had to do so in particularly difficult circumstances.
The Council has on every such
occasion adopted, under the influence of certain imperialist Powers that are friends and protectors of the
Pretoria regime, a number of resolutions which had
nothing whatever to do with the seriousness of the
events. Today, we are faced with more or less the
same scenario, which is being cleverly orchestrated
behind the scenes by the very Powers that have the
formidable right of veto in the Council.

20. The cycle of violence rooted in South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia must end, and it must
end now. But only the achievement
of a comprehensive settlement will break the cycle, and ensure
a lasting peace for Namibia and all its neighbours.

27. I have much admiration
and respect for the
sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document S/14024. I am well aware of’how much work
went into this text. I am aware of the fact that the
sponsors are standing together behind independent
Africa and are in favour of the complete liberation
of our continent from foreign, colonialist and imperialist domination.
I am also well aware of the fact that
around this table there are in addition to the sponsors
a number of States which also stand together in favour
of the complete liberation of Africa from the racist
control exercised by Pretoria. I also know that in this
Council there is a majority in favour of radical action
under Chapter VII of the Charter, this being the only
way of dealing with the repeated challenges offered
by the racist regime in Pretoria, which stops at nothing
to maintain its racist domination over southern Africa
and which is continuing with impunity to commit acts
of aggression against Angola, killing members of the
civilian population, in particular women, children and
innocent old people who have not the slightest means
of defending themselves.

21. The United States is determined that the people
of Namibia will soon realize their dream of freedom.
We will use every practical means to create conditions
so that our efforts will succeed. We once again call
upon all concerned to do the same.
22. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
23. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interprerutionfrom
French): Mr. President, I should like to thank you and
the other members of the Council once again for
inviting the delegation of the People’s Republic of
Benin to take part in this debate devoted to the repeated acts of aggression of the racist regime of
Pretoria against the People’s Republic of Angola.
I should like to express the satisfaction of my delegation at the admirable manner in which you have been
conducting the work of the Council during this month
of June.

28. An objective analysis of the composition of the
Council, and especially a thorough study of the positions adopted publicly and behind the scenes by its
members, shows clearly that the imperialist
Powers
who hold the right of veto are accomplices to the
atrocities committed every day by the Pretoria racists
in Namibia, South Africa and Angola. This is not even
to mention acts of aggression committed in the frontline countries. Those Powers, to our way of thinking,
are primarily responsible for the Council’s inaction
and for making it, to all intents and purposes, ineffective in the matter of putting into effect the principles
contained in the Charter.

24. The-situation
created in southern Africa by the
racist regime of Pretoria, with the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia, which serves as a base for
senseless and unprovoked aggression against neighbouring States-the
People’s Republic of Angola in
particular its principal target-is
filled with threats
to peace and security in Africa and in the world.
I should hope that the Security Council is well aware
of this dangerous situation.
25. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin
listened with deep emotion yesterday to the statement
of facts presented to the Council by the head of the
Angolan delegation [2237rh meefing]. The situation
is extremely grave; it is even dramatic. The population
of the People’s Republic of Angola, in particular the
women, the children and the elderly, are the victims,
even as I speak, of barbarous acts and massacres
committed by the armed forces of the racist regime of
Pretoria.

29. All these Powers, since 7 June, when the People’s
Republic of Angola became the victim of aggression,
have remained silent. None of them has condemned
in its national sphere the acts of aggression committed
by the South African regime. Not a single one of these
Powers seems really to take seriously the dangerous
invasion which today threatens the stability of the
People’s Republic of Angola. Never has the press of
3

any one of these countries denounced the atrocities
committed daily against the civilian populations by
the armies of Pretoria.

Peace and security are not only ,the concern of the
great Powers; they are the concern of a!! humanity.
What happens in southern Africa concerns the whole
world. It is necessary to reflect upon this before it is
too late.

30. A!! these circles, and the voracious multinational
corporations which exploit the natural resources of
our continent, speak of and concern themselves with
aggression or threats against peace and security .on!y
when their vita! interests are directly threatened. The
armies of Pretoria, which they have endowed with
awesome sophisticated weapons in frequent violation
of the embargo on arms bound for South Africa, can
kill, slaughter and wreak havoc among innocent
women and children in South Africa and Angola, as at
Cassinga, in Zambia and in other front-line countries;
but the Western Powers will not raise their little finger,
for their vita! interests are served by these acts of
slaughter and barbarous killings. This is their political
morality. This is their system of human rights. This is
Western democracy. Here, today, our anger is legitimate.

34. The Security Council, by virtue of Chapter VII
of the Charter, has been provided with the means
-genera! and. obligatory sanctions-to confront the
dangerous situation ,which the racist Pretoria regime
is daily creating to the detriment of peace and security
in the African continent and in the world. why ‘this
hesitation? Why not dare to act? All those who have
spoken here have shown that no measure can be effective in influencing South Africa except genera! sanctions. Why not decree such sanctions? The concern of certain Powers with their own petty interests,
aswe!! as their desire to dominate and exploit, obstruct
the work of the Council. The wrongful use of the veto
by those same Powers is a scandal which ought to be
denounced here.

31. In the Council, al! these’ Powers that .ho!d the
right of veto have concocted a veritable ritual, a vocabulary, a specific ‘language of words and commas and
ready-made phrases that they impose on other members of the Council. ,Whenever any group of States
tries to break the official ritual in the Council, ,the
right of veto hovers over all the Council’s debates
like .a very sword of Damocles.
’

Aparrheid is a policy which has been decried by
the United Nations and considered a crime against
mankind. The occupation of Namibia is yet another
act of lawlessness, as is’aggression by one country
against another. Those acts were foreseen, and, to
limit them, steps were taken in .the Charter. Why,
then, does the Council not act? It is high time that it
did so. We have had enough of vacuous texts, useless
pieces of paper which the-Council adopts in the face
of particularly serious situations in which’human lives
are at stake. We have had enough of all this empty
chatter,. a!! this verbiage. It is high time to confront
the danger which is a threat to everyone;

35.

32. This is the truth. It may not be to the liking of
some, but we shall say it anyway. This is a particularly serious situation, which has quite annihilated
the authority of the Council and makes the United
Nations a’laughing-stock. The draft resolution which
I referred to earlier, and which you may shortly‘be
adopting, is a striking illustration of the ‘situation we
have just described. In the humble opinion of my
delegation, there is not a single word or comma in this
text which has not already been used and accepted
by the Powers to which I have referred. These words
and these commas are ,part of the official vocabulary
perfected over the years by the Powers to protect their
interests. It is’at this point that we say “no” and that
our revolt is expressed in the most radical way.

36. We have stated and we reiterate that the uparrheid regime is inextricably linked with international
imperialism in Africa. It is a bridgehead of imperialism in its global strategy of dominating our continent. If the Council could be consistent’ and ‘act in
a concerted manner, the repeated acts of aggression
by the Pretoria regime against the People’s Republic of
Angola would by now have ceased, by perfectly
peaceful means provided for in the Charter.
’
37. That is why we say that a!! those who assist the
Pretoria regime to maintain its evil practices are
entirely responsible for the present situation. We shall
continue to denounce that regime and we shall never
tire of doing so. We say that Africa shall be free. We do
not like war, it is true. Africa is made up of peaceful
peoples who love life, the pastoral life, the everyday
routine, and who foster friendship with every country
in the world. It is true that we do not like violence;
but when violence is used against us, we are forced
to meet it with violence.

33. It is clear in the light of what I have just said that
the adoption of this new resolution does not represent
any progress at al! and brings to bear no impact on the
situation prevailing in southern Angola today, a situation which was so ably described to us by the representative of Angola. This resolution is another useless
piece of paper containing a resolution deprived of teeth.
It has nothing to do with the serious events which the
Council has met to discuss. The question that we have
raised here must concern a!! States, in particular
small States which have no armies with which to
defend themselves, and which have become Members
of the United Nations in order to find shelter under
the umbrella of international justice. The whole international community must take this matter seriously.

38. Our patience does have its limits-the Council
must take immediate action.. States which are fighting
for peace and security in the world, those far removed
from the cynicism and hypocrisy of international
4

imperialism, should continue to bring sustained pressure to bear,on the Council to induce it to live up to
its role. The path of sanctions against the Pretoria
rkgime is the only way to put an end to a!! the threats
which are hovering over not only Africa but the world
as a whole. No one, no State, however powerful,
will be spared.

45.. It is we!! known that the ground for this latest
invasion, this defiant violation of a!! the principles of
international law as embodied in the Charter had been
laid during the second week of June, specifically on
-7 June, when South African forces raided camps of
militants of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) in southern Angola. From all accounts
those raids were as horrendous as the Cassinga massacre two years ago, which was roundly condemned
by a!! civilized mankind.

39. Before concluding, I should like to express the
complete solidarity of my country, the People’s Republic of Benin, of its people, its ,Govemment and
its party, with the people, the Government a& the
MPLA party of Angola in their courage and their
determination to fight and to overcome.
,’

46. Commenting on the South African raids against
SWAP0 bases in southern Angola, Mr. Willers, formerly of the South African Department of Foreign
Affairs, wrote the following in the,RmJ Duily Mtril
of 18.June:

40. The fight goes on!
41. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria; whom I invite td take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

“It is an enduring the& of South African foreign
policy, a .pervasive belief, that military and economic power generally, outweigh other factors circumscribing South Africa’s relations with the
African continent and vice versa. There is a view
that in the final analysis redpolitik
counts for more
than the moral considerations of upcrr-theid and
other ideologies, even Marxism. Redpolitik
is the
name of the game, and perhaps this is the reason
why it is so difficult. to escape the impression that
a climate of acceptance in South Africa for a possible eventual SWAP0 election victory in Namibia
and a South African withdrawal from the Territory
is being generated at present.

42. Mr. BLANKSON (Nigeria): Mr. President, my
delegation, a?d 1 personally, are happy for this opportunity to congratulate you once again on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.’ During this
month of June developments that threaten intemationa! peace and security in many parts of the world
have placed heavy responsibilities on your shoulders. Your wisdom, diplomacy, skills and ability have
enabled you to discharge the functions of your high
and demanding office with fairness and firmness.
I have no doubt that you will continue to draw upon
those qualities in your efforts to shape the Council’s
response to this pressing matter on its agenda, South
Africa’s unprovoked and premeditated aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola, which is in
violation of a!! norms of international law and conduct.
:
43,‘. We h&e listened with carefu’i &ten&$ ;o t&
eloquent account by my dear friend and brother
Ambassador .de Figueiredo of Angola of this latest
chapter in South Africa’s deliberate series of outrages
against his country. We have been confronted by
specific facts, facts which no one has challenged or
dares challenge, facts detailing the violation of AngoIan airspace and territorial boundaries, facts listing
the criminal exploits launched by South Africa against
Angola and their dire consequences for the latter.
We have learned that the casualties from the latest
South African invasion, which began on 23 June,
include the killing of more than 370 men, womenand
children, the injuring of over 255 persons and extensive damage to property, farms and livestock. Nigeria
extends its deep sympathy to our Angolan brothers
and sisters on these tragic losses.

“This is the pragmatic ,construction which can
be placed on the recent security raid into Angola
which destroyed the Plan Operation Headquarters
and which went a long way towards answering the
question whether Mr! P. W. Botha’s Cabinet would
.ever countenance a SWAP0 Government,. The
answer of course is yes, it would. Pretoria has never
said it would not accept the democratic choice of
the .Namibian people in a free and fair ele.ction..
,Power through the barrel of a gun? No, with a capita!
N. But through elections, why not?”
_,,
The article also stated that the raid had bolstered the
internal forces in Namibia, for, as the author saw it,
as a result of the events in Rhodesia, the Democratic
Tumhalle Alliance (DTA) had come to the conclusion
that “nice guys don’t win elections in Africa”. Therefore they, DTA, not only must have to show that they
are as tough as their opponents but, more important,
they must have the power to get in, in other words
to win the election.
./
.47. Whether that represents the thinking ‘of the
benighted South African r&ime or not. and this
author should know, the fact-that the sovkreignty of
Angola, a State Member of the United Nations, has
again been violated in contravention of a!! the norms
and tenets of international law and conduct should be
strongly condemned by the Security Council. The
South African tigime, in sanctioning the invasion of

44. it was our historic privilege to be actively and
positively associated with the birth of an independent
Angolan nation. I wish to reiterate our national commitment to stand shoulder to shoulder with Angola
through thick and thin until our continent is totally
rid of racists, settler colonialists, .exp!oiters and surrogates of imperialists.
5

Angola stands condemned
for State terrorism and
should be adequately punished for its repeated and
systematic acts of lawlessness and mindless violence,
within its country and in neighbouring
African
countries.

mouth, as it were, 1 submit that it is about time that
the Council redouble its efforts with a view to plugging
all the loopholes in its arms embargo by reaching
early agreement on enforcement measures, including
a ban on the export of war material from South Africa.

48. Nigeria is not surprised at South Africa’s repeated attempts at diverting attention from her own
domestic problems, problems brought about by criminal policies of racial arrogance, racial hatred and
human exploitation.
We reject all attempts to settle
those self-imposed problems by the illegal usurpation
of Namibia or the occasional military occupation of
Angola and other neighbouring
States. Instead of
deceiving themselves by applying cosmetic changes
to the face of crpcrrtlreid,
the South African racist
regime should come to grips with reality; crprrrtiwid
cannot be changed; it has to be destroyed, completely
eliminated.

52. The second area is that of an oil embargo. Several
oil-producing
countries have imposed an oil embargo
on their own. It is encouraging that the campaign for
an oil embargo is gaining momentum
in the Netherlands, among other countries. Nigeria maintains. that
an oil embargo is one of the measures that will contribute most effectively to dismantling
the heinous
structure of crpmthcid
and, in the long run, assist in
averting the catastrophic
consequences for world
peace and security that will inevitably flow from the
policies of uparthici.
Obviously, with oil sanctions in
force, South Africa will be obliged to think twice
before launching raids against neighbouring
States,
South Africa will have to minimize its intimidation,
harassment and efforts to destabilize neighbouring
States.

49. Until the crporthd
regime reads and understands
the writing on the wall, it is essential that the international community
should concert its efforts primarily in two areas to help save South Africa from itself,
in the interests of justice and of world peace and
security. These two areas are being mentioned because of the reluctance to take action under Chapter VII of the Charter.

53. My delegation believes that the gravity of South
Africa’s continued aggression against Angola calls for
serious countervailing
action on the part of the Council. What is at stake is the authority and credibility
of the Council. In the circumstances, the least we can
expect is a very strong condemnation
of South Africa
for its invasions of Angola in violation of international
law and for the use of Namibia,
which it illegally
occupies in defiance of the United Nations, as a springboard for such aggression. We expect a Council decision regarding payment of full compensation by South
Africa to Angola for all the damage to life and property
in that country. We expect the Council to demand
that South Africa should withdraw all its military
forces from Angola and should desist from further
invasions of that territory. We submit that the Council
should now request all Member States to rally round
Angola and all other neighbouring States, all victims
of South African aggression, and render them concrete
assistance for the defence of their independence and
territory. That is the least the Council can do to demonstrate its solidarity with the people of Angola.

50. The first is the arms embargo. In its resolution
418 (1977). the Council imposed an arms embargo
against South Africa. That embargo has, like the
sanctions on Rhodesia, been by and large honoured
more in the breach than in the observance. We are
therefore faced with a situation whereby, through the
support of its friends and allies in the West, South
Africa is now a major arms exporter. To substantiate
that allow me to quote from a commentary broadcast
on 7 May 1980 by the Johannesburg
International
Service of the South African radio:
“The latest development is that the South African
navy has acquired a missile capability,
and its
feature, according to tests conducted, is that it has
a simple shot capacity, which falls in line with
modem naval operations. The announcement
follows hot on the heels of one made last week when
it was disclosed that South Africa had developed
a 127 mm artillery rocket system similar to the
Russian Stalin organ but superior to it in several
ways.”

54. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to.make his statement.
55.

KOUYATB
(Guinea) (interpretation
from
: Mr. President, it is a signal honour for us
and a real pleasure to extend to you, on behalf of the
delegation of the Revolutionary
People’s Republic of
Guinea, our satisfaction and warm congratulations
on seeing you presiding over the Council this month.
The nature of the relations between your great peaceloving country, Norway, and my own country, the
‘Revolutionary
People’s Republic of Guinea, as well
as your personal diplomatic qualities give us grounds
for hoping that the Council’s deliberations on the issue
of the warfare being carried out by the racist minority

Fwnch)

51. These then are the latest developments
in a
country which depends on its own resources and
expertise for defence weaponry and which has now
reached a stage beyond self-sufficiency and is embarking on arms exports. This self-sufficiency
in
weaponry which South Africa is now gloating about
could not have happened, as we see it, but for the
co-operation of its well-known friends and supporters
in exploiting and circumventing
loopholes in the arms
embargo. In the light of the evidence from the horse’s
6

Mr

regime of South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola will be crowned with successfor the welfare
of the fraternal people of Angola-the victims of
aggression-in particular, and of the African peoples
in general.

People’s Republic of Angola, is part of the vast plan
of the Pretoria regime, which, feeling the noose ever
tighter around its neck after the outstanding victory
of the people of Zimbabwe, is striving to multiply its
acts of aggression against the front-line States, and
particularly against the People’s Republic of Angola,
in order to jeopardize all efforts at negotiated settlements in southern Africa, as is indicated by Council
resolutions 387 (1976) and 428 (1978).

56. Permit me furthermore to extend our gratitude
to Ambassador Ide Oumarou of the sister Republic of
the Niger for the extremely competent and intelligent
way in which he conducted the proceedings of the
Council in May.

60. It is becoming ever clearer that South Africa is
seeking to expand the geographical area of its white
racist hegemony in southern Africa. This clearly
explains the intensification of its acts of aggression
committed against Angola in order to wipe out the
rearguard of SWAP0 and thus to create in Namibia
a situation similar to that in the Rhodesia of yesterday, and all this in spite of the warnings of the United
Nations and in defiance of international law.

57. Members will recall that, in his statement on
11October 1979in the general debate during the thirtyfourth session of the General Assembly, the head of
the delegation of the Party-State of Guinea stated the
following:
“The elimination of apartheid
and an end to
foreign intervention in the domestic affairs of the
peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America are preconditions to the establishment of true peace. In
order to be genuine, detente must cover every
region of our planet.

61. Our delegation notes with regret that, despite
the many crimes committed against African peoples
by the apartheid
regime, the Council has not yet given
convincing evidence that it is deeply concerned with I
this situation or, particularly, that it has finally decided
to take concrete measures against this regime in conformity with Chapter VII of the Charter.

“Indeed, developing countries know that any
threat to peace imperils their efforts to strengthen
their national independence and ensure their economic development. They are thus the first to feel
concern about the establishment of an international
order based on relations of trust and free from the
threat of war. Such an international order must
abolish the parcelling of the world into zones of,
influence or conquest in which the right to exercise
domination would be preserved. The tendency of
certain Powers to extend their lines of security
beyond their geographical borders and into regions
of the world that come under their purported protection and influence is extremely dangerous;“’

62. Surely it is time to pick up the gauntlet thrown
down before the United Nations by the racist regime
of South Africa and its allies. However that may be,
the peoples who are working for the liberation and the
freedom of southern Africa are keenly aware of the
plots against Africa and the world, which is menaced
by the dangers of war.
63. It is no longer a secret to anyone that the defiance
and the arrogance of South Africa exist because the
power of that racist State-which explains its ~aggressiveness-is fuelled by the active complicity of certain
Powers which condemn that regime in words but
support it in deeds. This state of affairs cannot continue!

The people and Government of Guinea are therefore
particularly concerned, especially our guide, Comrade
President Ahmed SCkou Toure, in the face of the
constant criminal aggression perpetrated by the sickening regime of South Africa against the valiant
Angolan people, to which we wish here to reiterate
the active and militant solidarity of the people and the
Party-State of Guinea.

64. Africa has come of age, and we believe that this
is well understood. Africa is on its feet and resolutely
determined to sweep from its soil the sad bastion of
shame which is upurtheid.
That is why the delegation
of the Revolutionary People’s Republic of Guinea
wishes also to express the solidarity and support of
the people and the Government of Guinea for the
fraternal people of Angola, who have suffered repeated acts of aggression by the South African regime,
This is also why our delegation supports the measures
contemplated in the draft resolution contained in
document S/14024. We will furthermore support any
other necessary measures-which the Council is sure
to take-to prevail upon South Africa to halt its acts
of aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola
and against the independence and territorial integrity
of all other neighbouring African States. We do this
with the assurance that our President, Comrade

‘58. The Fascist army of Pretoria has been constantly
engaging in many acts of aggression against neighbouring African States, causing incalculable loss of
human life and material damage. After its armed
incursions into Mozambique and its infiltrations into
Botswana and Lesotho, the South African soldiery is
once again attacking the People’s Republic of Angola.
These are desperate attempts to deflect that country
from its peaceful policy of national construction, condemning it to concern itself more with national security
than with economic and social development.
59. We know that South African aggression, which
is repeated with ever greater regularity against the
7

Ahmed Sekou To&, was right in saying that colonialism is unnatural and consequently, against history.

72. In the first place, we must say that, unfortunately, this is not an isolated act. Similar acts of aggression have been committed in the past, ‘and the draft
resolution introduced yesterday by the representative
of Zambia [S/14024] mentions four earlier resolutions
of the Council condemning the repeated acts of aggression by South Africa against Angola and demanding
that South Africa should scrupulously respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola, the emergence of which the South
African racists opposed by force of arms. Besides,
there is much more than that: the frontiers of the other
neighbouring countries, in particular those of Zambia,
Mozambique, Botswana and Lesotho, are constantly
being violated and infiltrated and everybody knows
that the South African army has received a legal
mandate to operate on the territories of all African
countries south of the Sahara, placing the Pretoria
regime in the unfortunate position of model for certain
imperialist countries, which also have set up mobile
forces of intervention.

65.. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Madagascar, in which he, requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
At theinvitation
of the President, Mr. Rasolondruibe
(Mudagascur) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
66. .The .PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table.and to make a statement.

73. A pillar of the upurtheid system, that anti-African
army is ensuring the occupation of Namibia and using
that international Territory to. invade ,neighbouring
‘,.
countries.

67. Mr. RASOLONDRAIBE (Madagascar) (interMr. xPresident, your country
and mine maintain cloudless and long-standing relations which have developed positively in recent years.
I should like to. vouch‘for the excellence of these relations in expressing our. satisfaction at seeing you
presiding ,over the work of the Council this month.
The courageous positions taken by .Norway on the
question of southern Africa and Palestine permit us
to think that the current debates will be crowned
6,. with
success. ..
_
: .,’
~’
68. 1’ should like also to thank, all members of the
Council; ‘who’have permitted us to participate in-this
de&tern
:
>,

pretution- frbm’ French):

74. Would it suffice for the Council to ‘condemn the
presence of that army in Angola and call upon it to
withdraw?
75. The question before the international community
is not hypothetical-that of ascertaining if a more
vigorous. demonstration of the Council’s authority.
could have spared Angola the trials it is now under:’
going. _
.
76. ‘The genuine questions to which we must ‘give
clear answers are those ‘being asked not only by the
Angolan people but also by all African countries. What
measures is the Council prepared to take to eliminate
upartheid and the institutions which support it, in
order to remove the ,threats posed. to the security of
the region by the racist regime and its anti-African
army? What measures are necessary to prevent a
repetition of the acts of aggression
we are witnessing
-/
today? -.

69. %&make our present contribution without prejudice ‘to the positions which OAU’ will not fail, in the
course of its present session .and at the appropriate
political lever, to take on the question of South Africa’s
aggression
Angola.
.Ti’ against
‘.
’
70. There is no longer any need for my delegation
to speak of the fact of the case, of the number of South
African divisions involved in this aggression, of the
depth- of their penetration into Angolan territory, of
the extent of. the material damage and, above all, of
the. ._,
number of victims and the loss of human lives.
We,note that the racist Pretoria regime, in its disdain
and arrogance, has not even bothered to deny the
events-.and does not seem to care very much at having
been. accused of committing a premeditated and
unprovoked act of aggression.

77. Some will use the pretext of the present political
context tobring out the limitations of the Council and
to explain why the Council did not act earlier.
78. My second purpose was precisely to say that the
cavalier attitude of South Africa is the result of the
present political context and can be accounted for
essentially in the light of that context. In saying that,
I refer tothe fact that the apartheid regime hasno lack
of objective allies which ensure it de facto impunity
and in that way and by other means provide it genuine
encouragement to persevere in its erring ways and its
reprehensible policy. Furthermore, aware that the
interests of imperialism are linked to its own interests,

71. ‘In fact, we are hot here to convince the Council
of the existence of an act of aggression which has
already been fully established and which has not been
disputed. Our modest purpose is to help the Council
to view the events in a wider context.
8

the racist regime is bending over backwards to maintain the status quo ante in southern Africa and thus to
safeguard the prevailing influence of the transnationa!
corporations and, hence, of imperialism.

85. .‘At a time when the Oraanization of African
Unity; meeting at the highest le;k!, is about to register
and celebrate the total victory of the nationalists in
Zimbabwe, and when the international .community
thought that it had the solution of the problem of
Namibia within reach, the racist regime has chosen
to- remind us of its true features and true designs.
Should we dwell on this outward manifestation or
should we attack the profound causes? That is the
question that we ask ourselves by way of a conclusion.

79. Above and beyond the particular’ events of the
kind uow before the Council, we believe that it is
important to consider how tlie United Nations and,
above all, the Council will be able, through their decisions and actions, to ensure the long-term peace,
security and stability of southern Africa. That means
that the Council must choose-that we must chooseto which of the influences being exercised in that
region we shall give the unconditional support of
the Organization.

86. .Before ending, I wish once again to’ reaffirm the
complete solidarity of the Government and. people of
Madagascar with the Government and fraternal people
.of ,Ango!a and with a!! those in southern Africa and
elsewhere who have been fighting for their freedom
and the recognition of their rights.

80. The South African racists are deeply .convinced
that they have no future outside of apartheid; they
take into consideration, with condescension, the
weakness of those who have acquiesced in the dis:
mantlement of the European colonial empires. They
find virtue in the maintenance of their racial supremacy, even if it means using force against the liberation
and anti-apartheid movements and keeping Namibia
against a!! the norms of international law and the
Charter, as we!! as strengthening the military occupation of the Territory and violating the borders of the
neighbouring countries to eliminate resistance from
SWAPO.

87. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
I vividly recall the moving statement of the representative of Angola when the Council met last November [2169rh meeting] in siinilarly sad circumstances,
and I know that none of us here could fail to have
been moved again, and very deeply, by ,Ambassador
de Figueiredo’s statement of yesterday [2237rh meerlng] describing the bloodshed, destruction and misery
which his countrymen have suffered. We profoundly
regret the loss of life and property in Angola. We
cannot in any way condone the actions.,of the SouthAfrican armed forces, :We .condemn the, resort to
1.
violence.
8
.

81. For the imperialists, the racist regime is an
embarrassment because of its extremism; if. only it
could accept the necessary corrective measures regarding respect for human rights, its place in the
defence of the so-called free world would be more
openly recognized. However that may be, South
Africa must remain in the Western ambit because of
its mining wealth and its strategicsituation;
” ’
’
I.

88, Ambassador de Figueiredo spoke of the ineffectiveness of previous Council resolutions in preventing
attacks upon his country. I fully understand what he
means. No one could fail to symeathize with this deep
frustration and. strong feelings. But we, with other
Western countries and with the front-line States, are
doing everything we can to cut out the problem at its
roots. I am speaking of what we hope ‘and believe
to be progress towards a settlement of the Namibian
problem which will bring that dountry-to independence
and’peace. I am, I hope, no foolish optimist,,but I do
believe that the settlement which we a!! desire may
be within our grasp. The Secretary-Genera! wrote a
week ago to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of South
Africa (S/l401 I ] in terms that reflected the views put
to him by tt, front-line States and SWAP0 and which
we hope will constitute a major step towards the
implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978). My
Government; along with the four other Western Governments which. originated the settlement proposal
for Namibia, support the Secretary-Genera! and have
informed the ‘South African Government of, that iupport. We will do everything we can to help secure the
early implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978).
A settlement in Namibia remains our top priority, and
the bloodshed in Angola serves only to make. us redouble our efforts towards that goal.

82. ‘The Africans and those who make up the majority ‘in southern Africa, like their brothers in Zimbabwe and elsewhere, reject the gloomy visions of
the racists and the machinations .,of the imperia!ists.
They demand justice, freedom and dignity for themselves. They want to be the masters of their own destiny in their own country and refuse to accept the continuation of racism, oppression, exploitation and
plundering of their natural resources.
83. We speak of these different aspirations not to
suggest that there might be some kind of arbitration
that could be exercised but to stress their fundamental
incompatibility.
84. If we do not become aware of this fundamental
incompatibility, we run the risk of misunderstanding
events, of losing sight of the political meaning of the
acts of aggression directed today against Angola, of
considering these acts outside their proper context
and of taking inadequate decisions with regard to
African aspirations.

89. Turning to the draft resolution which is before
the Council [S/14024], my delegation regrets that we
9

cannot support it positively. We agree with many of
the propositions in it and with its main thrust. But it
still contains language in certain of the preambular
and operative paragraphs which we cannot accept.
We are grateful to the sponsors for consulting with
us so fully in an attempt to reach consensus. We felt
that we were very close to agreement and regret that
in the end this did not prove possible. Despite the
language of certain passages,the resolution, if adopted,
does not in our view amount to a determination in the
technical sense of Chapter VII of the Charter.

of the problem of Namibia on the basis of resolution
435 (1978). It is our hope that all parties will appreciate
the size of the stakes involved and will show the
necessary restraint so as to permit success of the settlement plan.
94. I now turn to the draft resolution [S/14024] which
is at present before the Council. My delegation, as
stated, shares the spirit and understands the underlying motivation of the draft resolution. We join in its
fundamental concerns and in its condemnations, and
we are convinced of the need to put an end to attacks
upon Angola. However, because of some of the language in the text we regret that we are unable to vote
in favour of it. We would note, in particular, that two
preambular paragraphs and operative paragraphs 1,5,
6 and 7 contain language whose meaning may be interpreted in different ways and whose implications
might give rise to serious difficulties. It would, in
our opinion, have been preferable for negotiations
with the sponsors to allow the preparation of a consensus text. The resolutions of the Council have much
greater authority, indeed, if they are adopted unanimously.

90. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interppretution from
French): As the representative of Angola said yesterday with eloquence and very movingly, and as many
other representatives have repeated, the case before
the Council today is certainly not without precedent.
As Mr. de Figueiredo put it rather depressingly, there
have been “massacres as a matter of routine” [2237th
meeting,

para. 81.

91. My ‘Government shares the feelings of indignation which have been expressed here regarding attacks
upon the territory of the independent State of Angola.
We profoundly deplore the loss of human life that has
taken place, and we would address our full sympathy
to the victims and their families. It regrets that the
destruction of the property of the civilian population
during the fighting has added to the suffering.

95. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Acting President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, Mr. Eralp. 1 invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make a statement.

92. Mv countrv wishes to reaffirm. as it has done in
past cases, its &sapproval of the military actions that
have been undertaken by South Africa against its
neighbours. We are well aware of the seriousness of the
situation which exists in Angola, where the fighting
strength of those involved gives grounds for fears that
the number of victims will increase as will the devastation. France, attached to the principles of independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and to the right .of peoples to selfdetermination,
cannot excuse this most recent violation of the sovereignty of Angola. We demand that the South African
authorities stop the fighting and withdraw their troops
unconditionally and without delay.

96. Mr. ERALP (Turkey) (Acting President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia): May I initially
express the appreciation of the delegation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia for this opportunity to address the Council during its deliberations
on the question of the South African invasion of the
People’s Republic of Angola.
97. Mr. President,. I should like, this time in my
capacity as Acting President of the Council for Namibia, and on behalf of the Council, to congratulate
you on your presidency on the occasion of these
meetings, the consequences of which are related to
the future of Namibia which is the direct responsibility
of the Council for Namibia in accordance with the
decision of the United Nations.

93. I hardly need dwell on the profound causes of
the troubled situation in southern Africa. Those causes
were set forth here two -weeks ago in the Council’s
debate on the question of South Africa. The direct
cause is the maintenance in Namibia of a South Afri-.
can presence without any legal justification and the
refusal to recognize the right to self-determination of
the people of the Territory. The international community is familiar with France’s initiatives and those
taken by its Western partners to bring Namibia to
genuine independence in internationally acceptable
circumstances. The negotiations which have begun
are at a particularly important stage right now, and the
Secretary-General addressed a letter on 20 June to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Africa [S/14011],
a letter for which my Government has expressed its
support. My country will continue, along with its
partners, its efforts to bring about a peaceful solution

98. The Security Council is once again meeting to
consider the situation arising from the latest in a series
of premeditated and vicious acts of aggression against
Angola with the use of modem weapons of mass destruction. In order to carry out its acts of aggression
against neighbouring African States, South Africa has
intensified the militarization of Namibia. The Namibian people, struggling to achieve selfdetermination and independence under the leadership of SWAP0
have been suffering the consequences of the occupation of their Territory by the illegal South African
administration.
99. The efforts of the United Nations to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia have
10

those foreign economic and other interests whose
collaboration with the racist Pretoria regime buttresses the machinery of exploitation in Namibia and
contributes to the perpetuation of the subjugation of
the people of the Territory.

so far failed because of South Africa’s persistent
refusal to co-operate with the Organization in order
to implement resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978).
The Council for Namibia considers that the current
acts of aggression are yet another indication of South
Africa’s determination to perpetuate its illegal occupation of Namibia and to continue the ruthless exploitation of the people and resources of that Territory. There is no doubt that these acts of aggression
are motivated by South Africa’s desire to intimidate
the front-line States, such as Angola, which are supporting the struggle of the Namibian people for freedom and independence.

105. The Council for Namibia expects the Security
Council: strongly to condemn the racist regime of
South Africa for its premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions of the People’s Republic of
Angola, which constitute a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola as well
as a serious threat to international peace and security;
to take appropriate measures to ensure prompt and
total withdrawal of all South African troops from the
territory of Angola; and to prevent further acts of
aggression by South Africa against any of the neighbouring African States. In doing so, the Security
Council must bear in mind that it must act to fulfil
its commitment to the Namibian people by effectively
implementing its resolutions on the withdrawal of the
illegal South African administration from Namibia.

100. At its extraordinary plenary meetings at Algiers,
the United Nations Council for Namibia carried out
an extensive review of the situation in Namibia and
adopted the Algiers Declaration and Programme of
Action.* On that occasion, in his messageto the Council for Namibia, the Secretary-General said:
“The Council has fully succeeded in presenting to
the international community the nature of the problems at stake in Namibia . . . . The choice [in Namibia] is clearly between a conflict which risks daily
escalation or the rapid transfer of power to the
people of Namibia on the basis of free and fair elections under the supervision and control of the United
Nations.“*

106. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of Norway.
107. The new attacks carried out by South Africa
against Angola must be strongly condemned by the
Council. We are deeply saddened to learn about the
further loss of life and destruction of property. On this
occasion, I should like to extend to the families of the
victims and to the Government of Angola my delegation’s deepest sympathy.

101. The postponement of a final settlement of the
question of Namibia has raised the spectre of increasingly grave threats to international peace and security
as manifested by the wanton aggression by South
Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola.

108. The Council must also .be concerned about
these new attacks because of their wider implications. These latest acts of aggression represent another
direct challenge to the Council which has on previous
occasions already declared unacceptable such clear
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of an independent country.

102. In the Algiers Declaration the Council for Namibia strongly condemned the continuous and systematic aggression which has been repeatedly committed by the racist regime of South Africa against
both Angola and Zambia.

109. When the Security Council considered ,South
Africa’s aggression against Angola towards the end of
last year, my delegation noted [2/7&h meeting] that
the Council, then as now, was involved in an effort
to seek a peaceful solution to the question of Namibia.
We noted also that the attacks at that time coincided
with new and important initiatives towards a peaceful
settlement in Namibia. Today we are again faced with
the same situation. Only a few days ago, the SecretaryGeneral made a new and highly important proposal to
the South African Government with a view to seeking
its agreement on a date for a cease-fire in Namibia and
starting implementation of the United Nations plan
for the Territory. We commend the Secretary-General
for his efforts and his latest and timely proposal aimed
at securing free and fair elections in Namibia under
United Nations supervision. His efforts have our full
support.

103. At the same time that the Pretoria regime is
carrying out acts of aggression against neighbouring
African States, it is engaged in continuous efforts of
repression of Namibian patriots in their struggle to
achieve self-determination, freedom and independence
for the Namibian people.
104. In the light of the actions of the illegal occupation regime of-South Africa in Namibia, &e Council
for Namibia, in its Programme of Action adopted at
Algiers, invited the attention of the Security Council
to the present critical situation in Namibia and requested it to convene urgently to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa
as provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The Council for Namibia furthermore called upon the international community to
intensify efforts for the complete and effective isolation of South Africa, and, in that regard, called for
the exposure to the widest international scrutiny of

110. South Africa must be urged to respond quickly
and positively to the proposal by the Secretary-General
11

so that a peaceful process towards an independent
Namibia can finally get started. At the same time, the
Council must demand that South Africa withdraw
unconditionally .and forthwith from Angola, a country
that is playing a crucial,role in the present efforts to
end the impasse in the Namibia negotiations. The
recent South African aggression against Angola will
only prolong the Namibian struggle for freedom and;
independence. ,It canaot crush it.

tion. The representatives of the United Kingdom and
France have spoken eloquently to the points and
I would associate myself with their remarks.
1‘17. The PRESIDENT: The representative of
Angola has asked to speak and I now call on him.

118. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO. (Angola): Angola has
borders with Namibia; Angola has no, borders with
South Africa. History is not predestined, nor is it
111. The only way for the South African authorities. governed by the doctrine of the elect., But the racist
to demonstrate that they are interested in a peaceful, minority regime in Pretoria acts as though it is. History
transition to independence in Namibia is to agree is made of the dynamic between people, institutions
without further delay to implementation of the United
and incidents. And as we talk, history is being made.
Nations plan. Further South African aggression / This process of history is no consolation for those,
against Angola or any other front-line State will raise who are burying their dead today in Angola. History
the.most serious doubts as to ,South Africa’s willing- 1 as expressed in the corpses of infants gives no peace
ness to seek a peaceful and internationally acceptable
to those who cradle those tiny bodies,in their arms.
solution in Namibia. Continued failure by South Africa
History written as bombed-out wrecks and craters in
to agree to the, implementation of the United Nations
the earth of Angola gives no explanation to those who
plan will ultimately lead South Africa into further
lose their homes and their livelihood.
isolation and result. in new international measures
119. The people of Angola are still under attack, with
against it.
_,.,
a ‘portion of their territory still under. the ,occupation
of racist South African troops. Colonialism is trying
l’i2. Norway’will vote in favour of the draft resoluto establish another outpost. Racism is trying to send.
tion before the Council. I should, however, like to
out its tentacles to engulf a free and’equal people.
reiterate the reservations we have expressed on
Militarism is trying to win another victory.
previous occasions concerning the contents of operative paragraph 5.
120. South Africa launched what has been termed its
largest
military occupation since the Se,cond World
113. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT of
War
and
unleashed its racist forces once more on the
the Council.
territory and people of Angola: If the international
community does not force an immediate and union-‘
114. There are no further speakers who wish to
ditional South African withdrawal ‘-and guartintee’
speak at this stage. It ‘is my understanding that the
South Africa’s observance of the principles that.
Council is ready to proceed. to’the vote on the draft
govern
international relations, South Africa will not’
resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Jamaica, Mexico,
be alone in the dock. This comity of nations must
the Niger, Philippines, Tunisia and Zambia [S/14024].
accept its responsibility in allowing South Africa
freely
and regularly to exercise its racist and impeA vote wus taken by show of hands.
rialist options in southern Africa. South Africa must
be forced to show what has been referred to as a
In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
decent
respect for the opinions of mankind.
Republic,. Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
121. The Security Council has a mandate under the
Republics, Zambia.
Charter. But what use is a mandate unless it is predi-.
cated on a sense of mission? The Council has a clear
Against: None.
role in international peace and security. Does not the
situation now prevailing in southern Africa qualify?
Abstaining:
France, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Amer122. Throughout its history there have been links
ica.
that Africa has established; others that it has endured.
Africa, -Asia and Latin America have realized that
The draft resolution was adopted by I2 votes to none,
we
have to fight imperialism, not accommodate it.
with 3 abstentions (resolution 475 (1980)).
We have to punish racism, not condone it. We have
115. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the to defeat colonialism, not accept it. What unites Africa
United States has asked to make a statement following
and the non-aligned movement is more important
the vote.
than what divides us. And the same is true of all of us
represenfed in the United Nations, especially. those
116. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of
seated in this Chamber.
America): I think that the reasons for our abstention
are clear to everyone, certainly to those with whom
123. Gandhi characterized as one of the seven sins
we were privileged to discuss the text of this resolu“politics without principle**. I regret that this is the
12
.

sort practised by many nations. Certainly the racist
Pretoria regime is a prime example.

127. For better or for worse, our future is linked.
And the permanent members of this most vital organ
of the United Nations have a greater responsibility
towards that future than have those of us who serve
by rotation. Mankind has placed its trust in the United
Nations, and a particular role devolves upon the
Security Council, especially the five permanent members. Through you, Mr. President, Angola asks them
whether they will oversee the effective implementation of the resolution which the Council has just
adopted, whether they will discharge their responsibilities as outlined in the Charter.
,.
128. There are some in this chamber who will not
remember. But there are millions of us in Africa, Asia
and Latin America who will not forget. To those with
short and convenient memories, we say: “Hodie mihi,
crus tihi” -if it is us today; tomorrow it will be you.
:
..
129. Until final victory, a lutu ‘continuu.

124. South Africa’s military action is confined to the
areas corresponding to the demilitarized zone which
forms an important part of the United Nations proposals for Namibian independence. Pretoria aims at
controlling that area and at setting up a band of renegades under its sponsorship. Neither the group nor
the action has any legitimacy. The racists intend to
create well-proved “facts” on the basis of wellfounded “concepts” to Iegitimize well-established
“rights”. In this manner, a myth becomes history and
a crime becomes legitimate.
125. Before. concluding, Mr. President, I wish to
thank you, on behalf of my ,Govemment, for your
co-operation, and all those who spoke in the Council
yesterday and today, at short notice despite other
;’
commitments.
126. A resolution has been adopted. .But there have
been a number of similar resolutions since 1976. What
guarantee does my Government have that this resolution will fare any better than the previous ones? What
guarantee do the people of Angola have that they will
not be subjected to invasion, attack and murder in the
very near future? What compensation can we ever have
for all those killed, now and earlier? What payment
can compensate us for all the loss, damage and destruction? Who will wash the earth of the blood it has
soaked from the corpses of Angolan men, women ,and
children? Who will erase. the scars that our country-’
side carries of the bombing, napalm, artillery attacks
and mine fiejds? Who will answer all those questions
that the sons of the soil ask?
/
..

\..
j

‘,

. .

:

‘St,

.

I.
.

‘.

130. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of consideration of the item on its
agenda:
‘I
..
The meeting

> a.

rose ut 8.70 p.m.

.

,..

’
:

NOTES
. .
I Oficial Records of thi denerai Assembly, Thirfy-f&h
Sessick, Plenary Metk’ngs, 29th’meeting.
paras.169and 170.. .
s Ibid., Thirty-fflh Session, Supplemerit No. 24, vol. I. p&a.91.

‘-

.

.y,,

,

,(,j.
.I

: :

‘. ‘.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICA-IIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans Ies librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous A : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Gent%.
KAK

HOjIY.CHTh

H3AAHHSf

OPFAHHIAI&HH

HJnaHHn

~praRx3aIIllx

O6aenxxeRxbrx

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OribEAUHEHHS.IX
Hat&l

YOXHO

xynurb

HAUHR
a XHHxXblX

Mara-

Jxxax x arexTcTBax xo acex paxoxax xxpa. HaeoxnTe cnpamtx 06 HSAaHxnX B
aamex KXBXCXOM
waraaxxe xnx nxmx~e no anpeey: Opraxxsanxx 06’beAxxexxbrx
HasxR. Cexsxx no nponarrte xanaxxx. HbK)-FfOpX
XnX HCeHesa.
DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estAn en vcnta en hbretias y cams disttibuidorrts en
todas psrtes de1 mundo. Consuhe a su tibrcro o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebm.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-61462-October 1987-2.050
