United Nations

A/RES/63/220

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 49 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2008
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/63/414/Add.7)]

63/220. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its tenth special session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 53/242 of
28 July 1999, 56/193 of 21 December 2001, 57/251 of 20 December 2002, 58/209 of
23 December 2003, 59/226 of 22 December 2004, 60/189 of 22 December 2005,
61/205 of 20 December 2006 and 62/195 of 19 December 2007,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
0F

Recognizing the need for more efficient environmental activities in the United
Nations system, and noting the need to consider possible options to address this
need, including through the ongoing informal consultative process on the
institutional framework for United Nations environmental activities,
Taking into account Agenda 21 2 and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 3
1F

2F

Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as the
leading global environmental authority and principal body within the United
Nations system in the field of environment, which should take into account, within
its mandate, the sustainable development needs of developing countries,
Emphasizing that capacity-building and technology support to developing
countries in environment-related fields are important components of the work of the
United Nations Environment Programme,

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.
2

08-48399

A/RES/63/220

Recognizing the need to accelerate implementation of the Bali Strategic Plan
for Technology Support and Capacity-building, 4 including through the provision of
additional financial resources for that purpose,
3F

1.
Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its tenth special session 5 and the decisions contained
therein; 6
4F

5F

2.
Welcomes the continued efforts of the United Nations Environment
Programme in shifting emphasis from delivery of outputs to achievement of results
within its budget and programme of work, and also welcomes, in this regard, the
United Nations Environment Programme Medium-term Strategy 2010–2013, 7 which
is results-based and elaborates six cross-cutting thematic priority areas of work and
various means of implementation as a way of strengthening the work of the United
Nations Environment Programme, bearing in mind all the relevant provisions of
decisions of the Governing Council, and in this regard invites partner organizations
to cooperate closely with the Programme;
6F

Stresses the need to further advance and fully implement the Bali
3.
Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building,4 in this regard calls
upon Governments and other stakeholders in a position to do so to provide the
necessary funding and technical assistance, and welcomes the particular emphasis of
the Medium-term Strategy 2010–2013 on significantly enhancing the capacity of the
United Nations Environment Programme to deliver on the Bali Strategic Plan;
0H

Recognizes the progress made so far in the implementation of the
4.
Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management, 8 particularly through
its Quick Start Programme, 9 and invites Governments, regional economic
integration organizations, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to engage actively and cooperate closely to support the Strategic
Approach implementation activities of the United Nations Environment Programme,
including by providing adequate resources;
7F

8F

Also recognizes the global challenges posed by mercury, and, in this
5.
regard, welcomes the work of the ad hoc open-ended working group on mercury,
established by the Governing Council at its twenty-fourth session,9 to review and
assess options for enhanced voluntary measures and new or existing international
legal instruments, and notes that the Governing Council will consider the outcomes
of the work of the ad hoc open-ended working group at its twenty-fifth regular
session;
Emphasizes the need for the United Nations Environment Programme,
6.
within its mandate, to further contribute to sustainable development programmes,
the implementation of Agenda 212 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,3 at
all levels, and to the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development, bearing
in mind the mandate of the Commission;
1H

2H

_______________
4

UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/63/25).
6
Ibid., annex I.
7
See UNEP/GCSS.X/8.
8
See the report of the International Conference on Chemicals Management on the work of its first session
(SAICM/ICCM.1/7), annexes I-III.
9
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/62/25),
annex I, decision 24/3.
5

2

A/RES/63/220

7.
Notes that the Governing Council, at its tenth special session,
emphasized the need to implement fully its decision SS.VII/1 on international
environmental governance, 10 and also notes the continued discussions scheduled for
the twenty-fifth session of the Governing Council;
9F

8.
Recognizes that the current global crises could adversely impact
sustainable development and the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, emphasizes the
need for mobilization of adequate funding to address their environmental aspects,
and takes note of the proposal of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, following consultations with the Bureau of the Governing
Council and the Committee of Permanent Representatives to the Programme, to
address “Global crisis: national chaos?” as one of the themes for the ministerial
consultations, to be held at the twenty-fifth session of the Governing Council;
Emphasizes the need to further enhance coordination and cooperation
9.
among the relevant United Nations organizations in the promotion of the
environmental dimension of sustainable development, and to enhance the
cooperation between the United Nations Environment Programme and regional and
subregional organizations, and welcomes the continued active participation of the
Programme in the United Nations Development Group and the Environment
Management Group;
10. Takes note of the finding of Global Environment Outlook: Environment
for Development, 11 published by the United Nations Environment Programme, that
current environmental degradation represents a serious challenge for human wellbeing and sustainable development, and expresses its deep concern over the
evidence of unprecedented environmental changes at all levels, including possible
irreversible changes with potentially negative implications for economic and social
development, especially for the poor and vulnerable groups in society;
10F

11. Reaffirms the need to strengthen the scientific base of the United Nations
Environment Programme, as recommended by the intergovernmental consultation
on strengthening of the scientific base of the Programme, including the
reinforcement of the scientific capacity of developing countries, in the area of
protection of the environment, including through the provision of adequate financial
resources, and in this respect emphasizes the importance of building on the
experiences gained from the preparation of different global environmental
assessments as well as other relevant developments in this field;
12. Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial
resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII), underlines the need to consider the
adequate reflection of all administrative and management costs of the Programme in
the context of the United Nations regular budget;
13. Invites Governments that are in a position to do so to increase their
contributions to the Environment Fund;
14. Emphasizes the importance of the Nairobi headquarters location of the
United Nations Environment Programme, and requests the Secretary-General to
keep the resource needs of the Programme and the United Nations Office at Nairobi
_______________
10
11

Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/57/25), annex I.
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.07.III.D.19.

3

A/RES/63/220

under review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary
services to the Programme and to the other United Nations organs and organizations
in Nairobi;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled “Report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its
twenty-fifth session”.
72nd plenary meeting
19 December 2008

4
