S/PRST/2006/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 March 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5397th meeting of the Security Council, held on 27 March 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council commends the Haitian people on the successful
completion of the first round of their electoral process, congratulates Mr. René
García Préval on his election as President, and looks forward to working with
the new Government to help build a better future for Haiti. This process will
give Haiti a unique opportunity to break with the violence and political
instability of the past. The Council expresses its full support for the work of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdés.
“The Security Council welcomes the announcement by the Haitian
authorities to hold the second round of parliamentary elections on 21 April
2006, which will allow the prompt inauguration of the President elect. The
Council emphasizes that timely municipal and local elections are also
fundamentally important to complete Haiti’s electoral process and to
strengthen its democratic institutions. The Council urges the Transitional
Government of Haiti and the Provisional Electoral Council, with the support of
the international community, to continue to ensure that the electoral process is
conducted in a transparent and credible manner. The Council reiterates its call
on all parties to respect the outcome of the elections, remain engaged in the
political process, and promote national reconciliation and inclusiveness in
order to reach consensus on the basic policies Haiti should pursue to bolster its
democratic transition.
“The Security Council stresses the need to ensure a secure and stable
environment in Haiti and it expresses its support for MINUSTAH’s continued
efforts to assist the Haitian authorities in that respect. The Council, in that
regard, encourages all troop and police contributing countries to remain
engaged in MINUSTAH. The Council reaffirms that the establishment of the
rule of law, including the protection of human rights, institutional capacity
building, and rapid progress on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
will be crucial to Haiti’s future over the next few years. To this end, the
sustained political will and the common strategic vision of the Haitian
authorities and the international community are essential. In this context, the

06-28589 (E) 270306

*0628589*

S/PRST/2006/13

Council underlines the urgent need to proceed with a thorough and
comprehensive reform of the Haitian National Police in line with its resolution
1608 (2005) as well as concurrent justice reform.
“The Security Council is aware that sustainable development in Haiti
remains essential to the stability of the country. In that regard, the Council
reiterates the need for the quick implementation of highly visible and labourintensive projects that help to create jobs and deliver basic social services.
Recognizing progress already made in donor efforts, the Council calls on
donors and relevant stakeholders to work with the new Government through
the Interim Cooperation Framework to reassess assistance priorities in a
targeted way and to work in close coordination, as appropriate, with
MINUSTAH. The Council reiterates its willingness to cooperate with the
newly elected authorities in order to address the long-term challenges facing
Haiti.”

2
