S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6201st meeting
Wednesday, 14 October 2009, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Ms. Zamora
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Ryuno
Mr. Gebreel
Mr. Puente
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Dizdar
Mr. Kamahungye
Mr. Williams
Ms. Germain

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-55901 (E)

*0955901*

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Maldives, Norway and Sri Lanka, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated this morning, to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber. I thank
participants for their understanding and cooperation.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council in this important meeting
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I want to
start by emphasizing the importance of the monthly
briefing by the Secretariat, which remains one the most
important tools to assess the situation in the Middle
East and to enhance our collective efforts aimed at
advancing the peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
We express our appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his briefing this morning and
welcome the presence of Palestinian Foreign Minister
Riad Al-Malki at this meeting.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
briefing should focus not just on describing the
situation on the ground, but also on assessing the
reality with regard to the fulfilment by each side —
particularly Israel, the occupying Power — of its

2

responsibilities and compliance with international law
and Security Council resolutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that more
efforts and action are required from the Security
Council at this critical stage for the Middle East
region. The deteriorated situation in the region as a
result of the ongoing unlawful Israeli occupation of
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories since 1967
continues to be a matter of serious concern not only for
the region, but also for the entire international
community.
The Non-Aligned Movement regrets once again
the lack of progress made, despite increased efforts to
achieve a just and lasting solution to the question of
Palestine and a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East through the achievement of the two-State solution.
Regrettably, no progress has been made due to Israel’s
continued defiance of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law.
The international community must not waver in
its calls upon Israel to cease all of its flagrant
violations, including its collective punishment of the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip, and
its illegal settlement activities, and to return to
negotiations in good faith. Peace clearly cannot be
achieved in circumstances where international law and
human rights continue to be trampled.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its grave
concern about the findings of the investigation carried
out by the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict, as contained in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), as well as the conclusions reached by
the Secretary-General’s Board of Inquiry and the
conclusions of the Arab League’s fact-finding mission.
The Movement calls for serious follow-up action
on the recommendations set forth in those reports
towards bringing an end to the flagrant violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law, and in pursuit of accountability
and justice. All organs of the United Nations must
assume their responsibilities in this regard, and all
appropriate and available legal remedies should be
applied to end human rights violations and grave
breaches by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Movement reiterates its firm conviction that
respect for and compliance with international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

law, and United Nations resolutions and decisions will
have a positive influence on and are necessary to
advance efforts to achieve a just and peaceful political
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

measures to be taken immediately to address the grave
humanitarian situation resulting from the Israeli
military aggression on Gaza, as confirmed in the
report.

The Non-Aligned Movement urges that due
priority continue to be given to promoting respect for
and observance by all Member States of their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
particularly those under the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call on
Israel to end the collective punitive measures it has
imposed on the civilian population in Gaza. In this
regard, the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission finds
that Israel has imposed a blockade amounting to
collective punishment and has carried out a systematic
policy of progressive isolation and deprivation of the
Gaza Strip. Further, the Fact-Finding Mission states
that the Israeli military operation was directed at the
people of Gaza as a whole, in furtherance of an overall
and continuing policy aimed at punishing the Gaza
population and in a deliberate policy of
disproportionate force aimed at the civilian population.

In this regard, the Movement takes into account
the magnitude and persistence of the violations and
breaches of international law, including international
humanitarian law, being committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Movement urges the
Security Council to prevent impunity and apply
accountability for the war crimes committed by Israel
against the Palestinian civilian population during its
military aggression on the Gaza Strip.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its strong
condemnation of the death and destruction caused by
the Israeli military aggression on Gaza, as well as of
Israel’s ongoing unlawful closures and blockades,
which have resulted in the virtual imprisonment of the
entire Palestinian civilian population by obstructing
their freedom of movement, including the movement of
essential goods, humanitarian
assistance and
reconstruction materials. The ongoing negative
consequences of the Israeli aggression on Gaza have
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis on the ground,
continue to fuel instability and the cycle of violence,
threaten international peace and security and hamper
the efforts to resume the peace process between the
two sides.
The Non-Aligned Movement urges the Security
Council to seriously consider and act upon the
recommendations directed to it by the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission in accordance with the request
by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which was supported
by the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Group of Arab States.
Immediate measures by the Security Council are
required in this regard, in accordance with its Charter
responsibility to address matters affecting international
peace and security. The Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its call for the immediate implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions and for

09-55901

Such alarming findings clearly require the
attention of the Security Council. Serious measures
must be taken to end impunity and ensure
accountability. Immediate measures are also required
to address the pressing humanitarian and economic
needs of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip,
including by the sustained and permanent opening of
Gaza’s border crossings by Israel, in full compliance
with the terms and provisions of resolution 1860
(2009), in order to ensure the free access of
humanitarian aid and other essential supplies and
goods, including commercial supplies and needed
reconstruction materials, and to facilitate the passage
of persons to and from Gaza.
I turn now to the situation in occupied East
Jerusalem. The Non-Aligned Movement expresses
grave alarm at the recent attacks by extremist and
militant Israeli settlers, protected by Israeli forces, at
the Islamic holy sites of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
Al-Aqsa mosque. Such attacks against Palestinian
worshippers represent a threat and exacerbate an
already volatile situation in the occupied holy city. The
Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel’s continuing
provocations, aggression and illegal actions against the
city’s holy sites and against its Palestinian inhabitants
living under Israeli occupation.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
condemnation of all Israeli actions and provocative
measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, geographic nature, character and status of
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied

3

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian territory. The Non-Aligned Movement
expresses grave concern that, in defiance of the clear
international consensus rejecting Israeli colonization
and in flagrant breach of international law, Israel
continues to construct settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around East
Jerusalem, where the occupying Power also continues,
inter alia, to demolish Palestinian homes, evict
Palestinian families from their homes, confiscate
Palestinian land and properties, and carry out
excavations in the city, including in the vicinity of the
Al-Haram Al-Sharif compound.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
time has come for the Security Council to take a clear
position on and serious action against Israel’s
violations in occupied East Jerusalem. By staying
silent and leaving Israel to pursue its defiance of
international law through its actions against the Islamic
holy sites in the occupied East Jerusalem, the Council
sends the wrong message in the wrong direction. Such
illegal actions and incitement by Israel confirm doubts
about its willingness to achieve peace on the basis of
the two-State solution and the 1967 borders. We thus
urge rapid and decisive action to prevent this volatile
situation from escalating further.
Turning to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains deeply concerned by Israel’s ongoing
violations by air and land of Lebanese sovereignty, in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on Israel to
fully withdraw from the remaining Lebanese lands it
occupies in the Shaba’a Farms, the Kfar Shuba Hills
and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village.
With respect to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status o£ the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as Israeli measures to
impose jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and that it fully
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In a world where respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms occupies centre stage, nothing
justifies a policy of collective punishment of a people

4

under effective occupation or the destruction of their
means to live a dignified life. The lack of
accountability for serious violations has reached a
crisis point. The ongoing failure of justice could
undermine hopes for a successful outcome to the peace
process and reinforce an environment that fosters
violence.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains ready to
actively engage in any possible action to guarantee the
investigation and prosecution of all those responsible
for crimes against the civilian population in the Gaza
Strip. The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that justice
for these crimes must take its course.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).
The OIC expresses its serious concern about the
grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, especially the continuing
inhumane Israeli blockade and dire humanitarian crisis
being imposed on the Palestinian civilian population in
the Gaza Strip and the ongoing illegal colonization
campaign being carried out by Israel, the occupying
Power, particularly in and around occupied East
Jerusalem.
We strongly condemn the recent attacks
perpetrated by Israeli occupying forces, including
extremist settlers, against Palestinian civilians and
worshippers at Al-Aqsa mosque and the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound in occupied East Jerusalem. Our
group reiterates its condemnation of Israel’s persistent
aggression against Islamic and Christian holy places
and sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and against the
Palestinian inhabitants of the holy city of Al-Quds,
which continues to cause tensions to rise and
difficulties to mount for the Palestinian inhabitants of
the city in all spheres of life.
The new chapter of this Israeli aggression is the
ongoing saga of terror launched by the occupying
Power on 27 September 2009, when it began
excavation activity in a holy site, the purpose of which
was to undermine the site’s symbolic and sacred
significance for Muslims throughout the world and for
the Islamic faith itself.

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Israel’s current aggression against the Al-Aqsa
mosque is not the first of its kind. We still recall its
attempt to burn down the mosque in 1969, the
excavation of a tunnel near the mosque in 1996 and the
continuation of this excavation activity in 2007. In
another act of aggression, on 28 September 2000,
Ariel Sharon, leader of the right-wing opposition at
that time, visited the Al-Aqsa mosque compound,
which led to the outbreak of the second Palestinian
intifada and the hampering of the peace process.
The OIC expresses grave concern about and
condemns in particular Israel’s illegal and intensifying
colonization measures, including its ongoing
settlement activities, the transfer of further Israeli
settlers and the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around the Holy
City. It also condemns Israel’s escalation of its practice
of demolishing Palestinian homes, the eviction of
Palestinian families from the city, the confiscation of
more Palestinian land, homes and properties, the illegal
excavation near and beneath Al-Aqsa mosque in the
Al-Haram Al-Sharif compound, the revocation of
Palestinian residency rights in the city, the continued
closure of Palestinian institutions in the city and the
imposition of severe restrictions of movement that
have isolated the city from the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories. Each one of these crimes
constitutes a violation of the Geneva Conventions.
The OIC calls for the immediate cessation of all
such illegal Israeli activities, in accordance with the
occupying Power’s obligations under international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and General
Assembly and in accordance with commitments and
obligations under the Quartet Road Map and in respect
of the firm international consensus in this regard.
The OIC calls on the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, to shoulder its
responsibilities, including, in particular, towards
occupied East Jerusalem, and to take urgent action to
bring a complete halt to all illegal Israeli measures and
actions aimed at changing the demographic
composition, character, geographical nature and legal
status of the Holy City and at depopulating it of its
Palestinian inhabitants, entrenching the occupying
Power’s unlawful control of the city and thus illegally
and unilaterally determining the fate of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, the capital of the future State of Palestine.

09-55901

The OIC recalls paragraph 4 of resolution
2/36-PAL, adopted at the thirty-sixth ministerial
meeting of the OIC in Damascus, in which the
members reaffirmed that all the Israeli colonial
settlement measures and practices in Al-Quds and the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territories are null and
void, in line with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, as well as international covenants and
conventions that consider all Israeli legislative,
administrative and colonial settlement procedures and
measures aimed at altering the legal, demographic,
architectural, cultural and heritage-related status of the
Holy City as null and void, and contrary to the
resolutions and decisions of international legitimacy
and international covenants and conventions and,
therefore, as diametrically opposed to agreements
signed between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. The
resolution requests the Security Council to revive the
International Supervision and Monitoring Committee
to Prevent and Prohibit Colonial Settlement in Al-Quds
and the Occupied Arab Territories.
Our group expresses its full support for the
request made by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
convene an urgent meeting of the Security Council to
consider the report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission in Gaza (A/HRC/12/48), known as the
Goldstone report.
An important facet of the Goldstone report’s
findings on the causal effects of the recent Israeli
aggression against Gaza, taking into account the
historical perspective, serves to highlight once again
that the root cause of this conflict is the Israeli
occupation, and nothing else. It also confirms the fears
and deep concerns of the international community
about Israeli violations that amounted to war crimes
and possible crimes against humanity, including wilful
killings, deliberate attacks on civilian objects, wanton
destruction of civilian property, indiscriminate attacks,
the use of human shields and collective punishment
against Gaza’s civilian population in the form of a
continuing blockade.
Objective and apt recommendations made in this
report are not just addressed to the Human Rights
Council. The report also made an inevitable request,
set out in paragraph 1969, that the Security Council
shoulder its responsibilities. Therefore, the Security
Council must meet its responsibilities as mandated in
the Charter, take all necessary actions to bring the

5

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Israeli perpetrators of these war crimes to justice and
put an end to the Israeli mindset of impunity.
The OIC once again expresses its regret at the
continued non-cooperation on the part of Israel, the
occupying Power, with all the independent and
international missions that have been mandated to
investigate human rights violations of the occupied
Palestinian people. Such an attitude reflects an abovethe-law mentality and constitutes a clear refusal to
acknowledge the international community’s human
rights concerns.
The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
ongoing violations, by both air and land, of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, in breach of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), and it calls on Israel to withdraw fully
from the Lebanese land it continues to occupy in the
Sheba’a farms, the Kfar Shouba Hills and the northern
part of al-Ghajar village.
The OIC also reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying
Power, to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional
structure, as well as the Israeli measures to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, are null and void
and have no legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel
abide by Council resolution 497 (1981) — which, by
the way, was adopted by consensus — and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation also of Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The OIC calls on the international community to
intensify its efforts to accelerate the achievement of a
just and comprehensive peace settlement on the basis
of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The
OIC reiterates its firm and unwavering support for the
just cause of Palestine. The OIC calls for the speedy
realization by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination, with the establishment of their
independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem,
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as its capital, and for a just solution
for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

6

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate on the Middle
East. It is only natural that Member States be given a
chance to voice their views on such a crucial issue on
the international peace and security agenda. I would
also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Riad Al-Malki
among us today. Moreover, I express my appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
informative briefing.
We gather at a moment of renewed hope, but also
of heightened tensions, in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. On the one hand, the efforts of the Obama
Administration led by Mr. George Mitchell and the
intra-Palestinian negotiations mediated by Egypt make
it possible to believe that significant progress may be
achieved. On the other hand, continued difficulties in
resuming direct negotiations between the parties and
serious incidents on the ground, including in key holy
sites, further strain the peace process.
Under these circumstances, the immediate
priority must be to sustain the hope among people in
the region that a peaceful solution is possible and that
negotiations can and will produce concrete results.
This must be obtained through deeds. The
measures needed are well known. Israel must cease all
settlement activity, further ease restrictions on the
movement of people and goods in the occupied
Palestinian territories, abandon policies that artificially
alter the demographics of the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, prevent and stop violence and provocation
from extremists and immediately lift the blockade on
Gaza. Just as important, it must accept that there will
be no true and lasting peace until there is an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security
within internationally recognized borders. For their
part, the Palestinians must prevent and stop all
violence against Israel, including rocket-launching,
enhance democratic governance and overcome their
divisions.
Also relevant to sustaining hope in a peaceful
solution are confidence-building measures. Although
they are no substitute for effective negotiations, such
measures ease the state of mind, reduce mistrust and
facilitate mutual understanding. Enhancing dialogue
between Israeli and Palestinian civil societies, in
particular journalists and political analysts, is a
promising avenue. Their capacity to contribute to peace

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

is strong and was evident to the International Media
Seminar on Peace in the Middle East, held last July in
Rio de Janeiro.
All this would certainly allow for the prompt
resumption of negotiations on the final status. But
restarting the negotiating process, although in itself
key to sustaining hope, is not enough. In order to
generate the popular support that both parties will need
for the difficult decisions they will eventually have to
make, the talks must deliver visible gains to the
ordinary citizen in the short term. Support for dialogue
and compromise will be eroded if daily life conditions
are not rapidly improved in the Palestinian territories
or if people in southern Israel feel seriously threatened.
As soon as conditions allow, an international
conference on the Middle East peace process would
also serve as a powerful tool to make the negotiating
process move forward. All actors in the region that are
prepared to engage constructively should be given a
chance to participate in such an effort. Involving other
countries from outside the region in the discussions
would also bring significant momentum to the talks.
The fact-finding mission headed by Justice
Richard Goldstone has discharged its mandate in an
effective and professional manner. It addressed
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed by all sides
in the context of the military operations conducted in
Gaza.
The findings presented by the mission are
extremely disturbing. The Human Rights Council must
review them and adopt decisions that are just and
effective. Its focus must be full respect for
humanitarian legislation and human rights law on the
ground. Its aim should be the quest for justice. That is
the indispensable basis for achieving peace and
reconciliation among Israelis and Palestinians.
Before concluding, I wish to say a few words
about Lebanon, a country with which Brazil has strong
ties. We are concerned that violations of resolution
1701 (2006) continue to take place. It is imperative that
all parties involved fully and immediately comply with
all the provisions of that resolution. Brazil also calls
upon all parties to cooperate fully in the prompt
formation of a government of national unity able to
successfully address the challenges facing the country.
The Lebanese people deserve no less.

09-55901

The President: I now call on the representative
of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this statement.
Developments over the past year have clearly
shown that we must move swiftly towards a renewal of
the peace process in the Middle East. The European
Union urges the Palestinian Authority and the
Government of Israel to enter into serious peace
negotiations as soon as possible, respecting
international law and previous agreements, including
implementing their Road Map obligations. We hereby
reiterate the need for a political solution, with an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with the State of Israel.
We welcome the commitment of the United States
Administration to pursue vigorously a two-State
solution and a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. The European Union is ready to work with the
parties to the conflict as well as with the United States,
the other Quartet members and Arab partners to
achieve that goal. The EU welcomes the initial step
announced by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of
commitment to a peace that would include a
Palestinian State.
A durable solution to the Gaza crisis has to be
achieved through the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The European Union
remains gravely concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and calls for the immediate and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza. Reconstruction and economic recovery
has to be allowed. An effective mechanism to prevent
ammunitions smuggling into the Gaza Strip must also
be established. The European Union calls for a
complete stop to all violence, including a sustained halt
to rocket attacks on Israel. We reiterate our call on
those holding the abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit
to release him without delay.
The declared readiness of the Government of
Israel to promote Palestinian economic development is
a positive sign. We look forward to further and

7

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

sustained improvements in movement and access in all
of the occupied Palestinian territories. The Agreement
on Movement and Access of 2005 must be fully
implemented.
The European Union remains deeply concerned at
the continued settlement activities, house demolitions
and evictions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in East Jerusalem. We urge the Government
of Israel to end settlement activities immediately,
including so-called natural growth, and to dismantle all
outposts erected since March 2001. The EU reiterates
that the settlements are illegal under international law
and constitute an obstacle to peace. The European
Union will not recognize any changes to the pre-1967
borders other than those agreed by both parties.
The European Union is also very concerned about
the recent incidents in East Jerusalem. We have been
following closely the situation around the Al-Aqsa
mosque and Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
recent days. We urge all parties to refrain from any
provocative actions that could further inflame tensions
or lead to violence. Everyone must take action to avoid
escalation. If there is to be genuine peace, a way must
be found to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States.
The European Union expresses its continued
encouragement for inter-Palestinian reconciliation
behind President Mahmoud Abbas and its support for
the mediation efforts by Egypt and the League of Arab
States. Overcoming divisions among Palestinians
would help prevent a deeper separation between the
West Bank and Gaza and preserve the chances of
restoring the unity of a future Palestinian State. The
EU calls on all Palestinians to find common ground,
based on non-violence, in order to facilitate
reconstruction in Gaza and the organization of
elections. The EU urges Arab countries and other
partners to be forthcoming, both politically and
financially, in assisting the Palestinian Authority.
Underlining the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative, the EU reiterates its call on Israel and all
Arab countries to take confidence-building measures in
order to stimulate mutual trust and create an
atmosphere conducive to conflict resolution.
A lasting settlement of the conflicts between
Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon
should be pursued, creating mutually reinforcing
processes. In this regard, the EU expects Syria and

8

Israel to resume peace negotiations. The EU welcomes
the formation of a new Lebanese Government as soon
as possible.
The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict contains allegations
regarding
grave
violations
of
international
humanitarian law. As it has said in the Human Rights
Council, the EU is committed to assess the report and
its recommendations seriously. We will do so based on
the clear positions expressed by the European Union on
the conduct of the conflict and the importance the EU
that attaches to a durable peace. The EU deeply
deplores the loss of life during the Gaza conflict,
particularly the civilian casualties. The EU has
consistently reminded all parties to the conflict of their
obligations under international human rights and
humanitarian law.
One of the European Union’s overarching human
rights priorities is combating impunity. On this basis,
we call upon both parties to fully adhere to
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
European Union emphasizes the importance of
appropriate and credible investigations into possible
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by the parties to the
conflict in accordance with international standards,
noting that the Mission directs its recommendations to
both Israeli and Palestinian actors.
The Human Rights Council should ensure
appropriate follow-up, in particular by assessing
whether credible investigations have been conducted
by both sides. During the continued consideration in
the Human Rights Council, we will engage
constructively in the search for a consensual resolution.
The President: I call on the representative of
Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this opportunity to address the situation in the Middle
East — a crisis that dates back to the very beginning of
this Organization and has been the subject of countless
United Nations resolutions in this Council and in other
intergovernmental bodies. While there is a stated
commitment to lasting peace on the basis of a twoState solution, we have not seen a credible peace
process for quite some time now — that is a process
based on past resolutions and commitments and respect
for international law.

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

We reiterate our hope for a political solution that
provides for an independent and viable State of
Palestine living peacefully side by side with the State
of Israel, with secure and internationally recognized
borders. One of the prerequisites for such an outcome
is the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) of
this Council. Nine months after its adoption, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza still gives rise to
serious concern.
The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict submitted to the Human
Rights Council in Geneva gives a detailed account of
violations of international humanitarian law committed
by both parties to the conflict. We are concerned about
the findings of the report that indicate a systematic
disrespect for the principle of proportionality and grave
violations of international humanitarian law, including
deliberate attacks on civilian institutions that led to
massive civilian casualties.
The conclusion that some of the acts committed
may amount to crimes against humanity is particularly
disturbing to us. As a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, we fully subscribe
to the principle that national jurisdictions have primary
jurisdiction regarding such crimes and an obligation to
investigate and prosecute them. We therefore support
the recommendation of the Fact-Finding Mission that
the parties to the conflict establish, within a set
timeframe, independent investigations in conformity
with international standards, of serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Against that background, we welcome the pledges
made by both parties to investigate and prosecute the
alleged crimes.
We understand that this issue is again under
consideration by the Human Rights Council in Geneva,
which will convene in a special session tomorrow. But
we also believe that the Security Council has an
obligation in this respect. First, it must make it clear
that there is no choice between peace and justice. Quite
the contrary: measures taken to combat impunity will
contribute to a lasting political solution in the Middle
East, as accountability for serious crimes will promote
confidence in the peace process.
Furthermore, this Council must insist on respect
for the applicable rules of international humanitarian
law, without any exception. The laws of armed conflict
apply irrespective of the parties’ reasons for engaging

09-55901

in combat — be it to fight against terrorism or to fight
against foreign occupation. The protection of civilians
must always be the primary consideration — in
accordance with international humanitarian law and in
accordance with the most basic principles of humanity.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Group of Arab States, I congratulate you,
Sir, upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. It is an honour to inspiring
and friendly Viet Nam that we all welcome. We also
welcome warmly His Excellency, Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian Authority.
Israel has now become the subject of discussion
in the Security Council yet again, but not only because
of its despicable occupation of Palestine and other
Arab territories and its violation of all norms and total
disregard for the United Nations and its resolutions.
Israel has returned here, not through the door of the
separation wall that was condemned by the
international community or through its actions in
taking lives and destroying crops and other practices
that have been denounced in this Organization, but this
time through the gateway of its shameful violations
contained in the report by Judge Goldstone on Israel’s
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
through its barbaric campaign in Gaza.
This will not be the first or the last time in which
the Security Council will discuss the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. This
issue has been on the table of the Council for six
decades. In all of its aspects, it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, at a time when the
Security Council has been unable to assume its
responsibility to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
to withdraw from the Palestinian and Arab occupied
territories or to enable the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, and reach a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Palestinian question — which is the core of the
conflict in the Middle East.
However, today’s meeting acquires great and
distinct importance as it coincides with the release of
the Goldstone report. That represents a real challenge
to the credibility of the Security Council, as noted in

9

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

the request made to the Council last week by brotherly
Libya.
Israel’s war in Gaza was no secret. We all
witnessed it through the international media. Its
terrorization and murder of civilians have been the
subject of discussion everywhere. Israel launched a
destructive war against Gaza that killed and maimed
thousands of people, caused great destruction to
infrastructure and citizens’ property, and violated
international, international humanitarian and human
rights law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
Nevertheless, this Council has remained virtually
silent, having made no response other than to denounce
and express its concern about such actions, in spite of
the fact that Israeli violations against Palestinian
civilians have shocked the peace-loving people of the
world and all advocates of freedom, justice and human
rights. Israel’s actions have also placed a burden on the
Security Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security and to put an end to
this destructive war against Gaza and to the suffering
of its unarmed civilians.
In April this year, as everyone here knows, the
Human Rights Council established the Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict
“to investigate all violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law that might have been committed at any time
in the context of the military operations that were
conducted in Gaza during the period from
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, whether
before, during or after” (A/HRC/12/48, para. 1).
Since then, the Mission has implemented its
mandate with great professionalism, in accordance
with that request and reviewed all relevant materials
regarding the occupied Palestinian territories and
Israel. Wherever the Mission found a positive
response, Israel would not permit it to receive
assistance or cooperation from any party. This was not
the first time that Israel has interfered in the discharge
of legitimate international mandates, missions and
committees, or with cooperation with United Nations
bodies. Israel has always considered itself above the
law. This is the culture with which we are all familiar.
The Mission looked into many incidents and
conducted hundreds of personal interviews. It has
reviewed hundreds of reports and photographs, as well

10

as scores of video tapes. It has made field visits and
conducted investigations on the ground. It has talked to
victims, witnesses and other relevant people, and it has
reached a set of factual and legal conclusions that are
extremely important.
On the matter of the siege of Gaza, the report has
concluded that the behaviour of the Israeli occupation
forces represents a grave violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention by virtue of deliberate killings and
the infliction of inordinate suffering on civilians under
its authority. The report also concludes that the
deliberate targeting and arbitrary killing of Palestinian
civilians represent a violation of the right to life. The
report also indicates that the persecution of the
besieged people of Gaza under siege represents a crime
against humanity.
The Mission also looked into many cases in
which Israel has destroyed industrial infrastructure and
food production facilities, water storage facilities,
sanitation facilities, homes and even flour mills. It
concludes that the violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the excessive and illegal destruction, and
other grave violations committed undoubtedly
constitute war crimes.
With regard to the destruction of Government
installations and infrastructure, the report indicates that
the attacks against those targets were deliberate, as
were the attacks on civilian targets, in violation of
international humanitarian law. It also concludes that
there was a systematic policy by the Israeli armed
forces to target civilian sites and that, in addition to the
wide-scale destruction of homes, the Israeli army also
launched a campaign of barbaric destruction of civilian
installations during the final days of occupation and its
withdrawal from Gaza, which the report deems to be a
violation of the fundamental right of families to life
and dignity.
With regard to violations against civilians, the
Goldstone report also indicates that the behaviour of
the Israeli forces — particularly the relentless and
barbaric targeting, abuse, humiliation, persecution,
collective punishment and use of Palestinian civilians
as human shields — constitutes a grave violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and a war crime. The report
also clearly indicates that Israel knowingly ordered the
direct bombing of mosques and hospitals and that those
attacks represent deliberate aggression against civilian
inhabitants and installations.

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

What I have noted here is probably just a small
part of the truth and of the examples cited in the report.
The report cites crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed by Israel before, during and after the
war against Gaza, within the Gaza Strip and throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, and the imposition
checkpoints and restrictive measures against and
repression of the Palestinian population.
The Mission also concludes that the occupying
Power bears the responsibility for war crimes and
crimes against humanity and that the main reason for
those crimes and the suffering is the occupation itself.
The report indicates that
“Israel’s continuing occupation of the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank emerged as the fundamental
factor underlying violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law against the
protected population and undermining prospects
for development and peace. Israel’s failure to
acknowledge and exercise its responsibilities as
the occupying Power further exacerbated the
effects of occupation on the Palestinian people,
and continue to do so. Furthermore, the harsh and
unlawful practices of occupation, far from
quelling resistance, breed it, including its violent
manifestations. The Mission is of the view that
ending occupation is a prerequisite for the return
of a dignified life for Palestinians, as well as
development and a peaceful solution to the
conflict.” (ibid., para. 1897)
None of these Israeli measures has weakened the
resolve of the Palestinian people, which has stood fast
in demanding its right to dignified life. The Mission’s
report also indicates that “[t]he Mission was struck by
the resilience and dignity shown by people in the face
of dire circumstances” (ibid., para. 1898).
The Mission’s legal conclusions and citations of
violations put the Council in a position of historic
responsibility and require it to address these
conclusions and to support the resolute and steadfast
demand of the Palestinian people to its legitimate right
to self-determination, to establish its independent State
and to achieve a comprehensive and just peace,
including Israel’s withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of this Council and the General Assembly.
The very fact that some parties have been trying
to find a way to prevent the Goldstone report from

09-55901

being considered has sent the wrong message to Israel.
It was not enough for that country to launch a
destructive war against Gaza and its women and
children; it had to begin another war against Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, destroying homes, Judaizing the holy city
and continuing its settlement activities, its excavations
under the Al-Aqsa mosque and its siege against those
who pray there, in another catastrophe for the
Palestinian people.
We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility before it is too late and before it has to
meet again after the blood of martyrs has been spilled
and the cries of children and women have been heard
and their anguish seen. The situation in Jerusalem is
extremely grave, and Israel’s practices will unleash a
catastrophe. The Council must shoulder its
responsibility and respect its commitments by putting
an end to Israel’s excavations under the Al-Aqsa
mosque, the suffering of the people who pray there, the
destruction of homes, and above all else the
occupation.
Furthermore, the Arab Group wishes to reiterate
once again that all actions by Israel to alter the legal,
physical or demographic character of the occupied
Syrian Golan and all measures taken by Israel to
impose its legal authority there are null and void. We
also wish to emphasize once again that the building
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Syrian Golan constitute a challenge to the international
community and a grave violation of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations, the relevant
resolutions, including Security Council resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention. We call on
the members of the Security Council to shoulder their
responsibility by compelling Israel to comply with
resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
Syrian Golan to the borders of June 4 1967. We also
call for an Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Lebanese territories, including the Shaba’a farms, the
Kafr Shuba Hills and Al-Ghajar village.
From Israel’s assassination of United Nations
representative Count Bernadotte early in its occupation
of Palestine to its destruction of the homes of children
and schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Israel
has posed a grave threat to the peace and security of
the region and of the entire world, disregarding the
authority of this international Organization. The
Security Council bears a responsibility to restore the

11

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Organization’s credibility, which has been gravely
damaged by Israel, and should do so today, not
tomorrow. The Goldstone report provides the Council
with a final opportunity to restore that essential
credibility and to refute all claims that justice was
politicized in the report. Will the Council do that? We
hope so.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, a representative of the honourable people and
Government of Viet Nam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We are confident
that your leadership will make significant contributions
to the urgent issue before us. We thank the delegation
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, without whose
participation and initiative we would not be debating
this issue today.
We align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt, current Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement. It was a broad and principled
statement expressing the positions of our Movement on
all key issues related to the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. It was fully in
keeping with my country’s principled position, in
particular our recognition that Israel has not abandoned
its policies and practices aimed at perpetuating the
occupation of all Palestinian territories and other Arab
territories occupied in Syria and Lebanon; its ongoing
obstacles to serious peace negotiations in the Middle
East; its continued policy of building rather than
dismantling settlements; its ongoing blockade of Gaza;
its practices in violation of the status of Jerusalem; or
its reprehensible ethnic cleansing of that city’s
legitimate Arab and Palestinian inhabitants — all to
prevent the establishment of a Palestinian State and the
achievement of peace in the region.
There is a universal consensus in favour of
reversing this situation on the basis of negotiations and
the establishment of two States. Only Israel is opposed
to that consensus. The Security Council cannot
maintain its passive attitude of the past, allowing Israel
to manipulate the situation in the Middle East and to
perpetuate its occupation, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and all norms of international law.
Israel’s latest war crimes, committed during its

12

invasion of Gaza in December, exhausted the patience
of the international community.
In the light of this most recent crime against
humanity, the Human Rights Council, of which
Nicaragua is a member, decided to establish a factfinding mission, led by Judge Goldstone, to investigate
all violations of international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law that may have been
committed at any time in the context of the military
operations carried out by Israel in Gaza from
27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009.
The report (A/HRC/12/48) concludes, inter alia,
that serious violations of international law were clearly
committed by Israel during the conflict in Gaza and
that Israel committed acts that constitute war. The
report is yet further testimony to all the crimes
committed by Israel.
The recommendations of the Goldstone mission
should be followed by all United Nations organs, in
particular the Security Council, and all possible legal
measures should be taken to put a definitive end to all
of Israel’s human rights violations in the occupied
territories. The consideration of the report should result
in unequivocal action by the Security Council that puts
an end to Israel’s impunity and its practices and
policies of the past 60 years; it must also ensure the
necessary accountability and justice. The Security
Council would be an accomplice in the crimes
described in Judge Goldstone’s report if the decisions
necessary
for
the
implementation
of
its
recommendations were not adopted.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council
for convening this pertinent and timely meeting. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing. We wish in particular to welcome the
participation of Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority,
and to underscore the importance of the statement he
made this morning.
My delegation wishes also to associate itself with
the statements delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, speaking in

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

his capacity as Chair of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
Indonesia appreciates the thorough, analytical
and comprehensive report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone. Indonesia is
gravely concerned and dismayed over the findings of
the investigation. The report describes Israel’s
activities as a deliberate assault aimed at punishing,
humiliating and terrorizing a civilian population and
radically diminishing its local economic capacity. The
effect is to force upon the people of the Gaza Strip an
ever-increasing sense of dependency and vulnerability,
an excessive and disproportionate use of force, and a
policy of collective punishment. In short, Israel has
committed a variety of crimes, including war crimes, in
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
Israeli military operations in Gaza from
27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009 worsened the
already dire humanitarian situation there. Indeed, the
illegal blockade and closure of the Gaza crossings by
Israeli authorities persist. Their grave humanitarian
impact on the Palestinian people hardly needs
recalling. Not least are its damaging consequences in
further sowing the seeds of animosity and propelling
the cycle of violence in the region.
In this context, my delegation would like to
reaffirm in the clearest manner possible its outrage at
and strong condemnation of the military onslaught by
Israel in the Gaza Strip. We therefore commend the
Fact-Finding Mission for its recommendations and urge
all parties concerned to pay the utmost attention to the
report’s conclusions and follow up its recommendations
accordingly.
The Mission’s report states that Israel’s continued
occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
constitutes the fundamental factor underlying violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
and that ending the occupation is a prerequisite for the
restoration of a dignified life for the Palestinians, as
well as for development and a peaceful solution to the
conflict.
We are in full agreement with such observations.
The conflict in the Middle East has indeed been going
on for far too long. For 60 years, the illegal Israeli
occupation has made the region a theatre of tension and

09-55901

violence. The core issues — the status of East
Jerusalem, the borders of a Palestinian State, settlements
in the West Bank, Palestinian refugees, security and
water resources — remain unresolved. For many years
Indonesia has joined the international community in
drawing attention to the consequences of Israel’s
continued illegal activity in Arab occupied territories.
We therefore support the current surge in diplomacy
aimed at relaunching negotiations and jumpstarting a
comprehensive peace process, as demonstrated by
ongoing efforts, particularly those of the United States.
One of the core issues that require urgent
attention is Israeli settlement activities in the
Palestinian territory. Israel’s settlement policies and
practices, which have been aimed at altering the
demographic composition, physical character and
status of Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
are a blatant violation of international law. The
settlements are the greatest obstacle to the
establishment of a physically viable, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State, and thus to the
achievement of peace. This issue is intricately related
to nearly all other final-status issues.
If Israel has a genuine commitment to peace, it
must stop all settlement construction, expansion and
planning in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein. For these reasons, we attach
primary importance to the role of the Security Council
in responding to the settlement issue, as it did in 1980
through its resolution 465 (1980). The Security Council
must regain its role in resolving this very important
issue.
We also wish to urge the Palestinians who have
been involved in the reconciliation talks for many
months not to relent in those efforts, as facilitated by
Egypt. Palestinian unity is all the more crucial in the
face of the present challenges. In this regard, it is our
hope that, as they prepare to hold Palestinian Authority
presidential and parliamentary elections in January
2010, the negotiating factions will continue to focus on
the critical importance of unity among all Palestinians.
Finally, my delegation wishes once again to
express its concern over Israel’s ongoing land and air
violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty, in violation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). We call on
Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining occupied
Lebanese land, and we wish to make a similar call for

13

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan, in
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
The President: I now call on the representative
of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We wish to
congratulate you and your country, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. We welcome the opportunity to participate in
this debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council this
morning; we also wish to express our appreciation for
the presence of the Palestinian Foreign Minister and to
thank him for his statement.
The current situation in the Middle East should
be understood in the context of the ongoing Israeli
military occupation of the Palestinian territory and
other Arab territories, which dates back to 1967, and
the associated denial of the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people. Israel’s track record of
disregarding international law and the failure of the
Security Council to take any meaningful action in
response are the key factors contributing to the lack of
progress in the peace process. It is essential to the
maintenance of international peace and security that all
parties fully respect and meet their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law, and that the Security Council
discharge its mandate under the United Nations Charter
without selectivity or double standards.
South Africa condemns the continuing Israeli
blockade of Gaza and the ongoing construction and
expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. The continuing construction of the
separation wall and intensified home demolition
programmes that we are currently witnessing in East
Jerusalem constitute serious violations of international
law, as definitively clarified in the Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004. My
delegation is also concerned about the recent Israeli
provocations in East Jerusalem. These activities
undermine all efforts to achieve peace between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

14

The South African Government has condemned
the acts of aggression, as well as the gross and
systematic violations of human rights, in the occupied
Gaza Strip during the incursion by the Israeli Defense
Forces there in the latter part of December and earlier
this year, leading to massive loss of innocent lives and
the displacement of thousands of Palestinians. In an act
of disregard for its obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law and towards the
international community, the Israeli Defense Forces
attacked the school facilities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and destroyed Palestinian infrastructure. We
welcomed the decision of the Secretary-General to
establish and dispatch a Board of Inquiry to Gaza.
However, we regret that its findings and
recommendations have yet to be implemented.
The South African Government has studied the
report (A/HRC/12/48) of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict in detail. My
delegation wishes to acknowledge with appreciation
the outstanding manner in which Justice Richard
Goldstone and other members of the Mission
discharged their mandate under difficult circumstances.
South Africa unequivocally endorses the findings and
recommendations contained in the report. We reiterate
our full confidence in Justice Goldstone, recalling the
prominent role he played in our country’s transition to
democracy and his work on many other international
issues, including the International Criminal Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
As Justice Goldstone has said, “a culture of
impunity in the region has existed for too long. The
lack of accountability for war crimes and possible
crimes against humanity has reached a crisis point”.
We therefore call upon the Security Council to
discharge its Charter-mandated responsibilities with
respect to this crisis, which has gone on for far too
long.
This year marks the sixtieth year anniversary of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
commend UNRWA for its invaluable humanitarian and
development assistance to the Palestinian refugees over
the past six decades. South Africa remains committed
to contributing to the UNRWA General Fund on an
annual basis in recognition of the Agency’s invaluable
assistance to the most vulnerable Palestinians.

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

South Africa has consistently demonstrated our
unwavering support for the right of the Palestinian
people to a viable State of their own. We believe that a
vision of peaceful coexistence between Israelis and
Palestinians, based on the creation of a Palestinian
State coexisting peacefully alongside Israel on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is the only sustainable solution to this conflict.
We remain convinced that negotiations are the only
way to end the conflict and the occupation of the
Palestinian and other Arab territories.
South Africa continues to support a negotiated
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in line with
international resolutions and initiatives such as Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We look forward to a day
when the bloodshed ends and two States, Palestine and
Israel, are able to coexist in peace and security, within
internationally recognized borders.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express my congratulations to Viet Nam
for its presidency of the Council for the month of
October and to welcome the presence in this Chamber
of His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, continues to be marked by
violence and instability. The lack of respect for
international law by Israel, the occupying Power, and
its ongoing illegal occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories remain the major obstacles to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.
Cuba appreciates the presentation of the report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) — the Goldstone report. It is
an objective and legally rigorous document, drafted
with professionalism and impartiality.
Israel’s rejection of the conclusions of the FactFinding Mission and its reluctance to cooperate in their
implementation corroborate that Government’s lack of
respect for the will of the overwhelming majority of
the international community and its disregard, once
again, for General Assembly and Security Council

09-55901

resolutions and decisions. In addition, it continues to
enforce a criminal blockade against the population of
Gaza.
With its military aggression of last December and
January, Israel not only flagrantly violated
international law, including its legal obligations as the
occupying Power, but also perpetrated war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Those responsible for those
barbarous acts have not been prosecuted and remain
unpunished. Such impunity is possible only because of
the protection that Israel receives from the superpower
that continues to supply the financial resources and
armaments with which Israel carries out its aggressive
policy.
The Mission has confirmed that both the previous
blockade and the aggression against the Gaza Strip
constitute a form of collective punishment against the
Palestinian population in Gaza, and that they were
conceived for that very purpose by the authorities of
Israel.
The report not only provides evidence of Israel’s
numerous violations of international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction and
proportionality; it also demonstrates that there was a
clear intention to attack civilian objectives, as
evidenced by the order given to soldiers to make no
distinction between military and civilian targets.
The devastating machinery of war of the
occupying Power destroyed everything in its path. In
addition to the more than 1,400 deaths — including
more than 300 children — caused by these acts of
aggression, schools, hospitals, houses, public
buildings, food supply facilities, water purification
systems, factories and the economic infrastructure in
general were irrationally destroyed. That was done
with the clear intention of making life increasingly
difficult for the Palestinian people, undermining their
dignity, plunging them into terror, radically reducing
their capacity for development and increasing their
dependence and vulnerability.
We must also not forget that this is not the only
report that very clearly documents the barbarity of the
occupying Power in Gaza. Suffice it to recall that the
report of the mission sent by the Secretary-General to
investigate the attacks on United Nations premises in
the Gaza Strip produced identical conclusions. Cuba
strongly condemns those acts and urges the international

15

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

community to ensure that those responsible are
prosecuted with the severity these crimes require.
Likewise, we once again call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to put an end to all its violations of
the rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
scrupulously abide by its obligations under
international
law,
particularly
international
humanitarian law and human rights norms.
In serious violation of international law and in
contradiction with the objectives of the peace process,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its illegal
construction of settlements and of the wall along the
West Bank, especially in and around East Jerusalem.
That makes the present situation unstable and
dangerous, with the illegal acts of incitement,
provocation and aggression carried out by extremist
settlers against the population and sacred sites.
Cuba remains concerned about the huge physical,
economic and social devastation caused by these illegal
and destructive colonization practices, which have
grave ramifications for the peace process.
Cuba reaffirms that all measures or actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, with the
purpose of modifying the legal, physical and
demographic situation or the institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, and Israeli measures to
impose jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect.
We also reaffirm that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter, United Nations
resolutions — including Council resolution 497
(1981) — and the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well
as a challenge to the international community. Cuba
demands that Israel withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.
We hope that current and future efforts
undertaken by the international community put an end
to the Israel’s occupation of all Arab territories since
1967. We are convinced that the independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, will
become a reality sooner rather than later.
The President: I call on the representative of
Pakistan.

16

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your skilful steering of this Council and express our
gratitude to you for convening this meeting.
I should like to welcome Mr. Al-Malki to the
Security Council. It is a pleasure to have him with us. I
should also like to thank Mr. Lynne Pascoe in absentia
for starting the meeting off this morning.
It would not be unjust to say that we associate
ourselves completely and wholeheartedly with the
statements made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement and by the
representative of Syria on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference.
It has been a long-held common objective of the
international community to find a comprehensive peace
in the Middle East. Earlier this year, this Chamber
witnessed discussions at length on this very subject
and, in fact, it is a very sad statement on what we are
doing here today that we continue to discuss the same
subject, with all its very important components and
aspects that create for the international community a
problematic situation that just does not go away but
festers and festers.
The consequences of our inadequate response
create, to my mind, a situation wherein the people of
the area wait endlessly for social justice and for the
rights and causes which they uphold as completely
principled to be given in effect some recognition by
this Chamber. Unfortunately, that has not yet happened,
and as we sit here today, we express our serious
concerns over the ongoing humanitarian situation in
Gaza and the West Bank, where the people endure
threats to their lives, liberty and livelihoods. The
closure of Gaza’s borders to the free flow of people
and commerce has strangulated the local economy and
public services and is a continuing threat to human
security.
Amidst this great human tragedy, when I spoke
here last year I reminded the people of Israel of their
background, their culture and their deep belief in
taking the right path. I said to them, and repeat here
again today, that the magnificent report (A/HRC/12/48)
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict, headed by Mr. Goldstone, speaks
volumes about what people can achieve if they rise
above it all and wish to see the entire situation from
above, and not just subjectively. I think the report, in

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

the manner in which it reflects the situation, deserves
commendation by this house. It deserves to be
commended and read in complete understanding and
without reservation, because it speaks in a very strong
and truthful voice.
If this house will not recognize the great work on
the subject put together by its own rapporteurs, let me
say that not much of what the report describes is
unknown to us. We have spent months deliberating on
these issues in committee and in this Council Chamber,
but all I can say is that we do not somehow seem to
have the eyes to read, the ears to hear or the lips to
speak.
I believe that while we speak to condemn what is
happening, we must also be more progressive and try
to move beyond this phase. I should like to raise before
this house today issues that can re-engage this Council,
and I would set out four parameters for its
consideration that should, in a way, be beneficial to the
working of this house.
First, the Security Council, especially its five
permanent members, should show the political will to
achieve real progress towards peace and security in the
Middle East. It is important that the Council seek firm
commitments from relevant parties to relaunching
negotiations aimed at achieving the two-State solution.
To start afresh, we do not have to reinvent the wheel.
The framework for peace is already determined in the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as well as
in the Madrid terms of reference, the Road Map, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the understandings reached
in Annapolis in 2007.
Secondly, the Middle East Quartet must utilize
the full potential of its statement of 24 September 2009
and support the peace process through a transparent
and objective engagement.
Thirdly, there is a pressing urgency to address the
humanitarian plight in the Palestinian territories and to
rebuild the Palestinian institutions battered by conflict
and violence. We must support the efforts to achieve
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is also a
prerequisite for credible and comprehensive peace. We
urge our Palestinian brothers to put aside their
differences and pool their energies in the pursuit of
peace.
Lastly, to achieve a lasting settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, it is imperative to address its root

09-55901

cause, which is the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories. The solution therefore requires Israel’s
complete withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and other occupied
Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan. Israel
should also immediately cease all settlement activities.
Crucial to this equation would be parallel progress on
the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel tracks in order to
achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
It is the sincere belief of my delegation that a
sustained engagement by the international community
and the Security Council on the parameters I have
outlined will lead to the political settlement that we
have long hoped for and dreamed of.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for having convened this meeting and for inviting
us to participate in the Security Council’s discussion of
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, following the issuance of the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48).
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
and thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.
The destructive invasion of Gaza, the policy of
blockade that has deprived its people of their basic
necessities, and the violation of their basic rights
guaranteed under international treaties and instruments
prompted the international community to send the
Fact-Finding Mission to Gaza, under the chairmanship
of Judge Goldstone. The Mission was inspired by
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, as well as by the commitment of States,
especially those occupying other countries, to the
principle that occupying authorities bear responsibility
for violations against civilian populations. The report
concluded that Israel deliberately targeted civilians in
Gaza during its invasion, using them as human shields.
These practices constitute war crimes under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The use of disproportionate force, acts of
aggression against civilians, the destruction of private
property and civilian infrastructure are all forms of

17

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

illegal behaviour, and such acts run counter to
international law as well as the Charter of the United
Nations.
Every time a decision is taken or a report is
drawn up on its practices, Israel behaves as if it were
above the law. This situation of unaccountability
unfortunately allows impunity to prevail and
undermines the credibility of the United Nations. It is
high time for the Security Council to put an end to this
culture of protecting Israel from the consequences of
its actions in the region, and it is high time to bring to
justice the perpetrators of violations of the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to put an end to Israel’s
impunity.
The Fact-Finding Mission concluded that the
grave violations of international humanitarian law fall
within the remit of the ICC and underscored its belief
that there was a need to take specific measures to end
impunity, which would stand as guarantees against the
repetition of such practices in the future, contribute to
putting an end to violence against civilians and
promote and maintain peace. The objective of the
report is to ensure that the perpetrators of war crimes
are brought to justice, and such an objective does not
hinder efforts to make peace.
Respect for international humanitarian law cannot
serve as an obstacle to peace, and peace cannot run
counter to the respect of the rights of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories. We thus
call for the implementation of the recommendations of
the report.
In addition to its aggression against Gaza, Israel
continues its policy aimed at Judaizing Jerusalem by
confiscating land, expelling its inhabitants, isolating
the city, stepping up settlement activity in and around
Jerusalem and building a separation wall.
Israeli practices in the Holy City continue,
excavation work is under way and the Arabic-Islamic
character of Jerusalem is being changed. Jerusalem and
Al-Aqsa are of special importance and significance to
all Arabs and Muslims, and they form a red line that
cannot be stepped over.
We are stunned by the silence of the Security
Council in the face of Israel’s behaviour and its actions
against the city in violating its Holy Sites and in
attempting to Judaize it. We ask the Security Council to

18

respect its obligations and put a freeze on Israel’s
settlement policy and its policy to Judaize Jerusalem.
The Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable to
both Jerusalem and all of the occupied Palestinian
territories. The core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
lies in the occupation by Israel of Palestinian and Arab
territories. As a result of this occupation, our region
has suffered a number of wars and a number of
tragedies and crises. All attempts to find peace in
previous years have failed owing to the intransigent
position of Israel and the fact that it does not take the
peace process seriously.
The situation in the Middle East is in a critical
phase. Efforts are under way to restore peace through
negotiations and to find a just and lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian and Arab-Israeli conflicts, in
accordance with international law and the Arab Peace
Initiative. If these efforts are not successful, the
impasse could lead to a deterioration of the situation, a
resumption of violence and instability in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Paul
Badji, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): In my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, allow me,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. I am confident that under your able
leadership the work of the Council will be successfully
carried out.
I wish also to take this opportunity, Sir, to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Susan
Rice, Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, on the efficient and exemplary manner in
which she steered the work of the Council during the
month of September.
I would like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Security Council His Excellency
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian Authority, and express my appreciation to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his report.
On behalf of the Committee, I would like to
express my appreciation for the convening of this
extremely important debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, which

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

continues to be a burning issue. In my statement today
I shall not belabour the issue of how many times over
the years the Council has taken up issues related to the
status of Jerusalem nor of how effective its
intervention has been. But I shall certainly call on the
Council to follow up this monthly discussion with a
concrete decision that would help to bring about an
appreciable and positive change on the ground and
thereby move the political process forward.
The Council’s latest decision on the issue,
resolution 1860 (2009), dated 8 January 2009, spelled
out a number of necessary steps in that direction.
Regrettably, they have, for the most part, remained
unfulfilled. The situation in Gaza is still devastating.
Reconstruction work has not yet begun. Israel
continues its blockade of the territory. There are at
present no signs that a genuine political dialogue, let
alone serious negotiations on all permanent status
issues between Israel and the Palestinian Governments,
is about to begin.
This situation allows the illegal Israeli occupation
of Palestinian land to perpetuate. Settlement
construction in the occupied West Bank continues, with
hundreds of new housing units being built and new
construction projects approved by the Israeli occupiers.
The situation in occupied East Jerusalem is
deteriorating by the day. Only last week, the Bureau of
our Committee issued a statement in which it expressed
alarm at the serious worsening of the situation in East
Jerusalem and called attention to the ongoing
demolition of houses, expulsion of Palestinian
residents, construction of settlements and transfer of
settlers aimed at altering the status, physical nature and
demography of the holy city.
The Bureau stated that those policies and actions
constitute violations of international law and that the
occupying Power must immediately put an end to
them. Those policies and those actions have also
invalidated the considerable efforts made by the
Quartet and its partners to give fresh momentum to the
permanent status negotiations. Moreover, they have
again called into question the credibility of the official
statements of the Israeli Government regarding its will
to resume serious negotiations towards reaching a twoState solution.
As our Committee has underscored on numerous
occasions, the continuing occupation of the Palestinian
territories, which embrace the Gaza Strip and the West

09-55901

Bank, including East Jerusalem, is a violation of
international humanitarian law. The relevance of the
Fourth Geneva Convention to the Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian territory has been confirmed by the high
contracting parties and by the Security Council. The
military invasion of Gaza by the Israeli army during
Operation Cast Lead demonstrated that Israel flouts its
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian law. That is also borne out by the number
of dead and wounded among the population of the
Gaza Strip, mainly civilians, and by the extensive and
deliberate destruction of property and infrastructure.
The international community reacted promptly
and unanimously to the violations carried out in Gaza.
Several fact-finding missions have been dispatched by
different international bodies in recent months in order
to establish the facts surrounding the events of
December 2008 and January 2009. The results of those
inquiries have brought to light a very large number of
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, and even war crimes, committed by both
parties to the conflict. Civil society organizations have
drawn up reports that all conclude that egregious
violations of international law were indeed committed.
Our Committee has commended the work of
those fact-finding missions and supported calls for
accountability. Last July in Geneva, our Committee
convened the United Nations International Meeting on
the Question of Palestine, which brought together
renowned international experts and the representatives
of Member States and of intergovernmental and civil
society organizations. The participants in that meeting
called for the implementation of the recommendations
of all United Nations fact-finding missions and urged
all States to honour their commitments under the
Geneva Conventions and other legal instruments.
On 15 September, the United Nations FactFinding Mission, established by the Human Rights
Council and chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone,
presented its report on the Gaza conflict
(A/HRC/12/48). It is a very comprehensive document
that merits thorough study. The report ends with a set
of recommendations, some of which are directed at the
parties to the conflict, some to the international
community and others both to the parties to the conflict
and to the international community. Those
recommendations should be considered by the
competent bodies and given the necessary follow-up.

19

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Our Committee believes that the perpetrators of
serious crimes, whatever side they may be on, must be
brought to justice and held accountable for their acts.
The Committee calls for resolute action by the
international community to ensure full and complete
adherence to and respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law. In particular, the Committee asks the
high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention immediately to fulfil their obligations
under common article 1 to the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which requires the high contracting
parties to respect the Convention and ensure respect for
it in all circumstances.
The United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council, should be invited to consider what steps to
take to effectively address violations of international
law. A negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has to be based on the principles of
international law, which must be scrupulously
observed.
The international legal system can achieve its
purpose only by ensuring respect for international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law. Indeed, international justice can be restored only if
all actors of the international community are resolved
to end impunity by calling for the perpetrators of
violations of international law to answer for their
actions. The Security Council, which, under the terms
of the United Nations Charter, is charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
take the lead role in that vitally important undertaking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Idd (United Republic of Tanzania): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. The Security Council’s
consideration of this matter demonstrates its
determination to seek a lasting solution for peace and
security in the Middle East region. Tanzania aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The statements made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine and the Permanent Representative
of Israel show that both parties want peace and security
in the Middle East region. The only remaining issue is
how to conclude the ongoing process so as to achieve

20

that goal. My delegation welcomes the various efforts
made by the United Nations, the European Union, the
United States, the Russian Federation, Egypt and other
regional players in their different initiatives, searching
for durable peace and security in the region.
Tanzania reiterates its concern with regard to the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as a result of continuing unlawful
activities by Israel. In particular, we are very
concerned by the ongoing Israeli actions in support of
illegal settlements in the heart of East Jerusalem. We
urge the Israeli Government to lift the embargo it has
imposed on Palestinians and to open without delay all
border crossings to allow the free movement of goods
and persons and, most importantly, humanitarian
assistance for the Palestinian civilians.
We call upon the international community, in
particular the Security Council, to fulfil its
responsibilities and to take the necessary action to
pressure Israel, the occupying Power, to act in
accordance with all of its legal obligations and
commitments under the Quartet Road Map as
enshrined in resolution 1515 (2003). We encourage all
parties involved in the process to exercise restraint,
observe a permanent ceasefire and embark on sincere
dialogue to negotiate the implementation of the Road
Map. In that regard, we urge the leadership on both
sides of the conflict to avoid inflammatory statements
and stop all forms of violence, especially against
innocent civilians, such as women and children.
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the peace process and the right
of the Palestinians to regain their fundamental rights,
including the right to existence as an independent State
living in peace and security side by side with Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): The situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory remains of grave concern
and continues to threaten stability far beyond the
region. Although Operation Cast Lead has ended, the
people of Gaza remain besieged by limited freedom of
movement, import restrictions on even the most basic
necessities, the near-total prohibition of export, and the
reversal of economic development. For the ordinary
civilians of Gaza, the situation remains unacceptable
by international standards.

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Meanwhile, the closure regime is still operating
in the West Bank. Iceland remains deeply concerned by
the continued house demolitions, evictions and
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem. An immediate
end must be put to settlements and impunity. The
prolonged climate of impunity has created a crisis of
justice in the occupied Palestinian territory that needs
to be addressed.
Iceland fully recognizes Israel’s legitimate
security concerns, including over weapons smuggling
and the unacceptable firing of rockets from Gaza,
which destroy and endanger the lives of innocent
civilians. At the same time, such violations do not
justify the disproportionate use of force or the
breaching of international humanitarian and human
rights law.
The comprehensive report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48) has concluded that there is evidence
indicating serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law committed both by Israel
during Operation Cast Lead and in the West Bank, as
well as by Palestinian armed groups in their repeated
launching of rockets into southern Israel. The report
deserves serious consideration and follow-up. The
conclusions drawn require concrete action and the
establishment of a credible system of investigation into
the alleged violations. Every Member State must
commit itself to full cooperation with the United
Nations.
Iceland deems it imperative that every effort be
made to bring the human tragedy in the occupied
Palestinian territory to an end through negotiations and
mediation. The international community must step up
pressure on both sides and revitalize the peace process.
More needs to be done, in particular by the Security
Council, through a concerted effort to actively further
the goal of ending the occupation and achieving a twoState solution, which is a prerequisite for durable
peace. The political momentum that has been created
must not be allowed to fade.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity for Switzerland to express its views on the
situation in the Middle East. That region continues to

09-55901

be prey to strong tensions that give rise to instability
and suffering, in particular among the civilian
population. The difficulty of forming a Government in
Lebanon, in spite of the free and transparent elections
held there in June, and the precarious status of the
ceasefire between Israel and the Gaza Strip are both
strong indicators of this recurrent instability.
Switzerland expresses its serious concern with
regard to the situation prevailing throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory. It has proved impossible
to achieve any significant progress towards a
sustainable response to the humanitarian situation in
Gaza or the reconstruction and economic development
needs of its population. We also note that Israel is not
honouring its obligations under international law and
that the construction of settlements, including in East
Jerusalem, continues in contravention of the law.
Recent events in relation to the Temple
Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as well as consideration of
the report (A/HRC/12/48) of the independent United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
from December 2008 to January 2009, demonstrate the
need for a resumption of the peace talks and the
urgency of finding a negotiated solution to the conflict.
Switzerland welcomes the Goldstone Mission’s
investigation of the allegations of violations committed
by all the parties. However, we are preoccupied by the
Mission’s finding that very serious crimes were
committed by the various parties in the context of the
conflict in Gaza. It would be irresponsible not to
follow up that finding.
It is vital that all parties to the conflict adopt
forthwith the measures necessary to launch
independent inquiries in conformity with international
standards. They bear primary responsibility to follow
up. If the parties to the conflict are unable or unwilling
to meet their obligation to bring to justice those
suspected of having committed serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, it is
up to the international community to ensure that such
violations do not go unpunished.
In our view, it is essential, first, to urge the
parties to the conflict to adopt the appropriate
measures, within a specified time frame, to open
independent inquiries that meet international standards;
and, secondly, to consider the establishment of an
independent committee of international humanitarian

21

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

law and human rights experts to supervise any judicial
proceeding undertaken by the parties to the conflict.
To conclude, the quest for a negotiated solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can never be imposed to
the detriment of the main goal of seeking justice and
fighting impunity. Following up the Goldstone Mission
in a serious way would indicate the international
community’s will to actively promote a lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The fight against impunity is, however, just one
component of this solution. Intra-Palestinian
reconciliation remains a cornerstone of the
construction of a future Palestinian State. We
encourage the parties involved to make a credible
commitment to the efforts under way. Moreover,
nothing can replace direct negotiations between the
parties. My country can only encourage them to return
to the negotiating table. The Geneva initiative offers a
model solution and, with its recently completed
annexes, a practical instrument for putting in place a
peace accord. This important work accomplished by
civil society could thus inspire these discussions and
the settlement of the conflict.
The President: I give
representative of Bangladesh.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and all others concerned for convening
this important meeting. I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing this morning on recent developments in the
Middle East, including Palestine.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt as the Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In addition, I would like to highlight the
following points.
Bangladesh has always been committed to the
cause of Palestine. It maintains solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their just and legitimate struggle
for self-determination and statehood. Our solidarity
with the Palestinian cause and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are
consistent and unwavering. Bangladesh reiterates its
long-standing position that the continued occupation of
Palestine is the root cause of violence, unrest and
destabilization in the region. The people of Palestine
are being denied their fundamental rights to

22

self-determination and to live freely in their own land.
We believe that the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital is
the only sustainable solution to this long-lasting
conflict.
Bangladesh condemns Israel’s illegal settlement
in the occupied Palestinian territory, which undermines
the Palestinian territory’s unity and contiguity. All
concerned parties should call for an immediate freeze
on the expansion of Jewish settlements, as well as the
dismantling of the existing ones in the occupied
territories. Such injustice cannot be allowed to
continue and must be rolled back in the interest of the
free movement of people and access of the
humanitarian agencies. It is necessary to rededicate
ourselves to the Palestinian cause of self-determination
and statehood, and to work together to bring this
aspiration to fruition.
We need to seize every opportunity and take
measures so that Israel and its patrons comply with the
relevant United Nations resolutions on Palestine. It is
regrettable to note that the key elements of resolution
1860 (2009) remain unfulfilled. The United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, must undertake
the necessary measures to ensure the full and effective
implementation of that resolution. The continuous
defiance and blatant disregard demonstrated by the
occupying Power against international law should be
addressed by all concerned, including the Security
Council and the international community. Effective
measures should be taken to oblige the occupier to
comply with international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map.
It is disturbing to note the recent attacks by Israel
against Palestinian worshippers at the Islamic holy
sites of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa mosque in
occupied East Jerusalem. These attacks are no doubt
provocative, considering the volatile situation in the
occupied city. We feel that it is necessary to draw
attention to the report (A/HRC/12/48) of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
known as the Goldstone report.
Furthermore, the conclusions of the SecretaryGeneral’s Board of Enquiry also need serious
consideration. According to the report of the FactFinding Mission, Israel imposed a blockade and
conducted a systematic policy of isolation and

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

deprivation against the people of the Gaza Strip. The
report further says that Israeli military activities were
directed at the civilian population of Gaza. As per the
recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission, in this
situation it is necessary for the Security Council to
adopt appropriate measures to address the acute
adversity of the people of Gaza.
Bangladesh firmly believes that a comprehensive
and just peace settlement is the key to peace in the
Middle East. The relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Middle East Road
Map can be viewed as the guiding principles in this
regard. Moreover, the recommendations of the FactFinding Mission need to be taken seriously into
account. Bangladesh hopes that all parties involved
will take a pragmatic approach to this issue in order to
ensure the early implementation of the Road Map for
peace in the Middle East. We would not wish to see the
global community blamed for and ashamed of not
implementing the fair, judicious and humane Road
Map for Palestine.
The President: I give
representative of Malaysia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
this Council and express how pleased we are at seeing
you preside over this meeting. We also thank you for
convening this meeting and for inviting the larger
membership of the United Nations to participate in this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question on Palestine. My delegation also
wishes to align itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Egypt and Syria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively.
The situation in the Middle East, particularly in
the occupied Palestinian territory, is perilous and
precarious. Urgent, decisive action is needed,
particularly by this Council, to stabilize the situation
and to restart the peace process, leading to a
comprehensive and just solution.
The war unleashed by Israel on Gaza in late
December 2008 further exacerbated the situation. It has
been almost a year now since the establishment of the
fragile ceasefire and since this Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1860 (2009), which, among other
things, called for free access of humanitarian aid and
other essential and commercial supplies, as well as

09-55901

necessary construction materials to and from Gaza, to
alleviate the suffering of the people there. Yet this is
far from happening, and nothing has been done to
ensure its implementation. The people in Gaza,
particularly women, children and the elderly, continue
to suffer from Israeli actions to prevent much-needed
essentials from reaching them. Does this not warrant
any action from this Council to ensure the
implementation of its own unanimously adopted
resolution?
At the same time, the Board of Inquiry set up by
the Secretary-General and the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict established by
the Human Rights Council have found Israel
responsible for the death and destruction in Gaza and
for material breaches of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
We
fully
support
the
findings
and
recommendations of both the Board of Inquiry and the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48), especially on the
need for full investigation by relevant authorities in
pursuing possible charges of war crimes and crimes
against humanity. On this note, too, we wonder why
the Council has been silent on the Board of Inquiry’s
report, despite its having been presented to the Council
several months ago. Does it not warrant any action
from the Council, or is the Council waiting for the
Goldstone report to further substantiate the Board of
Inquiry’s findings?
We are alarmed by the increasing incidents of
violence and attacks against Palestinians by Israeli
illegal settlers. We are dismayed by the reluctance of
the Israeli authorities to prevent such acts, which have
further worsened the already volatile situation in the
occupied territories, particularly occupied East
Jerusalem. We urge the Council to take decisive action
to compel Israel to cease all provocative actions,
including those aimed at altering the demographic and
geographic characteristics and the status of East
Jerusalem and the occupied Palestinian territory.
We need to seriously focus our energy and efforts
on restoring to the Palestinians their inalienable rights,
including their right to an independent State. All
parties must act in earnest and with sincerity to attain
the objective of a just and lasting solution to the
problem in the Middle East. We again urge the Security
Council to take the actions necessary to restore peace
and stability to the Middle East.

23

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now call on the representative
of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador reaffirms once again its position on the
Middle East conflict: full respect for the norms and
principles of international law, in particular with regard
to the peaceful settlement of disputes; condemnation of
the use or threat of use of force; compliance with
international treaties and agreements; and strict
compliance with resolutions of the United Nations and
its organs. In that connection, we support the
resolutions of the Security Council.
My delegation once again condemns the acts of
violence in the Middle East, which clearly violate
international law and prevent the achievement of a
global and comprehensive solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict — and, ultimately, the Arab-Israeli
conflict — within the framework of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and in accordance with the norms
and principles of international law.
We also condemn the military operations in the
Gaza Strip, which claimed many human lives —
particularly among women and children — and caused
extensive material damage. In addition to those
military actions, the blockade imposed on the
Palestinian territories has aggravated the suffering and
destruction of a people fighting to achieve a sovereign
and independent State. It was precisely those actions
that led the President of the Human Rights Council to
establish the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict.
Ecuador notes the recommendations set out in the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48) to various United
Nations organs, Israel, the competent Palestinian
authorities and the international community with
respect to accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian law, reparations, serious
violations of human rights law, the blockade and
reconstruction, the use of weapons and military
procedures, the protection of human rights
organizations and defenders, and follow-up to the
Mission’s recommendations. Ecuador also notes with
concern Israel’s scant support for the Mission of the
Human Rights Council, as referred to in the Goldstone
report.
Finally, Ecuador joins in the demand of the
international community that the conflict be resolved
with respect for the right of the Palestinian and Israeli

24

peoples to live in peace and security as sovereign and
independent States within secure and recognized
borders. We urge the parties to seek to contribute to the
resumption of a dialogue that, through strict and
effective compliance with their commitments, may lead
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by expressing our sincere thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely and
important meeting. We would also like to express our
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his proposal that this
meeting of the Security Council be held to consider the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48). We commend the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Arab Group and other Member
States for supporting Libya’s proposal.
Less than a year ago, the military machine of the
Israeli occupier regime created an unprecedented,
horrific human tragedy in the Gaza Strip, which
resulted in the strangulation and slaughter of the
innocent and defenceless people of Gaza, especially
women and children, for more than 20 consecutive
days. The Zionist regime, which knows nothing about
respect for humanity and human rights, also targeted
each and every human being, house and infrastructure
in the Gaza Strip and resorted to unimaginable criminal
acts, such as the bombardment of innocent children and
women sheltered in buildings declared safe by the
United Nations. By committing those barbaric crimes,
the Israeli regime once again challenged the credibility
of the international community and the civilized world,
in particular the United Nations and the Security
Council, and undermined the most basic values for
which the civilized world stands.
During the Gaza crisis, a majority of Member
States were unanimous in calling on the United Nations
and the Security Council to take all measures necessary
to put an immediate end to the brutal and callous
crimes perpetrated by the Israeli regime in Gaza. The
Islamic Republic of Iran, together with many other
Member States, firmly urged the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, to take urgent
measures to stop the Israeli attacks, which bore all the

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

characteristics of collective punishment, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
We supported the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council calling for, inter alia,
condemnation of the Israeli regime’s military
operations in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in the Gaza Strip; the immediate cessation
of the Israeli regime’s military attacks throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip; and the immediate withdrawal of its military
forces from the Gaza Strip. Likewise, we strongly
supported the Council in its decision to dispatch an
urgent independent international Fact-Finding Mission
to investigate all violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law
committed by the Israeli occupying Power against the
Palestinian people throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip.
As members are aware, in the absence of any
effective measure on the part of the Security Council,
the Human Rights Council mandated Judge Richard
Goldstone to lead a team to investigate those crimes
and to report to the Council. Despite the fact that the
Goldstone report was issued rather late and reflects
only partial and minimal aspects of the various crimes
committed by the Israeli regime in Gaza, it contains
important recommendations for the Security Council,
including, inter alia, a request that the Council require
the Israeli regime to report to it within six months on
the investigations and prosecutions that it should carry
out with regard to the violations identified by the
Mission.
We strongly echo the voices of wakeful
consciences throughout the world, including the
majority of Member States, in calling on the United
Nations to take decisive action concerning the crimes
of the Zionist regime in Gaza, including those
described in the Goldstone report. We also believe that
the recommendations contained in the report should be
considered a valid basis for the prosecution of those
Israeli politicians, military commanders, personnel and
citizens who were involved in the Gaza massacre.
We should act collectively to demonstrate our
unqualified support for the cause of Palestine, on the
one hand, and to save the image and the credibility of
the United Nations, on the other. We must resolutely
combine our strong political will in order to prove to
our nations that the Organization never appeases

09-55901

oppressors and that there can be no impunity for those
who have committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
We must work hard to confront the crimes revealed
in the report and prevent the application of double
standards in the process of bringing the criminals to
justice. There is no doubt that this meeting’s response to
the report will convey a clear message to various
audiences — first, to the international community as a
whole, concerning the effectiveness and efficiency of the
United Nations system in maintaining international peace
and security; secondly, to the perpetrators of crimes such
as these, concerning the level of seriousness with which
we confront their criminal acts; and thirdly, to the
victims of war crimes, who deserve fair and adequate
support from competent regional and international
organizations.
That being said, it is expected that the Security
Council, in line with its responsibility to uphold and
protect international peace and security, will take the
recommendations of the Goldstone report fully into
account. We consider this meeting to be a true test of
the Council’s credibility and reliability, and sincerely
hope to see it move in the right direction. If it does not,
we cannot expect the world, especially the victims of
the heinous crimes perpetrated in Gaza by the Israeli
regime, to keep believing in the United Nations and
other international organizations as their best source of
support.
I wish to reject the baseless allegations that the
representative of the Zionist regime made in her
statement against my country this morning. Needless to
say, the allegations represent yet another smear
campaign by that regime in its vain attempts to divert
attention from its own nuclear arsenals, State terrorism
and atrocities in the region.
Before concluding, I wish to reiterate the
unwavering support of my people and my Government
for the Palestinian people in their rightful and
legitimate efforts to exercise their right to
self-determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak in this second open debate of your
presidency. We very much appreciate the opportunity
to contribute to the Council’s consideration of such

25

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

vital matters in this way. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing, and
to welcome the participation in the debate of Foreign
Minister Al-Malki.

peace. Israel must halt settlement activity and work to
normalize the day-to-day life of Palestinians. In turn,
the Palestinians must continue to dismantle terrorist
infrastructure and halt violence and incitement.

Many countries today have spoken about the
conflict in Gaza and southern Israel in December and
January. We spoke in this Council during that conflict,
and we were deeply saddened by the tragic events.
Australia supports Israel’s right to self-defence, and
supports it strongly. Rocket attacks must cease.

We commend the United States efforts and the
commitment of President Obama and his team, and we
call on the parties to resume negotiations urgently. The
ongoing positive engagement of the broader
international community, including the Quartet
members and the countries of the region, is clearly also
essential. As we have said previously, we recognize
and value the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.

This does not alter, however, our fundamental
concern over the humanitarian situation of the civilians
of Gaza before, during and after the conflict. We called
on parties during the conflict to avoid actions which
caused unnecessary suffering to civilians, and we call
on the parties now to act to prevent the continuing
humanitarian crisis — a situation that is unacceptable.
We call for border controls to be eased. Equally, arms
smuggling must stop. During the conflict, Australia
said consistently that all parties had to do everything
they could, legally and morally, to ensure that civilian
casualties were avoided. Australia has also made it
clear, at the time and since then, that it supported a
proper investigation of any allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
It is crucial that such matters be dealt with
seriously and carefully. For this reason, Australia again
calls on the parties to undertake the proper
investigation of the allegations that have been made
concerning all violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. We outlined in Geneva
on 29 September our preference that consideration of
the report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission
on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) remain within the
Human Rights Council to allow the parties time to
pursue those investigations.
The ineluctable lesson that must be drawn from
the Gaza conflict is that a lasting resolution of the
Israel-Palestinian dispute can be brought about only
through peaceful means. All efforts to secure a just and
enduring peace in the Middle East must be pursued by
all of us as a matter of compelling urgency. Australia’s
long-standing position is that peace between Israel and
the Palestinians has to be predicated on a two-State
solution, where both Israelis and Palestinians can exist
in peace and security within their own defined borders.
The parties must honour the agreements they have
already entered into, including the Road Map for

26

In the interests of time, I would draw attention to
my distributed remarks and, in conclusion, say that
Australia strongly supports the peace process and is
contributing to the development of Palestinian
institutions as well as providing humanitarian
assistance. Since late 2007, we have given more than
$75 million in development and humanitarian
assistance and will continue to provide a high level of
assistance. We urge all parties to work towards a just
and enduring resolution of this terrible conflict, and we
stand ready to continue to provide what help we can to
support such an outcome.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to convey our
gratitude and appreciation to you for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing
on the most recent developments in the region, and
welcome Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Foreign Minister of
Palestine. We wish to associate ourselves with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, of Syria on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
and of the Sudan on behalf of the Arab Group.
We would like to focus in our statement on the
dangerous recent practices in the occupied Palestinian
territory and especially the city of Al-Quds, where
Israel has continued its illegal policy by confiscating
more land in Silwan and other Arab districts through
the creation of additional settlements in the Al-Jarrah
neighbourhood and the construction of the separation
wall that isolates Al-Quds from its natural
surroundings. These activities are aimed at Arab

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

citizens, who are then expelled and whose residency
permits are confiscated and homes destroyed.
Excavations are continuing, tunnels are being
bored under and around the Al-Aqsa mosque, and
Islamic civilization’s heritage is being confiscated.
These provocative acts, which are ultimately aimed at
changing the demographic and legal status of Al-Quds
in a systematic and unprecedented way, are all likely to
increase tensions in the region and create a new reality
on the ground, undermining and indeed hindering any
possible progress in the peace process and towards the
two-State solution agreed by the international
community.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose sovereign
chairs the Al-Quds Committee, has reiterated its
unreserved condemnation of the recent violations of
the Al-Aqsa mosque and other dangerous practices,
which run counter to the values of peaceful coexistence
and religious tolerance and constitute a rejection of
international resolutions and instruments.
His Majesty the King has drawn the attention of
influential international stakeholders to the dangers
arising from Israel’s illegal practices. He has done so
to ensure that these countries fulfil their
responsibilities and intervene immediately to put an
end to these practices, including the violations of the
mosque’s esplanade and other holy sites. His Majesty
is following developments in the situation closely and
is in constant communication with Arab and Islamic
leaders.
In the light of the daily suffering of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Al-Quds Committee
continues to back the resistance there through social
projects funded by the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif
Agency. To highlight the central importance of the
issue of Jerusalem in the context of the wider conflict
in the region, on 28 and 29 October the Al-Quds
Agency, in partnership with the Arafat institute, will
hold a workshop in Morocco on the subject of
Jerusalem. It will be sponsored by the King of
Morocco, with the participation of eminent academic
personalities, religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and representatives of civil society.
Morocco continues to support the Arab Peace
Initiative as the definitive path to follow on this matter.
In addition to the role it plays in negotiations, the
Kingdom of Morocco takes an active part in the efforts
of the international community to advance the peace

09-55901

process. We note with appreciation the intensification
of international efforts, and welcome the efforts of the
United States Administration to overcome the obstacles
to the peace process. We also welcome all other
international efforts in this area, including those of the
European Union. The Kingdom of Morocco hopes that
the recent endeavours of the United States special
envoy to the Middle East will lead to a resumption of
peace negotiations on the basis of existing agreements
between the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative, a
realistic initiative that reflects the genuine Arab will to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution in the
Middle East.
Peace in the Middle East is not the sole
responsibility of the parties to the conflict, as the
Permanent Representative of Australia affirmed earlier,
but an issue that the international community must also
address, because stability in the region has an impact
on international peace and security. That is why the
parties to the conflict must fulfil all their
responsibilities, alongside the international community,
and seize this historic opportunity to achieve peace in
the region.
With the support of the Arab Group and the
international community, the Palestinian National
Authority has worked to meet its international
obligations, acted boldly and made sacrifices, and has
fulfilled its commitments to the international
community. The Palestinian people should therefore be
able to enjoy the fruits of those promises instead of
having to watch Israel continue to question and
undermine all agreements and terms of reference upon
which the peace process is based. International efforts
to revitalize the peace process are being stepped up,
and in this regard the Kingdom of Morocco hopes that
the efforts of the brotherly country of Egypt will lead
to unification within Palestinian ranks for the benefit
of all sectors of Palestinian society.
We have also learned, with a great deal of
satisfaction, of the initiative of the Palestinian National
Authority aimed at laying the foundations necessary to
fulfilling the dream of the Palestinian people to live in
their own independent State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, side by side with Israel in peace and security.
We hope that this meeting will lead to measures and
initiatives that will alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian people and open up new prospects for the
continuation of a genuine and comprehensive peace
process.

27

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning. We would also like to welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine at this meeting.
Jordan associates itself with the statements made
by the representatives of the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Egypt on behalf the Arab Group, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and the
Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
The world is unanimous today on the objective of
achieving a two-State solution and establishing
comprehensive peace in the Middle East in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference, international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative. The Arab
countries are also committed to this goal, as
demonstrated in the adoption of the Arab Peace
Initiative in 2002, its consequent reaffirmation at other
Arab summits — the most recent of which was the
Doha summit — and its adoption and sponsorship by
the OIC. We have also seen the Palestinian National
Authority, particularly President Mahmoud Abbas,
work tirelessly and continuously in the pursuit of the
two-State solution, which would guarantee peace and
security for the peoples and States of the region.
In spite of all this, Israel unfortunately remains
intransigent and rejects the tireless and sincere efforts
being made to create an environment conducive to
serious peace negotiations on all tracks, proceeding
from the most recent point they had reached. Israel
continues its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Arab territories, including East Jerusalem.
We further reiterate that settlements and peace are
contradictory and cannot go together. This is
particularly true give that settlement activities run
counter to international law and international
humanitarian law. They undermine any possibility of
establishing a viable and independent Palestinian State
on Palestinian national soil in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the borders of 4 June 1967.

28

We therefore reaffirm that these settlement
activities and their recent frenzied resumption seriously
threaten the prospects for peace in the region. Israel
also pursues its unilateral, illegal and illegitimate
measures in occupied East Jerusalem. We have seen a
serious acceleration in the scope and number of these
activities, including excavations under and around
Muslim and Christian holy sites, particularly around
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and its environs, the demolition of
homes and the forced displacement of their Arab
inhabitants, the consolidation of existing settlements
and the establishment of new ones, and frenzied
attempts to change the demographic makeup of
occupied East Jerusalem and to prevent the
administration from doing its work there. The
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan condemns all of Israel’s
unilateral measures as illegal, illegitimate and in gross
violation of its commitments as the occupying Power.
They represent a grave obstacle to efforts to relaunch
serious negotiations aimed at achieving the two-State
solution and a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, led by His
Majesty King Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, the serious
Israeli escalation over the past two weeks in terms of
many provocative measures carried out at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa mosque, and other
violations aimed at altering the legal status of East
Jerusalem, represent a red line that cannot be crossed.
We wish to highlight the fact that we are intensifying
our contacts with all influential actors concerned,
particularly the five permanent members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, with a
view to exerting pressure to put an immediate and
definitive end to all Israeli aggressions and provocative
actions.
Jerusalem has a special status in the hearts and
minds of tens of millions of Muslims and Christians
throughout the world. Because of that status, Israel’s
provocative and illegal actions are an explosive
element that threatens the very foundations of
international peace and security. Therefore, we call on
the international community to shoulder its
responsibility and take resolute action to put an end to
all Israeli aggressions and provocations in the occupied
Arab territories, particularly East Jerusalem. We wish
to reaffirm that preserving and protecting the holy city
of Jerusalem will always be a top priority for Jordan,
which will spare no effort in opposing any such

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

aggression, provocation or threat to either Muslim or
Christian holy sites.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has forcefully
condemned the Israeli aggressions committed against
unarmed civilians during its latest war in the Gaza
Strip. On more than one occasion, including in the
statement made by His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jordan to the General Assembly on
26 September 2009, we have welcomed the report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/HRC/12/48), led by Judge Richard
Goldstone. We have done so because of our firm
conviction that it is important to support the principle
of international criminal justice and its application in
an objective and non-selective manner, free from
politicization. We also supported the request that an
emergency session of the Human Rights Council be
held tomorrow in Geneva to discuss the Goldstone
report.
Furthermore, we wish to call for the lifting of the
blockade against the Gaza Strip, whose population is
suffering greatly every day and lacks the most basic
needs of everyday life. That inhumane blockade must
be lifted, and the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip must
begin immediately.
We reaffirm our support for the important
statement made by His Excellency Mr. Barack Obama,
President of the United States of America, to the
General Assembly on 23 September 2009. It was
unambiguous in setting out the President’s vision of a
final solution to the problem in accordance with the
agreed frameworks, ending the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967 and establishing a viable, independent
Palestinian State with contiguous territory, living side
by side in peace and security with Israel. President
Obama’s clear reaffirmation that the political
framework of negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis is the best way to address the final
status issues — security for Israelis and Palestinians,
borders, refugees and Jerusalem — and his forceful
statement that all settler activity is illegitimate show
his strong commitment to the two-State solution and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, as well as his
resolve to continue his tireless efforts — which began
the day he took office — to create an atmosphere
conducive to the relaunching of serious and
constructive peace negotiations on all tracks aimed at
the attainment of that noble objective.

09-55901

Finding a just and comprehensive solution to the
question of Palestine, which is at the heart of the
Middle East conflict, would be a key to resolving other
conflicts and a guarantee for peace and security in our
region, which yearns for peace and stability. These can
be achieved only through the two-State solution: an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): First of all, I wish to add
Norway’s voice to that of the Middle East Quartet,
which last month again called on Israel and the
Palestinians to act on their previous agreements and
obligations in order to create conditions for the
resumption of negotiations in the near term. With the
same sense of urgency, I call on the parties to fully
engage in resumed negotiations to create a viable
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders.
There is a broad and growing recognition that we are
nearing a moment of truth. The prospective two-State
solution can ill afford one more abortive process.
Furthermore, in view of Norway’s role as Chair
of the ad hoc liaison committee — the donor group
supporting the Palestinian Authority — I must stress
the importance of resumed negotiations to our ability
to mobilize continued donor support for the Palestinian
State-building project. Without forward movement, and
without a political endgame clearly in sight, donors
will have a hard time justifying support beyond their
pledges made in 2007, which are due to expire next
year.
Norway chaired a meeting of the committee here
in New York on 22 September this year. In spite of the
international financial downturn, donors are honouring
their pledges, and support for the Palestinian Authority
is on a par with expectations for fiscal year 2009. In
addition, the World Bank reported 7 per cent growth in
the Palestinian economy on the West Bank, which was
due in part to Israel’s easing of restrictions and in part
to the Authority’s reform and security initiatives. If
expanded and sustained, those developments will ease
the humanitarian suffering and underpin peace efforts.
But let me be clear: the objective of the
committee is to support the quest for a two-State
solution, whereby the Israeli occupation is replaced by
a free and sovereign Palestinian State living side by

29

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

side with Israel in peace and security. The willingness
of donors to maintain high levels of support is a strong
message to the parties to engage in meaningful and
dedicated negotiations to bring the peace process to its
rightful conclusion.
The United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict raises allegations of a most serious
nature. It alleges that both Israel and Palestinian groups
may have been responsible for grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
We believe that the report should first be studied
by the United Nations Human Rights Council, as that
Council initiated the Fact-Finding Mission. The Human
Rights Council is addressing the report this week. As a
member of that Council, Norway will work toward
achieving broad support for a balanced resolution
ensuring appropriate follow-up of the report and its
recommendations.
The parties to the conflict bear the most
immediate responsibility to investigate and prosecute
possible violations committed by forces under their
command. This is necessary, inter alia, to prevent
impunity. Norway is deeply concerned regarding issues
of the protection of vulnerable groups in armed conflict
in the Middle East and throughout the world. The role
of humanitarian agencies is under threat, as are
increasingly their workers themselves. The need to
work towards the full development of international
humanitarian law is a significant legacy of the violent
century we have put behind us. International
humanitarian law needs to be protected, defended and
expanded.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): The Maldives
strongly supports the right of the Palestinian people to
freely determine their own political and economic
system, including the right to resist forcible
deprivation of their right to self-determination and
their right to live in peace and freedom in their own
State. We also support the inalienable right of the
people of Israel to live in peace and security. Perhaps
the greatest tragedy of the Gaza conflict is that,
although fought to assert these rights, it in fact pushes
them further away.
The Maldives believes that the report of the FactFinding Mission led by Justice Goldstone is detailed

30

and thorough. We sincerely regret Israel’s decision not
to cooperate with the Mission.
That said, a few things are clear: The blockade
amounts to collective punishment intentionally
inflicted by the Government of Israel on the people of
the Gaza Strip. As such, the blockade violates
international law and should be immediately lifted. The
launching of rockets by Palestinian armed groups into
Israeli civilian areas constitutes a grave violation of
humanitarian and human rights law. The Israeli
military incursion into Gaza in response to those rocket
attacks was massively disproportionate, and the
destruction of houses, factories, schools and hospitals
and the large number of civilian casualties
demonstrate, at best, a blatant disregard for the
fundamental principle of distinction.
The Maldives believes that the clear and manifest
violations of human rights and humanitarian law that
have occurred in Gaza warrant careful and verifiable
scrutiny. Accountability must be established and justice
pursued. The Maldives therefore supports the
recommendation, contained in the report, that all
alleged violations by both sides in the conflict be
independently
investigated
and
that
those
investigations
together
with
any
subsequent
prosecutions be monitored by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I thank the President of
the Security Council for giving us the opportunity to
once again focus on the situation in the Middle East,
particularly the Palestinian question, a question that
has occupied the attention of this Council time and
again. Sri Lanka has consistently supported a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian issue and called for the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the realization of the two-State
solution. Our sincere wish is that Israel, Palestine and
their neighbours in the region coexist in peace and
security. As a country that has suffered much at the
hands of unbridled violence unleashed by terrorism, Sri
Lanka knows only too well the human and material
cost of such violence, which can impede political
solutions. We have consistently endorsed the two-State
solution to the problem. A peaceful Middle East is our
wish for the people of the region.

09-55901

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

My Government, it may be recalled, expressed its
deep anguish and concern over the developments that
took place in Gaza late last year and in the early part of
this year — developments that led to the loss of
civilian life, an increase of tensions in the region and
unnecessary suffering among civilians. Sri Lanka is
fully aware, through its own experience, of the need to
provide for and supply civilians affected by conflict
owing to terrorist violence. At that time, my
Government called upon all parties to end military
action and violence immediately and ensure a climate
conducive to finding a way forward towards a twoState solution, which all parties concerned, including
Israel and Palestine, agree is the only possible lasting
solution. In spite of those unfortunate circumstances
earlier this year, my Government was pleased to note
the several important developments on the ground
since then and the continued international efforts to
create the conditions for the early resumption of
negotiations by the two sides. Those gave us reason to
renew our hope for a peaceful solution.
It is our sincere hope that the issues before the
Council today will be addressed in a just and equitable
manner that will not obstruct the search for peace. I
believe that we will have further opportunity to discuss
these issues at the forthcoming sessions of the Human
Rights Council. We believe that at this time the unity
of the Palestinian people is of utmost importance and
that they will unite in pursuit of their aspirations.
Sri Lanka wishes to reiterate its support for the
Palestinians’ quest for their legitimate, human and
national rights. The Government and the people of Sri
Lanka would like to reassure them of our continued
support and solidarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, we wish to express our
satisfaction with your direction of the presidency of the
Security Council, and to commend you for having
moved this debate on the situation in the Middle East
including the question of Palestine forward. Your
decision is a clear and accurate interpretation of the
concern that a considerable majority of this
Organization has about Israel’s systematic disregard, as
a State policy, for the resolutions of this body, the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council

09-55901

regarding the Middle East and the situation in
Palestine.
The Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations associates
itself with the statement made today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement delivered by the Permanent
Mission of Egypt.
The matter of the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, has been of the greatest
importance to this Council. The creation of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization by the
Security Council in 1948 led to the first peacekeeping
operation, charged with verifying the ceasefire in the
Middle East. Since 1947 numerous resolutions have
been adopted by the United Nations on the matter of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East, from the
controversial General Assembly resolution 181 (II) on
the partition of Palestine to Council resolution 1860
(2009) adopted this year.
Absolutely none of these have been honoured by
the Government of Israel. Several decades have borne
witness to the continual military aggression of the
Government of Israel, which has increasingly violated
international law, and in particular international
humanitarian law, in its practices against the peoples
and Governments of the region of the Middle East.
In January 2009, given the inaction of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council acted to impede — or at least mitigate
— the brutal aggression launched against the people of
Palestine in the Gaza strip. In this context, the results
obtained by the Human Rights Council in the wake of
its resolution (A/HRC/S-9/1), which spoke to the grave
situation in Gaza, merit particular endorsement. The
Fact-Finding Mission charged with investigating those
events has now produced its report (A/HRC/12/48), the
content of which, in the opinion of Venezuela, demands
the support of the entire international community.
In its conclusions and recommendations, the
report
underscores
the
need
for
effective
accountability. In addition, according to the report,
there is important evidence showing clearly that during
the military operation of 27 December 2008 through
18 January 2009 there were “serious violations of
international humanitarian law”, as well as blatant
violations of human rights made worse by the blockade
to which the population of Gaza was subjected in the
months before Operation Cast Lead was launched.

31

S/PV.6201 (Resumption 1)

Among the violations, which the entire world
witnessed and which have been disseminated by the
media to every corner of the Earth, were arbitrary and
abusive detentions, recurrent torture, ill treatment,
extrajudicial killings, forced expulsion, the demolition
of homes, and a brutal, unmitigated broadening of
settlement activity. These unquestionably abominable
actions were undertaken with total impunity.
Impunity is the most important issue we must
address in this meeting. The conclusions of the
impartial and thorough investigation are unequivocal
as to the grave responsibility of the Israeli Government
for the abominable events cited. The report of the
independent Fact-Finding Mission also indicates that
“there are serious doubts about the willingness of
Israel to carry out genuine investigations in an
impartial, independent, prompt and effective way
as required by international law. The Mission is
also of the view that the system presents
inherently discriminatory features that make the
pursuit of justice for Palestinian victims
extremely difficult”. (A/HRC/12/48, para. 1961)
It is important to note that the International
Criminal Court, under the Rome Statute, plays an
important role in the quest for achieving justice and the
prevention of flagrant violations of international law.
The Rome Statute clearly codifies crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court: genocide, the crime of
aggression, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
My country sees evidence of such crimes reflected in
the reports of the Human Rights Council.
The Security Council is obligated to assess
Israel’s non-compliance with the Council’s resolutions
concerning peace and security in the Middle East. The
United Nations Charter confers on this body the
authority to do so. That includes the authority to
determine whether, in its judgment, a State is willing to
honour its obligations under the Charter. It can make
recommendations to the General Assembly in that
regard.
The Security Council faces a dilemma that must
be resolved. Should the Council gather further proof in
the case concerning aggression against the people of

32

the Middle East and Palestine, or should it shoulder the
responsibility that is incumbent upon it? The
Government of Israel has long acted outside the
principles of the United Nations and international
justice, and we cannot wait while the new,
reprehensible concept known as natural growth — that
is, natural extermination — is allowed to develop with
impunity. International law forbids Israel from
invoking conquest and colonization; it certainly cannot
be allowed to pursue such practices in the name of socalled natural growth or, rather, natural extermination.
Israel has no excuse for expelling the
Palestinians, a dignified people with thousands of years
of history, from their own lands, or for its ongoing
aggression against them, its frequent indiscriminate
bombing of Lebanon and its occupation of Golan.
These constitute flagrant, clear and unconcealable
violations of the principles of international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, without
parallel, in their constancy and brutality, in modern
history.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, with President Hugo Chávez at its helm,
has been emphatic in its rejection of the historic
aggression of the Government of Israel against the
nations of the Middle East and Palestine in particular.
We endorse the demands of those peoples and the
peoples of the world to be allowed to live in peace, and
we call on the international community not to permit
jurisprudence to grant legitimacy to the military
conquest of any territory.
In conclusion, Venezuela will continue to suspend
its diplomatic relations with the Government of Israel,
which were broken off by my Government as a result
of the criminal attacks on the Palestinian people and
the Gaza Strip. My Government is unwilling to resume
diplomatic relations until the inhumane treatment of
the Palestinians comes to a definitive end.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6:30 p.m.

09-55901
