Reeolution1 adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

13. Calls upon the Government of Portugal:
(a) To observe immediately the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949;42
(b) To eradicate the practice of xibalo, or forced
labour, in its African colonies;
(c) To introduce a system in which the products
of the African farmers can be freely bought and sold
in normal market conditions;
14. Condemns once again the actions of those Governments which continue to maintain diplomatic, economic. cultural and other relations with the Government of South Africa and with the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia in violation of United Nations
resolutions;
15. Calls upon those Governments urgently to consider breaking off such relations and, if they have not
already done so, to report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session the reasons therefor;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution and also to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyseventh session on the measures taken to publicize the
report of the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2715 (XXV). Employment of qualified women in
llellior and other profeaional positions by
the secretariats of organizations in the
United Nations system

The General Assembly,
RecalUng Article 101 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women,
1. Expresses the hope that the United Nations, including its special bodies and all intergovernmental
agencies in the United Nations system of organizations,
will set an example with regard to the opportunities
they afford for the employment of women at senior
and other professional levels;
2. Urges the United Nations, including its special
bodies and all intergovernmental agencies in the United
Nations system of organizations, to take or continue
to take appropriate measures to ensure equal opportunities for the employment of qualified women in
senior and other professional positions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
report to the General Assembly on the composition of
the Secretariat data on the employment of women at
senior and other professional levels by the secretariats
of the above-mentioned bodies, including their numbers
and the positions they occupy.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2716 (XXV). Programme of concerted international action for the advancement of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1777 (XVII) of 7 December
a United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos.
970-973.

81

1962 initiating the study of a unified, long-term United
Nations programme for the advancement of women,
Recalling also the ~laration on the Elimination ol.
Discrimination against Women, adopted on 7 November 1967, and the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, adopted on 11 December 1969,
Noting resolution IX of the International Conference
on Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968,'3 on
measures to promote women's rights in the modern
world, including a unified, long-term United Nations
programme for the advancement of women, which
established guidelines for such a programme,
Noting also that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2571 (XXIV) of 13 December
1969 and with paragraph 79 of Assembly resolution
2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, concerning the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, arran1ements should
be made to keep under systematic scrutiny the progress
towards achie~J the goals and objectives of the
Decade, to identify shortfalls in their achievement and
the policies that are not consistent with the attainment
of those objectives and to recommend positive measures, including new goals and policies as needed,
Expressing the hope that general and complete disarmament under effective international control will
allow for the use of the resources released progressively
for purposes of economic and social progress of all
peoples, including the elaboration of programmes designed to advance the status of women,
Believing that a programme of concerted international action, planned on a long-term basis, will advance
the status of women and increase their effective participation in all sectors,
Considering that the success of such a programme
will require intensified action on the part of Member
States, at the national and regional levels, as well as
maximum use of the methods and techniques available
through the United Nations system of organizations,
Believing that an important step in the further development of such a programme would be the establishment of concrete objectives and minimum targets,
1. Recommends that the objectives and targets set
forth in the annex to the present resolution should be
achieved as widely as possible during the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations or
members of specialized agencies and all organs and
agencies within the United Nations system to co-operate
in achieving these objectives and targets, and hopes
that adequate staff and resources will be made available for this purpose;
3. Recommends that concerted efforts should be
made to increase the resources available for technical
co-operation projects which advance the status of
women and that consideration be given to allocating
a specific percentage of the available funds for this
purpose;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Commission on the Status of Women if
possible at its twenty-fourth session, information 'on
the ex!ent to which ~omen are participating in, and
benefiting from, techmcal co-operation projects;
63 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E 68 XIV'>)
p. 10.
. .
·- '

s Rlcommends that conferences, lfflDiDan and
aimilar meetings at the regional and international levels

II, MINDcuM TAUBTI TO . . ACIIIIIVBD J>UaJNO TIIB SB00IID
UNITED NA110NI DBVIILOPMBNT DBCADB

should bo orpnized with the participation, wherever
possible,
ministers,wi'di
highproblems
government
o8lciala and
._,.;au.taofcon---.:1
of developm-t
•r--~~
.......,
and of representatives of non-governmental organizadons concerned with this problem, to consider WafS
and means of promoting the status of women within
the framework of over-all development;
6. Draws attention to the important role that may
also
played centres
in this respect
by the
regional ~
and be
research
for social
development
to ~
established pursuant to Economic and Social Council
resolution 1~ (XLVI) of 5 June 1969;
7. Suggem that the continuous education of adults
be encouraged with a view to changing in particular
their attitucfe of mind towards the roles to be played
by men and women in order to help them to aasume
their respODSl°bilities in society;
S. Notes, notwithstanding the provisions of all the
preceding paragraphs, that the fainily, 118 the comeratone of society, must be protected.
1930th pl4nary mnting,
15 December 1970.

at all levels.
4. The establilhment of the same choice of c ~ for
boys and 1irl1, the same examinationa, equally qualiled teach·
iDI staff, and the same quality of school premilel and equipmoot, whether the inatitutiona are co-educational or not, and
equal opportumtiea to receive scholarships and arant■,
,. The achievement of equality in the percentap of boys
and airls rec:eivina primary education and of a mbetantial IDcroue in the number of prls at all educational levels, in JIU'•
ticular in the field of technical and profeslional education.
6. The eatablilhment of educational policies that tab aecount of employment neecla and opportuJlitiea and of adentflc
and tecbnoloalcal chanp.

ANNEX

B. Training and employment
1. Provision of the same vocational advice and auidanc:e

I. GBNUAL OB.JIICTJYBI

l. The ratification of, or ac:ceaaion to, the relevant intern&•
tional conventiona relatiq to the status of women.
2. The enactment of leai■lation to bring national laws into
conformity with international inatruments re1atina to the status
of women, includiq in particular the Declaration on the
Blimination of Diacrimination agaimt Women.
3. The taldq of effective legal and other measures to emuro
the full implementation of tbele instruments.
4. The development of effective large-acale educational and
informational programme, uaiq all mus media and other
available meana to make all sectors of the population in rural
as well as urban area,■ fully aware of the norms established
by the United Nations and the specialized apncies in tbo conventions, recommendations, declarationa and resolution■
adopted under their alllJ)ices, and to educate public opinion
and enlist its mpport for all measures aimed at achievina the
realization of the atandarda set forth.
,. The asaesament and evaluation of the contribution of
women to the various economic and aocial aectors in relation
to the country's over-all development plans and proarammes,
with a view to establishing specific objectives and minimum
targets which might realistically be achieved by 1980 to increase the effective contribution of women to the various

sectors.

6. The study of the positive and negative effects of scientific
and technological change on the status of women with a view
to ensuring continuous progress, especially u reprds the
education and training u well u the living conditions and
employment of women.
7. The elaboration of abort-term and Iona-term proarammes
to achieve these specific objective■ and minimum tarpts, where
possible within the framework of over-all national development plans or programmes, and the provision of adequate
funds for programmes which advance the status of women.
8. The establishment of machinery and procedures to make
possible the continuous review and evaluation of women's
intqration into all sectors of economic and aocial life and
their contribution to development.
9. The full utilization of the desire and readiness of women
to devote their energies, talents and abilities to the benefit of
society.

A. Education

--·..i-8 ...,:...

_ , CIIIIDlllll
-"-'-·tiOD of ....
:m-...-.
1· The ..,...,.._.ve
_,_,,, _ _ ._eq.......,
in literacy between the sexes, especially amoq the youn,er
IDDC1'ation.
2. Equal acc:ea of boys and sirls to education at the primary
and NCODdary 1eve11 and at educational inatitutiona of all types,
IDcludfq uniwinities and .vocational, technical and professional

IChools.

-~ieeco:=

_!.:..~on
at~..- ~ . inlevelacbievfnaand
in
.,.._..
...., 11•-.r
_._ •._
H ~. .

to members of both sexes.
2, Equal acc:esa of airl• and women to vocatioaal trallliq
and retraiDiq at all levels. with a view to achievlq their full
participation in the economic and aocial life of their countriel.
3. Univenal acceptance of the principle of equal pay for
equal work and the adoption of effective measures to im•
plement it.
4. Puij1 acceptance of the policy of non-diacrimination in
relation fo the employment and treatment of women, and
measures to pve effect to that policy on a proareuive basil.
,. A subltantial increase in the numbers of qualified women
employed in lkilled and technical work, and at all hiaher level■
of economic life and in posts of responsibility.
6. A substantial increase in the opportunities for involwiment of women in all facets of agricultural development and
qricultural services.

C. Health and maternity protection
l. The progressive extension of measures to ensure maternity protection, with a view to eDIUring paid maternity leave
with the auarantee of returniq to former or equivalent employment.
2. The development and extension of adequate child care
and other facilities to assist parents with family responlibilitiel.
3. The adoption of measures for the creation and development of a wide network of special medical establishments for
the protection of the health of the mother and child.
4. Making available to all persons who so desire the necetsary information and advice to enable them to decide freely
and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children
and to prepare them for responsible parenthood, includin1 in•
formation on the ways in which women can benefit from
family planning. Such information and advice lhould be .,._
on valid and proven scientific expertise, with due re1ard to
the risks that may be involved.

D. Administration and public life
1. A 111betantial increase in the number of women participatina in public and government life at the local, national
and international levels. Special attention might be paid to
trainin1 women for such participation, especially in micldlelevel and hiaher posts.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. A substantial increase in the number of qualified women
holdiq responsible posts at the executive and policy-making
levels, includiq those related to over-all development planning.

2717 (XXV). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster
The General Assembly,
Concerned about the grave human and material
losses suffered by countries which have recently been
stricken by natural disasters,
Aware also of the serious consequences of such
disasters on the economic and social development of
countries, particularly the developing countries,
Expressing its appreciation of the assistance rendered
by the Red Cross, other voluntary organizations, the
United Nations system and bilateral aid, and once again
emphasizing the necessity of strengthening the international machinery for providing adequate assistance in
cases of natural disaster,
Mindful of the principles laid down in the Declaration of Principles for International Humanitarian Relief
to the avilian Population in Disaster Situations, contained in resolution XXVI adopted by the twenty-first
International Conference of the Red Cross held at
Istanbul in 1969,H
Recalling its resolutions 2034 (XX) of 7 December
196S, 243S (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2608
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and 2643 (XXV) of
20 November 1970 and Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1S33 (XLIX) of 23 July 1970 and 1546
(XLIX) of 30 July 1970 concerning assistance in cases
of natural disaster,
Aware that the assistance envisaged in cases of
natural disaster in resolution 2435 (XXIII) is inadequate for relief in calamities of major magnitude,
Having considered with interest and appreciation the
interim report of the Secretary-General on assistance in
cases of natural disaster4 11 and the report of the Secretary-General's personal representative on United Nations assistance to Peru,•6
Noting the request made by the Economic and Social
Council at its forty-ninth session to the Secretary-General to give early consideration to the strengthening of
staff arrangements within the United Nations Secretariat to deal with natural disasters, and the steps already taken towards the implementation of this request,
including the designation of a focal point in the Secretariat,
Bearing in mind the need to strengthen and coordinate effectively the efforts of the United Nations
family of organizations in disaster relief as well as
other assistance directed through the United Nations
system,
Considering that additional measures are necessary
to enable the United Nations system to play an effective and more significant role in meeting the needs of
States, especially the developing countries, in relation
to natural disasters, epidemics, famines and similar
emergency situations,
Also bearing in mind that immediate relief assistance
at the international level should be followed by con"International Review of the Red Cross, No. 104 (November 1969), p. 632.
•11 E/48S3 and Corr.I and Add.I.
•e E/L.13S6.

certed action for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development of the disaster areas,
Recalling the request made to the Secretary-General
by the General Assembly in its resolution 2435
(XXIII) to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of that resolution to the Economic and
Social Council at its fifty-first session and to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session,
1. Renews its appeals to States Members of the
United Nations or members of specialized agencies to
consider and to continue offering on a wider basis,
through the United Nations, bilateral arrangements or
other appropriate organizations, emergency assistance
to meet natural disasters, including stand-by disaster
relief units or the earmarking of similar units for service
in foreign countries;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations
or members of specialized agencies to communic:ite information to the Secretary-General on the kind of
facilities and services they might be in a position to
provide immediately, if they so decided, in response to
a request from him to participate in emergency relief
operations, including, where possible, t~e ~umber ~d
type of vehicles or other means of dehvermg supplies
to disaster areas by air, sea and land;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to submit in his comprehensive report the study called for in paragraph 6
of General Assembly resolution 2435 (XXIII) concerning the legal status of disaster relief units made
available through the United Nations;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to include in his
comprehensive report, in addition to those studies and
reports he has been invited to submit by the General
Assembly in resolution 2435 (XXIII) and by the
Economic and Social Council in paragraphs 10 and 11
of resolution 1S46 (XLIX), his conclusions and recommendations on:
(a) The capacity of the different organizations of
the United Nations system to contribute assistance in
connexion with natural disasters;
(b) The areas where this assistance might be increased or made more effective;
( c) The most appropriate means to strengthen
further the capacity of the United Nations relating to
natural disasters, including organizational arrangements
for the permanent office in the United Nations Secretariat responsible for the co-ordination of action relating to natural disasters, epidemics, famines and similar
emergency situations and the resources required therefor;
5. Further invites the Secretary-General, in pursuance of paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 above, to submit recommendations in particular on:
(a) Ways and means of ensuring better mobilization and co-ordination of the assistance to be provided
through the United Nations, the organizations of the
United Nations system, as well as the League of Red
Cross Societies and other non-governmental organizations;
( b) Pre-disaster planning at the national and international levels, including the definition of machinery
and contingency arrangements capable of coping immediately with disaster situations;
( c) The stockpiling of emergency supplies, including medicines, non-perishable food-stuffs, blankets,
tents and clothing, and the earmarking of other facilities
such as logistical equipment and helicopters;
