VI. Resolutions adopted on tbe reportl of the Third Committee

Noting with concern the delay in the publication of
the report of the Special Rapporteur 135 and the report of
the Expert on the Question of the Fate of Missing and
Disappeared Persons in Chile, 136
Noting that both reports in their conclusions clearly
indicate that generally the situation of human rights has
not improved, and in a number of areas has even deteriorated, compared with that described in the last report
of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of
Human Rights in Chile,1 37
Deeply concerned about recent reports regarding the
discovery in the main cemetery of Santiago de Chile of
hundreds of unmarked graves believed to contain the
remains of victims of political executions, and expressing
the hope that the judicial investigation initiated to determine the origins of those graves will be carried out
without hindrance,
Noting with particular concern that the Chilean
authorities have failed to take urgent and effective measures, as requested by the General Assembly in resolution
33/ 175, to investigate and clarify the fate of persons
reported to have disappeared for political reasons,
Drawing the attention of the Commission on Human
Rights to the recommendations contained in the report
of the Expert on the Question of the Fate of Missing and
Disappeared Persons in Chile1ss when pursuing the question of disappeared persons, as requested by the General
Assembly in resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978,
and when considering resolution 5 B (XXXII) of 5 September 19791s0 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
1. Commends the Special Rapporteur and the Expert on the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared Persons in Chile for their work;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-sixth session thoroughly to study the report of
the Special Rapporteur and the report of the Expert on
the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared
Persons in Chile;

3. Reiterates its indignation at the continued violation of human rights in Chile and concludes that it should
continue to exercise vigilance with regard to the situation
of human rights in that country;
4. Expresses its grave concern that there has been a
deterioration in a number of areas, notably in relation to:
(a) An increase in the arbitrary powers of security
agencies;
(b) Cases of torture, ill-treatment and unexplained
deaths;
(c) Freedom of assembly and association;
(d) Trade union rights;
(e) The presumption of innocence of accused
persons;
(f) The treatment of indigenous people;
5. Strongly urges the Chilean authorities to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with the obligations Chile has undertaken under various international instruments and, in particular:
(a) To cease the state of emergency, under which
continued violations of human rights occur, and to restore the democratic institutions and constitutional safeguards formerly enjoyed by the Chilean people;
mA/34/583.
186 A/34/583/ Add.I.
187

A/33/331.

18 8 A/34/583/ Add.I, paras.

180 See

193-198.
E/CN.4/1350, chap. XVI, sect. A.

193

(b) To ensure an immediate end to torture and other
forms of inhuman or degrading treatment and to prosecute and punish those responsible for such practices;
(c) To restore fully the freedom of expression and
information and of assembly and association;
(d) To restore fuUy trade union rights, especially as
regards the freedom to form trade unions which can
operate freely without government control and exercise
fully the right to strike;
(e) To allow their citizens freely to enter and leave
the country, and to restore Chilean nationality to those
who have been deprived of it for political reasons;
(f) To restore fully the right of amparo (habeas
corpus);
(g) To respect the rights, in particular the economic,
social and cultural rights, of the indigenous population;
(h) To adopt measures to improve the enjoyment of
economic and social rights by the population at large;
6 _ Expresses its deep concern, although noting that
no persons are reported to have disappeared in Chile
during 1978 and 1979, that the disappearance between
September 1973 and the end of 1977 of numerous persons, whose whereabouts are still unknown, represents
a continuous situation of gross and flagrant violations of
human rights;
7. Urges the Chilean authorities to investigate and
clarify the fate of persons reported to have disappeared
for political reasons, to inform relatives of the outcome
and to institute criminal proceedings against those responsible for such disappearances and punish those
found guilty;
8. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give close attention to the situation in Chile and,
to this end:
(a) To extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Chile, in accordance
with paragraph 6 of Commission resolution 11 (XXXV);
(b) To consider further at its thirty-sixth session the
most effective ways of clarifying the whereabouts and
fate of missing and disappeared persons in Chile, taking
into account the contents of the report of the Expert on
the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared
Persons in Chile;
9. Further urges the Chilean authorities to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and the Expert on
the Question of the Fate of Missing and Disappeared
Persons in Chile;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
report on the subject, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/180.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is
to promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction of any kind, including any distinction as to sex,
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly,
in its resolution 2263 (XXII) of 7 November 1967, of

General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Semon

194

the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women,
Taking into account the conventions, resolutions,
declarations and recommendations of the United Nations
and of tlte specialized agencies designed to eliminate all
forms of discrimination and to promote equal rights for
men and women,
Noting, in particular, its resolution 33/177 of 20 December 1978 concerning the drafting of a convention on
the elimination of discrimination against women,
Considering that discrimination against women is incompatible with human dignity and the welfare of society
and constitutes an obstacle to the full realization of the
potentialities of women,
Affirming that women and men should participate and
contribute on a basis of equality in the social, economic
and political processes of development and should share
equally in improved conditions of life,
Recognizing that the welfare of the world and the
cause of peace require the full participation of both men
and women in society,
Convinced that it is necessary to ensure the universal
recognition in law and in fact of the principle of equality
of men and women,
1. Adopts and opens for signature, ratification and
accession the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Expresses the hope that the Convention will be
signed and ratified or acceded to without delay and will
come into force at an early date;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to present the
text of the Convention to the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women for its information;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the status of the Convention under an item entitled
"Status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women".
107th plenary meeting
18 December 1979
ANNEX
Convention on the Ellmination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women
The States Parties to the present Convention,
Noting that the Charter of the United Nations reaffirms faith
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the
human person and in the equal rights of men and women,
Noting that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 140
affirms the principle of the inadmissibility of discrimination and
proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights
and freedoms set forth therein, without distinction of any kind,
including distinction based on sex,
Noting that the States parties to the International Covenants
on Human Rights141 have the obligation to ensure the equal
right of men and women to enjoy all economic, social, cultural,
civil and political rights,
Considering the international conventions concluded under
the auspices of the United Nations and the specialized agencies
promoting equality of rights of men and women,
Noting also the resolutions, declarations and recommendations
adopted by the United Nations and the specialized agencies
promoting equality of rights of men and women,
uo Resolution 217 A (III).
141

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

Concerned, however, that despite these various instruments
extensive discrimination against women continues to exist,
Recalling that discrimination against women violates the
principles of equality of rights and respect for human dignity, is
an obstacle to the participation of women, on equal terms with
men, in the political, social, economic and cultural life of their
countries, hampers the growth of the prosperity of society and
the family and makes more difficult the full development of the
potentialities of women in the service of their countries and of
humanity,
Concerned that in situations of poverty women have the least
access to food, health, education, training and opportunities for
employment and other needs,
Convinced that the establishment of the new international
economic order based on equity and justice will contribute
significantly towards the promotion of equality between men
and women,
Emphasizing that the eradication of apartheid, all forms of
racism, racial discrimination, colonialism, neo-colonialism, aggression, foreign occupation and domination and interference in
the internal affairs of States is essential to the full enjoyment of
the rights of men and women,
Affirming that the strengthening of international peace and
security, the relaxation of international tension, mutual cooperation among all States irrespective of their social and economic systems, general and complete disarmament, in particular
nuclear disarmament under strict and effective international
control, the affirmation of the principles of justice, equality and
mutual benefit in relations among countries and the realization
of the right of peoples under alien and colonial domination and
foreign occupation to self-determination and independence, as
well as respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity,
will promote social progress and development and as a consequence will contribute to the attainment of full equality between
men and women,
Convinced that the full and complete development of a
country, the welfare of the world and the cause of peace require
the maximum participation of women on equal terms with men
in all fields,
Bearing in mind the great contribution of women to the welfare of the family and to the development of society, so far not
fully recognized, the social significance of maternity and the
role of both parents in the family and in the upbringing of
children, and aware that the role of women in procreation
should not be a basis for discrimination but that the upbringing
of children requires a sharing of responsibility between men and
women and society as a whole,
Aware that a change in the traditional role of men as well
as the role of women in society and in the family is needed to
achieve full equality between men and women,
Determined to implement the principles set forth in the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
and, for that purpose, to adopt the measures required for the
elimination of such discrimination in all its forms and manifestations,
Have agreed on the following:
PART I

Article 1
For the purposes of the present Convention, the term "discrimination against women" shall mean any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect
or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment
or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a
basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural,
civil or any other field.
Article 2
States Parties condemn discrimination against women in all
its forms, agree to pursue by all appropriate means and without
delay a policy of eliminating discrimination against women and,
to this end, undertake:
(a) To embody the principle of the equality of men and
women in their national constitutions or other appropriate
legislation if not yet incorporated therein and to ensure, through

VL

Resolutiom adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

law and other appropriate means, the practical realization of
this principle;
(b) To adopt appropriate legislative and other measures, including sanctions where appropriate, prohibiting all discrimination against women;
(c) To establish legal protection of the rights of women on
an equal basis with men and to ensure through competent national tribunals and other public institutions the effective protection of women against any act of discrimination;
(d) To refrain from engaging in any act or practice of discrimination against women and to ensure that public authorities
and institutions shall act in conformity with this obligation;
(e) To take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women by any person, organization or enterprise;
(f) To take all appropriate measures, including legislation,
to modify or abolish existing laws, regulations, customs and
practices which constitute discrimination against women;
(g) To repeal all national penal provisions which constitute
discrimination against women.

Article 3
States Parties shall take in all fields, in particular in the
political, social, economic and cultural fields, all appropriate
measures, including legislation, to ensure the full development
and advancement of women, for the purpose of guaranteeing
them the exercise and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms on a basis of equality with men.
Article 4
1. Adoption by States Parties of temporary special measures
aimed at accelerating de facto equality between men and women
shall not be considered discrimination as defined in the present
Convention, but shall in no way entail as a consequence the
maintenance of unequal or separate standards; these measures
shall be discontinued when the objectives of equality of opportunity and treatment have been achieved.
2. Adoption by States Parties of special measures, including
those measures contained in the present Convention, aimed at
protecting maternity shall not be considered discriminatory.
Article 5
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures:
(a) To modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of
men and women, with a view to achieving the elimination of
prejudices and customary and all other practices which are
based on the idea of the inferiority or the superiority of either
of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women;

(b) To ensure that family education includes a proper understanding of maternity as a social function and the recognition
of the common responsibility of men and women in the upbringing and development of their children, it being understood
that the interest of the children is the primordial consideration
in all cases.
Article 6
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures, including
legislation, to suppress all forms of traffic in women and exploitation of prostitution of women.
PART II

Article 7
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in the political and public life
of the country and, in particular, shall ensure to women, on
equal terms with men, the right:
(a) To vote in all elections and public referenda and to be
eligible for election to all publicly elected bodies;
(b) To participate in the formulation of government policy
and the implementation thereof and to hold public office and
perform all public functions at all levels of government;
(c) To participate in non-governmental organizations and
associations concerned with the public and political life of
the country.

195

Article 8
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure to
women, on equal terms with men and without any discrimination, the opportunity to represent their Governments at the
international level and to participate in the work of international organizations.

Article 9
States Parties shall grant women equal rights with men
to acquire, change or retain their nationality. They shall ensure
in particular that neither marriage to an alien nor change of
nationality by the husband during marriage shall automatically
change the nationality of the wife, render her stateless or force
upon her the nationality of the husband.
2. States Parties shall grant women equal rights with men
with respect to the nationality of their children.
1.

PART III

Article JO
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in order to ensure to them equal
rights with men in the field of education and in particular to
ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women:
(a) The same conditions for career and vocational guidance,
for access to studies and for the achievement of diplomas in
educational establishments of all categories in rural as well as in
urban areas; this equality shall be ensured in pre-school, general, technical, professional and higher technical education, as
well as in all types of vocational training;
(b) Access to the same curricula, the same examinations,
teaching staff with qualifications of the same standard and
school premises and equipment of the same quality;
(c) The elimination of any stereotyped concept of the roles
of men and women at all levels and in all forms of education
by encouraging coeducation and other types of education which
will help to achieve this aim and, in particular, by the revision
of textbooks and school programmes and the adaptation of
teaching methods;
(d) The same opportunities to benefit from scholarships and
other study grants;
(e) The same opportunities for access to programmes of continuing education, including adult and functional literacy programmes, particularly those aimed at reducing, at the earliest
possible time, any gap in education existing between men
and women;
(f) The reduction of female student drop-out rates and the
organization of programmes for girls and women who have left
school prematurely;
(g) The same opportunities to participate actively in sports
and physical education;
(h) Access to specific educational information to help to
ensure the health and well-being of families, including information and advice on family planning.
Article 11
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women in the field of employment in order to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and
women, the same rights, in particular:
(a) The right to work as an inalienable right of all human
beings;
(b) The right to the same employment opportunities, including the application of the same criteria for selection in matters of employment;
(c) The right to free choice of profession and employment,
the right to promotion, job security and all benefits and conditions of service and the right to receive vocational training
and retraining, including apprenticeships, advanced vocational
training and recurrent training;
(d) The right to equal remuneration, including benefits, and
to equal treatment in respect of work of equal value, as well
as equality of treatment in the evaluation of the quality of work;
(e) The right to social security, particularly in cases of retirement, unemployment, sickness, invalidity and old age and
other incapacity to work, as well as the right to paid leave;
1.

196

General Allemllly-Tldrty-foartb Sellloa

(f) The right to protection of health and to safety in working
conditions, including the safeguarding of the function of
reproduction.
2. In order to prevent discrimination against women on the
grounds of marriage or maternity and to ensure their effective
right to work, States Parties shall take appropriate measures:
(a) To prohibit, subject to the imposition of sanctions, dismissal on the grounds of pregnancy or of maternity leave and
discrimination in dismissals on the basis of marital status;
(b) To introduce maternity leave with pay or with comparable social benefits without loss of former employment,
seniority or social allowances;
(c) To encourage the provision of the necessary supporting
social services to enable parents to combine family obligations
with work responsibilities and participation in public life, in
particular through promoting the establishment and development of a network of child-care facilities; ·
(d) To provide special protection to women during pregnancy in types of work proved to be harmful to them.
3. Protective legislation relating to matters covered in this
article shall be reviewed periodically in the light of scientific
and technological knowledge and shall be revised, repealed or
extended as necessary.
Article 12
1. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women in the field of health
care in order to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and
women, access to health care services, including those related to
family planning.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this
article, States Parties shall ensure to women appropriate services
in connexion with pregnancy, confinement and the post-natal
period, granting free services where necessary, as well as adequate nutrition during pregnancy and lactation.
Article 13
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in other areas of economic and
social life in order to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and
women, the same rights, in particular:
(a) The right to family benefits;
(b) The right to bank loans, mortgages and other forms of
financial credit;
(c) The right to participate in recreational activities, sports
and all aspects of cultural life.
Article 14
1. States Parties shall take into account the particular problems faced by rural women and the significant roles which rural
women play in the economic survival of their families, including
their work in the non-monetized sectors of the economy, and
shall take all appropriate measures to ensure the application of
the provisions of the present Convention to women in rural
areas.
2. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women in rural areas in order
to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women, that they
participate in and benefit from rural development and, in
particular, shall ensure to such women the right:
(a) To participate in the elaboration and implementation of
development planning at all levels;
(b) To have access to adequate health care facilities, including information, counselling and services in family planning;
(c) To benefit directly from social security programmes;
(d) To obtain all types of training and education, formal
and non-formal, including that relating to functional literacy, as
well as, inter alia, the benefit of all community and extension
services, in order to increase their technical proficiency;
(e) To organize self-help groups and co-operatives in order
to obtain -equal access to economic opportunities through employment or self-employment;
(f) To participate in all community activities;
(g) To have access to agricultural credit and loans, marketing facilities, appropriate technology and equal treatment in land
and agrarian reform as well as in land resettlement schemes;

(h) To enjoy adequate living conditions, particularly in relation to housing, sanitation, electricity and water supply, transport and communications.
PART IV
Article 15
1. States Parties shall accord to women equality with men
before the law.
2. States Parties shall accord to women, in civil matters, a
legal capacity identical to that of men and the same opportunities to exercise that capacity. In particular, they shall give
women equal rights to conclude contracts and to administer
property and shall treat them equally in all stages of procedure
in courts and tribunals.
3. States Parties agree that all contracts and all other private
instruments of any kind with a legal effect which is directed at
restricting the legal capacity of women shall be deemed null
and void.
4. States Parties shall accord to men and women the same
rights with regard to the law relating to the movement of persons and the freedom to choose their residence and domicile.
Article 16
1. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women in all matters relating
to marriage and family relations and in particular shall ensure,
on a basis of equality of men and women:
(a) The same right to enter into marriage;
(b) The same right freely to choose a spouse and to enter
into marriage only with their free and full consent;
(c) The same rights and responsibilities during marriage and
at its dissolution;
(d) The same rights and responsibilities as parents, irrespective of their marital status, in matters relating to their
children; in all cases the interests of the children shall be
paramount;
(e) The same rights to decide freely and responsibly on the
number and spacing of their children and to have access to the
information, education and means to enable them to exercise
these rights;
(f) The same rights and responsibilities with regard to
guardianship, wardship, trusteeship and adoption of children,
or similar institutions where these concepts exist in national
legislation; in all cases the interests of the children shall be
paramount;
(g) The same personal rights as husband and wife, including
the right to choose a family name, a profession and an occupation;
(h) The same rights for both spouses in respect of the
ownership, acquisition, management, administration, enjoyment
and disposition of property, whether free of charge or for a
valuable consideration.
2. The betrothal and the marriage of a child shall have no
legal effect, and all necessary action, including legislation, shall
be taken to specify a minimum age for marriage and to make
the registration of marriages in an official registry compulsory.
PART V

Article 17
I. For the purpose of considering the progress made in the
implementation of the present Convention, there shall be established a Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) consisting, at the time of entry into force of the Convention, of
eighteen and, after ratification of or accession to the Convention
by the thirty-fifth State Party, of twenty-three experts of high
moral standing and competence in the field covered by the
Convention. The experts shall be elected by States Parties from
among their nationals and shall serve in their personal capacity,
consideration being given to equitable geographical distribution
and to the representation of the different forms of civilization
as well as the principal legal systems.
2. The members of the Committee shall be elected by secret
ballot from a list of persons nominated by States Parties. Each
State Party may nominate one person from among its own
nationals.

VI. Resolatlom adopted on the repor111 of the Third Committee
3. The initial election shall be held six months after the date
of the entry into force of the present Convention. At least three
months before the date of each election the Secretary-General
of the United Nations shall address a letter to the States Parties
inviting them to submit their nominations within two months.
The Secretary-General shall prepare a list in alphabetical order
of all persons thus nominated, indicating the States Parties which
have nominated them, and shall submit it to the States Parties.
4. Elections of the members of the Committee shall be held
at a meeting of States Parties convened by the Secretary-General
at United Nations Headquarters. At that meeting, for which two
thirds of the States Parties shall constitute a quorum, the persons
elected to the Committee shall be those nominees who obtain
the largest number of votes and an absolute majority of the
votes of the representatives of States Parties present and voting.
5. The members of the Committee shall be elected for a
term of four years. However, the terms of nine of the members
elected at the first election shall expire at the end of two years;
immediately after the first election the names of these nine members shall be chosen by lot by the Chairman of the Committee.
6. The election of the five additional members of the Committee shall be held in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this article, following the thirty-fifth
ratification or accession. The terms of two of the additional
members elected on this occasion shall expire at the end of two
years, the names of these two members having been chosen by
lot by the Chairman of the Committee.
7. For the filling of casual vacancies, the State Party whose
expert has ceased to function as a member of the Committee
shall appoint another expert from among its nationals, subject
to the approval of the Committee.
8. The members of the Committee shall, with the approval
of the General Assembly, receive emoluments from United Nations resources on such terms and conditions as the Assembly
may decide, having regard to the importance of the Committee's
responsibilities.
9. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall provide the necessary staff and facilities for the effective performance of the functions of the Committee under the present
Convention.
Article 18

States Parties undertake to submit to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, for consideration by the Com1.

mittee, a report on the legislative, judicial, administrative or
other measures which they have adopted to give effect to the
provisions of the present Convention and on the progress made
in this respect:
(a) Within one year after the entry into force for the State
concerned;
(b) Thereafter at least every four years and further whenever the Committee so requests.
2. Reports may indicate factors and difficulties affecting the
degree of fulfilment of obligations under the present Convention.
1.

2.

Article 19
The Committee shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
The Committee shall elect its officers for a term of two

years.
Article 20
1. The Committee shall normally meet for a period of not
more than two weeks annually in order to consider the reports
submitted in accordance with article 18 of the present
Convention.
2. The meetings of the Committee shall normally be held at
United Nations Headquarters or at any other convenient place
as determined by the Committee.
Article 21
1. The Committee shall, through the Economic and Social
Council, report annually to the General Assembly of the United
Nations on its activities and may make suggestions and general
recommendations based on the examination of reports and
information received from the States Parties. Such suggestions
and general recommendations shall be included in the report of
the Committee together with comments, if any, from States

Parties.

197

2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit the reports of the Committee to the Commission on the
Status of Women for its information.
Article 22
The specialized agencies shall be entitled to be represented at
the consideration of the implementation of such provisions of
the present Convention as fall within the scope of their activities.
The Committee may invite the specialized agencies to submit
reports on the implementation of the Convention in areas falling
within the scope of their activities.
PART VI

Article 23
Nothing in the present Convention shall affect any provisions
that are more conducive to the achievement of equality between
men and women which may be contained:
(a) In the legislation of a State Party; or
(b) In any other international convention, treaty or agreement in force for that State.
Article 24
States Parties undertake to adopt all necessary measures at
the national level aimed at achieving the full realization of the
rights recognized in the present Convention.
Article 25
1. The present Convention shall be open for signature by
all States.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations is designated as the depositary of the present Convention.
3. The present Convention is subject to ratification. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United·Nations.
4. The present Convention shall be open to accession by all
States. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Article 26
1. A request for the revision of the present Convention may
be made at any time by any State Party by means of a notification in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations shall decide upon the steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such
a request.
Article 27
1. The present Convention shall enter into force on the
thirtieth day after the date of deposit with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of the twentieth instrument of ratification
or accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Convention or acceding to it after the deposit of the twentieth instrument of ratification or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the
thirtieth day after the date of the deposit of its own instrument
of ratification or accession.
Article 28
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall receive
and circulate to all States the text of reservations made by States
at the time of ratification or accession.
2. A reservation incompatible with the object and purpose
of the present Convention shall not be permitted.
3. Reservations may be withdrawn at any time by notification to this effect addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who shall then inform all States thereof. Such
notification shall take effect on the date on which it is received.
1.

Article 29
1. Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the interpretation or application of the present Convention
which is not settled by negotiation shall, at the request of one
of them, be submitted to arbitration. H within six months from
the date of the request for arbitration the parties are unable to
agree on the organization of the arbitration, any one of those

198

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Selillon

parties may refer the dispute to the International Court of
Justice by request in conformity with the Statute of the Court.
2. Each State Party may at the time of signature or ratification of the present Convention or accession thereto declare that it
does not ,consider itself bound by paragraph 1 of this article. The
other States Parties shall not be bound by that paragraph with
respect to any State Party which has made such a reservation.
3. Any State Party which has made a reservation in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article may at any time with-

draw that reservation by notification to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
Article 30
The present Convention, the Arabic, Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed the present Convention.
