United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9158th meeting

Thursday, 20 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ngyema Ndong. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Jardim Oliveira
Mrs. Gui Dan
Mr. Samson
Mr. Nsowah
Mr. Setia
Ms. Ispas
Ms. Mohammed
Mrs. Vásquez Muñoz
Ms. Tranoey
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Tantawy
Ms. O’Kelly
Mr. Curiel

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Strengthening women’s resilience and leadership as a path to peace in regions
plagued by armed groups
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2022/740)
Letter dated 4 October 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/743)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-64259 (E)
*2264259*

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in French) : I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order to enable the Council to do its
work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the microphone
collars will prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a
close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Ms. O’Neill (Canada): I am grateful for the
invitation to deliver two separate statements today. The
second will be on behalf of Canada, and the first will be
on behalf of 64 member States of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security, an informal network
representing all five regional groups of the United
Nations and the European Union.
In Afghanistan, Haiti, Myanmar, the Sudan,
Ukraine, Yemen and many other countries, women
and girls are working courageously to build peace and
shape their countries’ futures. Amidst a sharp rebound
of militarization and misogyny, they are demonstrating,
at great risk to their own safety, their determination,
resilience and capacities. Yet women and girls in
conflict-affected contexts in particular continue to
be excluded from decision-making and targeted with
discrimination and violence, including sexual and
gender-based violence.
Women leaders have made clear what the
international community must do. We, as 64 member
States, reiterate seven commitments.
First, we must protect, respect and promote the
autonomy and human rights of all women and girls.
Secondly, we must advocate for and support
women’s full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation and leadership, at all stages and levels and
in all political and peace processes, and we reiterate
our call on the United Nations to lead by example by
making women’s participation in United Nations-led
peace processes a requirement.
Thirdly, we must create a safe and enabling
environment for all women peacebuilders, human
rights defenders, civil society leaders, journalists
and advocates for gender equality to carry out their
invaluable work, including by championing their role,
amplifying their voices, swiftly and unequivocally
condemning attacks, intimidation and reprisals against
them and ensuring adequate, predictable, sustained and
2/53

20/10/2022

flexible funding so they can carry out their important
work safely and independently.
Fourthly, we continue to call on the United Nations
itself to champion the important work of women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders, as well as
advocates for gender equality, to provide all necessary
protection and support for those at risk and to establish
clear protocols for how all United Nations entities
should respond.
Fifthly, we call on the Security Council to ensure
that all peacekeeping operations and special political
missions provide, monitor and report on support to
women peacebuilders and human rights defenders at
risk and fully support and facilitate independent civil
society contributions to the work of the Council.
Sixthly, we must prevent and respond to all forms of
sexual and gender-based violence and discrimination,
such as by ensuring survivors’ access to essential
services, including sexual and reproductive health
care, and to gender-responsive justice, by holding
perpetrators of such acts to account. We will continue
to encourage the Security Council to pursue the fight
against impunity with all the means at its disposal
and to incorporate and apply conflict-related sexual
violence as a designation criterion in United Nations
sanction regimes.
Finally, we commit to providing greater support for
women and girls subjected to forced displacement and
put at increased risk for violence and discrimination.
It is critical that the international community act
now to close the gaps between the global commitments
set out in the Council’s now 10 resolutions on women
and peace and security and their realization.
(spoke in French)
I will now address the Council on behalf of Canada.
(spoke in English)
Canada is profoundly concerned about the reversal
of generational gains in women’s rights, about the
Taliban attempting to erase women from public life in
Afghanistan — Zahra Nader referred to it this morning
as “gender apartheid”; about attacks on often young,
peaceful women protesters in Iran and the Sudan;
about conflict-related sexual violence in Ethiopia,
Haiti, Myanmar and as part of Russia’s illegal invasion
of Ukraine; and about the murders of women climate
activists and about the dangerous disinformation
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

campaigns targeting women peacebuilders and human
rights defenders.
As we reflect in this debate on ways in which
women and girls, in all their diversity, are overcoming
immense barriers, let us recognize, and thank them for,
their resilience. But let us also be clear that our primary
focus must be on addressing the factors that require
them to be resilient in the first place.
Canada is proud to work with a wide range of
partners around the world to support systemic changes.
We are also looking inwards. Like many other countries,
Canada is developing its next national action plan. To
prepare, our primary civil-society partner, the Women,
Peace and Security Network of Canada, sought input
from across our country. Among the recommendations,
it called on us to focus on the “peace” in women and
peace and security and to bring a more feminist lens to
the term “security”.
(spoke in French)
Its calls are relevant to us all in informing our
next plan. We are broadening the national focus by
addressing a wider range of security issues. We are
recommitting to strong and predictable collaboration
with civil society and indigenous representatives and to
working together to mainstream anti-racist approaches
in our work. We are determined to fully honour the
empowerment of women peacebuilders in all their
diversity, recognizing that support for them and for
women’s movements is one of the greatest contributions
that we can make to the prevention of violent conflict.
We are also committed to working with them and all
Member States to prevent and address the attacks and
reprisals that they face.
(spoke in English)
Last year, I told the Security Council that Canada
was determined to reflect and proceed with humility,
and that we wanted to talk about our successes, but
were also resolved to openly share our challenges (see
S/PV.8886). In that spirit, our Department of National
Defence undertook an independent assessment of
barriers to the meaningful participation of women in
the Canadian Armed Forces in peace operations. For
that, we used the methodology developed through the
Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations. Last
month, we made the results public.
We will keep deepening the work that we are doing
within our own institutions, and, having renewed the

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Elsie Initiative for another five years, we will keep
working with partners globally to ensure receptive
environments and root out harmful practices and
unacceptable behaviours.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the MIKTA Group of
countries, namely, Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of
Korea, Türkiye and Australia. We would like to clearly
express our appreciation to the Gabonese presidency
for convening today’s Security Council debate on
the women and peace and security agenda. The
MIKTA Group of countries also thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report (S/2022/740), which
provides valuable assessments and recommendations
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
More than two decades ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which set the foundation
for guiding the women and peace and security agenda.
In doing so, the Council made it known to the world
that there could not be lasting peace without gender
equality. Yet, despite subsequent resolutions and best
efforts, its implementation has fallen short. The slow
progress was exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. A shadow pandemic of intensified violence
against women and girls emerged, and humanitarian
workers in conflict zones across the world continued to
report increasing rates and harrowing cases on a daily
basis. While we have a solid normative framework in
place, we unfortunately see that its implementation
is put aside during turbulent times, marked by wars,
military coups or seizures of power by force, and during
humanitarian crises resulting from natural disasters or
other threats.
Recent events in countries such as Ukraine,
Afghanistan and Myanmar vividly showed us how
the fragile gains of the women and peace and security
agenda can easily be rolled back, as well as how the
rights, fundamental freedoms and well-being of women
and girls can be violated with impunity. Conflict-related
sexual violence remains a deep and persistent problem,
as it continues to be used as a routine tactical element of
war in situations of armed conflict. Sexual exploitation,
abuse and harassment constitute abhorrent violations
of human rights, mainly affecting women and girls. It

22-642593/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

is therefore imperative to coordinate and scale up our
efforts for prevention and strengthen accountability.
The MIKTA Group of countries highlights the need
for the international community to support national
efforts in ensuring a survival-centred approach, and we
believe that comprehensive assistance, including the
provision of sexual and reproductive health services,
should be provided to victims and survivors of all forms
of sexual and gender-based violence.
Gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls are priorities for the MIKTA Group
in its efforts to strengthen the resilience of women and
girls. Respecting, protecting, promoting and fulfilling
the human rights, safety and well-being of all women
and girls are essential for the achievement of resilient
and sustainable peace and development. The MIKTA
countries therefore remain committed to advancing the
full, equal and meaningful participation and leadership
of women in all stages and at all levels of peace and
security processes. We believe that women’s political
and economic empowerment is crucial to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and the
stabilization of societies emerging from armed conflict
and to strengthening the resilience of women and girls
against future risks of crisis.
In the same vein, the MIKTA countries recognize the
key role that civil society, women’s rights organizations
and women peacebuilders and peacekeepers, as well as
women’s human rights defenders, play in promoting
peace and security, particularly at the local level. We
are deeply concerned to see that, as highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report, women peacebuilders,
journalists, human rights defenders and civil-society
leaders face increasing challenges, including serious
threats to their safety and freedom. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendations, and we are
committed to reversing that deeply worrying trend.
The MIKTA Group also wishes to reiterate its
support for the Secretary-General’s system-wide
Gender Parity Strategy and the Department of Peace
Operations Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, which
have had a significant impact on increasing the number
of women represented within the United Nations
leadership, as well as in peace operations.
As a unique cross-regional group of countries on
different continents, the MIKTA Group underscores
its unwavering commitment to advancing the
implementation of the women and peace and security
4/53

20/10/2022

agenda and its readiness to work with other Member
States as we advance our common goal of achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls. Only then can we truly achieve inclusive societies
that allow for progress in establishing and maintaining
peace and security, upholding human rights and
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): We thank the
presidency of the Security Council, Gabon, for having
convened today’s open debate. We also thank all the
briefers for their comprehensive briefings. While the
delegation of Ukraine aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security and the European Union, I would like
to add the following remarks in our national capacity.
We express our strong solidarity with all the women
and girls who at this very moment, despite all the
often-life-threatening challenges and difficulties, show
incredible courage and leadership in their countries.
In Ukraine, we have witnessed that peace and security
can be fragile, but what remains incredibly reliable and
strong are people — men and women; they can never
be defeated. During seven months of resistance by the
entire Ukrainian nation to the Russian war against our
country, women in Ukraine have been shaping their
immediate future. Indeed, the current resilience in
Ukraine has a particularly female face.
Despite the challenges posed by the destruction
and shifting economic realities, Ukrainian women are
organizing in ways that contribute to peace and security.
They lead, and they take deliberate decisions in defence
of their communities and their nation in both combat
and non-combat roles. They are on the front lines of
ensuring continuing education for the children in our
country, addressing access to technology, physical and
psychological health care and social protection for our
people. They bear the sole responsibility for the care of
themselves, their children and elderly family members.
Each of them fulfils an individual rescue mission to
save their loved ones. They are also on the front lines of
military defence,
Women’s participation in the security and defence
sector in Ukraine has increased tremendously. Over
38,000 women are serving in a military capacity in
the Armed Forces of Ukraine, with the total number
of women in the armed forces reaching 50,000. Over
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

5,000 are defending our country on the front lines. This
is a concrete example of how important women to the
defence of their own country.

participation in peace negotiations. And the United
Nations peacekeeping missions are not on track to
reach gender parity at all levels by 2028.

Strengthening women’s leadership around the
world is of vital importance, and there are many ways
to do that. I would like to mention the initiative of the
First Lady of Ukraine, Ms. Olena Zelenska, on holding
annual summits of global first ladies and gentlemen,
which is a cross-regional platform for soft power to
advance dialogue and contribute to building a peaceful
future. It is indeed an effective tool.

These trends are clearly going in the wrong
direction, preventing the fulfilment of the goals set in
the Security Council’s resolutions on the women and
peace and security agenda. And these trends are deeply
harmful, given the vast evidence that gender equality
offers an effective path to conflict prevention and
sustainable peace: women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peacekeeping and peace operations has
resulted in improved mandate delivery; their inclusion
in peace talks has proven indispensable for forging
lasting peace agreements; and their contributions as
mediators, journalists and human rights defenders have
been crucial for political change.

We welcome the important contributions to
strengthening women’s resilience and leadership made
by Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Natalia Kanem, Executive
Director of the United Nations Population Fund.
Ukraine’s commitment to supporting women
remains strong. Resolution 1325 (2000) and the women
and peace and security agenda have always been
important for our country. Ukraine is the first State
Member of the United Nations to adopt a national action
plan under conditions of war. Its second national action
plan will be updated soon, reflecting the consequences
of the Russian aggression, as Russian forces in Ukraine
have actively targeted women. According to Special
Representative Patten, rapes and sexual assaults
attributed to Moscow’s forces in Ukraine are part of
the Russian military strategy. Ukraine has therefore
partnered with the United Nations to prevent and
respond to all forms of gender-based violence, including
sexual violence, to ensure meaningful justice through
holding the perpetrators accountable. And we may well
become a model for reparations and compensation for
victims of sexual violence in conflict.
Today I would like to pay tribute to all women who
sacrificed their lives for peace in their own countries.
It happens in all corners of the world. It happens every
day, and it is happening now. The least we can do is
forgo indifference, act and bring justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We gather at a time
of enormous turmoil and tension around the globe.
Military expenditures have increased, which often
comes at the cost of social spending. Funding for
women’s organizations has decreased, as has women’s

We are particularly concerned about the increased
violence against women human rights defenders
when standing up for peace, democracy and the rule
of law, from Belarus to Afghanistan. The killing of
Mahsa Amini in Iran — who is a symbol of the many
thousands who have peacefully protested for their
rights and freedoms — must be condemned in the
strongest terms. We must speak with a unified voice in
support of respecting human rights and show solidarity
with and protect those who have taken to the streets
to protest the systematic oppression of women’s rights
since Mahsa’s killing.
We also ask the Security Council to adopt a text
that sends a strong message to end the violence against
the civilian population in Myanmar, including killings
and arbitrary detention of women activists, and to
call on Member States to prevent the flow of arms
into Myanmar, taking up the call from the General
Assembly in its resolution last year (General Assembly
resolution 75/287).
We are concerned about the increase in conflictrelated sexual violence documented in 2021. Reports
of sexual enslavement by members of armed groups
are particularly horrifying. While sexual and genderbased violence disproportionately affects women and
girls, men and boys are specifically targeted in such
contexts as detention settings and child recruitment.
It is often used as a weapon of war and to attack
civilian populations, as also documented by the All
Survivors project in Afghanistan and Syria, among
other situations.

22-642595/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

We are particularly concerned about the risk of
sexual exploitation and the trafficking of women and
children fleeing Ukraine as a result of the Russian
aggression. An effective response to human trafficking
must also include private and financial-sector actors, as
called for in resolution 2331 (2016). The “Finance against
Slavery and Trafficking” initiative (FAST) initiated by
Liechtenstein more than three years ago has undertaken
activities in the areas of prevention and financial
inclusion. In this context, FAST has collaborated
with Eastern European financial intelligence units to
promote European financial-inclusion measures. And
as a result of a joint financial-inclusion initiative with
FAST, the three largest banks in Liechtenstein are
providing refugees from Ukraine with fee-free bank
accounts. This is but one example of the impact the
financial sector can have in preventing and responding
to trafficking and slavery and in empowering women
who account for the majority of the 50 million
victims worldwide.
Accountability remains key to addressing conflictrelated sexual violence and is a matter of prevention.
International criminal-justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced our efforts to fight impunity,
including groundbreaking verdicts on sexual and
gender-based violence by the International Criminal
Court. The pioneering role of the Rome Statute with
its gender-sensitive approach can serve as a source
of inspiration for national and regional courts as well
as other accountability mechanisms. We applaud,
in particular, the strong gender perspective of the
International, Impartial, and Independent Mechanism
and commend the recent launch of its gender strategy.
It contributes to a more holistic and comprehensive
understanding of the patterns of persecution and helps
strengthen accountability for the crimes committed in
Syria by all parties.

20/10/2022

now the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao (BARMM). One of the first acts passed by
the Bangsamoro parliament created the Bangsamoro
Women Commission (BWC). Mandated to advance
the rights and welfare of women, the BWC launched a
regional action plan on women, peace and security. The
regional action plan complements the national action
plan to better localize women, peace and security in
the BARMM.
United Nations agencies in the Philippines worked
with the Commission to develop the regional action
plan. Partnership between the United Nations and the
Government has been instrumental in implementing
the goals of the women and peace and security agenda.
Last year, the Government partnered with UN-Women
to provide leadership workshops with former female
combatants and families of former insurgents. This
training provided a platform to discuss justice and
reconciliation and strengthened participants’ capacities
to lead as peacebuilders in their communities.
Going forward, the Philippines is reviewing
lessons learned from our third-generation national
action plan on women, peace and security. These
lessons will strengthen the crafting of the next version
of our national action plan. We remain determined to
fully and effectively implement this women, peace and
security agenda. We do this because we know that this
is indispensable to achieving peace for all.
We encourage Member States to develop their
own action plans, share and learn good practices and
work with all stakeholders. We do not underestimate
the challenge of resolving conflict and the tortuous
journey ahead. However, there are no short cuts to
peace. We can get there only if women have an equal
place at the helm.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.

Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): The Philippines
thanks Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the briefers for their very useful briefings.

Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Gabonese presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s open debate.
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women, the African Union
Special Envoy and Ms. Zahra Nader for their briefings.

Peace is possible and more durable with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women. The
Philippines is proof of this. For decades, peace was
elusive in the southern Philippines. A women-led
peace process, which held inclusive dialogue that
embraced all stakeholders, forged the way to what is
6/53

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statements
made on behalf of the European Union, the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and the Group
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, and I would
like to add a few points in my national capacity.
Despite all the efforts to implement the women
and peace and security agenda since it was launched
22 years ago, women are still too often excluded from
peace processes. Despite being marginalized, women
are putting their lives on the line and being subjected
to intimidation, reprisals and physical violence as they
strive to take action on the ground to ensure the peace
and prosperity of their communities. To support them,
we suggest focusing on three areas of action — justice,
education and support for regional and national efforts.
First, with regard to justice, in conflict zones
around the world, including areas controlled by armed
groups, women and girls are at an unprecedented
risk of violence, including sexual and gender-based
violence. In that regard, safe and secure access to
justice for women and girls must be guaranteed. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
strengthen support for women human rights defenders
and accountability for perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict situations. Luxembourg is concerned about
the high incidence of sexual and gender-based violence
committed by Russia’s armed forces in its war of
aggression against Ukraine. There must be no impunity
for those crimes.
Secondly, concerning education, hindrances to
women’s participation can appear at an early age if
young girls are deprived of an adequate education,
including as a result of insecurity. In that regard,
Luxembourg supports the efforts of the Niger, whose
President has just launched a boarding-school initiative
for girls in order to provide them with accessible,
safe, quality and sustainable education. Luxembourg
reiterates its commitment to a safe school environment
in the spirit of the Safe Schools Declaration, which we
encourage all Member States to endorse.
Lastly, with respect to support for regional and
national efforts, the increased activity of terrorist
and violent extremist groups has serious implications
for the safety of women and girls, especially in West
Africa and the Sahel. It is crucial to work hand in
hand with regional and national partners to promote
the rights of women and girls. Luxembourg is proud
to support the work of the Office of Ms. Bineta Diop,
the African Union Special Envoy on Women and Peace
and Security, aimed at protecting women and girls in
the Sahel from sexual and gender-based violence, in

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

partnership with the Pan-African Centre for Gender,
Peace and Development. In another example, a
Luxembourg police officer deployed with the European
Union Police and Rule of Law Mission for the occupied
Palestinian territory helped to launch a network of
female Palestinian civilian police personnel in May.
Luxembourg’s support for strengthening the role
of women as agents for peace is part of our feminist
foreign policy and our national action plan on women
and peace and security. The Council can count on our
continued commitment to supporting women and girls,
without whom peace, security and prosperity cannot be
achieved and whose resilience should be an example to
us all.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Gabon for convening
this year’s annual open debate and the briefers for
their statements.
Malta aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.
Many conflicts and crises around the world
continue to disproportionately affect women and girls.
The women and peace and security agenda cannot
be realized without the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and girls, in all their diversity
and in all aspects of peace and security. Malta
recognizes the immense bravery of the many women at
risk, including human rights defenders, peacebuilders
and women with disabilities, who continue to make
active and tangible contributions to their societies.
They are crucial leaders of change, and yet they still
face gendered obstacles.
The Russian war on Ukraine has led to the
displacement of millions of women and girls, leaving
them especially vulnerable to conflict-related sexual
violence. Courageous women in Myanmar continue to
face risks of sexual violence, arbitrary execution and
torture in their quest for democracy. In Afghanistan, the
Taliban’s regressive policies have set back women’s and
girls’ rights and have violated and threatened LGBTIQ
persons, based on their sexual orientation and gender
identity. In Syria, millions of women and children
still live in catastrophic humanitarian conditions. In
Ethiopia, parties responsible for sexual violence have
not been held accountable, while the ongoing conflict

22-642597/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
have devastating effects on women and girls.
Women are still at the forefront of protests asking
for change, as seen in Iran, the Sudan and Yemen. Their
daily struggles should ignite our resolve to act and
uphold women’s rights and gender equality. Member
States need to ensure consistent, visible and solid
political support for women. We firmly believe in the
need to redouble efforts to end impunity and strengthen
accountability when it comes to investigating cases of
intimidation, attacks or reprisals against civil-society
organizations and women human rights defenders.
Literacy and education have pivotal roles in
strengthening women’s resilience and leadership.
Women-led initiatives often make communities more
resilient in the face of conflict. The Secretary-General’s
most recent report on women and peace and security
(S/2022/740) discusses the gendered impact of small
arms and light weapons on women and girls. In that
regard, women-led organizations can lead strategies
to address those effects, especially at the community
level. We encourage Member States to endorse the
Safe Schools Declaration, whose commitments can
contribute to facilitating the participation of women
in decision-making at all levels. National action
plans continue to be a critical tool for countries to
prioritize the women and peace and security agenda
in national and foreign policy. In 2020, we launched
our first action plan, reaffirming our commitment to
strengthening peace and security. During our tenure on
the Security Council in 2023 and 2024, Malta aims to
support regular, diverse and independent civil-society
participation in the work of the Council.
As the Secretary-General’s report on women
and peace and security further notes, there has been
an increase in the number of women briefers in the
Council. As we move closer to taking our seat in the
Council, Malta is proud to also join the statement of
shared commitments initially spearheaded by the
consecutive presidencies of Ireland, Kenya and Mexico.
We hope that will lead to greater visibility of the women
and peace and security agenda and of gender issues
more broadly.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like to thank
Gabon for organizing today’s important annual open
debate on women and peace and security. I would also
8/53

20/10/2022

like to express my thanks to all the briefers who spoke
earlier today. It is always important to recall Africa’s
role in bringing the women and peace and security
agenda before the Security Council.
Egypt is working extensively to expand and deepen
partnerships in support of the women and peace and
security agenda, especially between the United Nations
and the African Union. In that connection, in June
Egypt hosted the third edition of the Aswan Forum for
Sustainable Peace and Development, entitled “Africa in
an Era of Cascading Risks and Climate Vulnerability:
Pathways for a Peaceful, Resilient and Sustainable
Continent”, where we witnessed rich discussions and
in-depth deliberations. The Forum concluded with
reaffirming the need for flexible and sustainable
financing for women and youth-led initiatives,
aiming to address peace, security and climate-change
risks and how to build economic resilience, as well
as leveraging women’s crucial role in building
resilience, including by advancing their meaningful
participation in decision-making, climate action and
peacebuilding efforts.
Egypt is keen to advance the women and peace and
security agenda through a holistic approach that aligns
efforts across the peace continuum so as to enhance its
effectiveness and impact, which is highly relevant in
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
In that regard, Egypt takes pride in championing
the resolution on United Nations action on sexual
exploitation and abuse, which the General Assembly
has adopted annually since its seventy-first session, the
most recent instance being resolution 76/303, adopted
on 2 September. That resolution promotes a systemwide approach to implementing the zero-tolerance
policy on eliminating such heinous acts.
His Excellency the President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt was one of the first leaders to join the circle of
leadership initiative to prevent sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations operations. Raising awareness
of sexual exploitation and abuse is an integral part of
the comprehensive training received by Egyptian forces
prior to their deployment in peacekeeping operations.
Egypt is eager to stress the major importance of
ensuring the necessary balance in the implementation
of the four pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda — prevention, protection, participation,
and relief and recovery — while ensuring national
ownership and taking into consideration the cultural
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

and societal specificities of each country dealing with
armed conflict or emerging from it.
In conclusion, Egypt calls for renewed political and
moral commitments to further support and empower
women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations,
including by investing in women’s resilience and
leadership. Women are the fundamental agents of
change during the transitional period from conflict
to development. Their empowerment is a must for
a healthy and coherent society aiming to achieve
sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by echoing other
speakers today in congratulating Gabon on its
leadership as President of the Security Council for the
month of October.
I would like to highlight in particular the objective
and multidimensional focus applied to the different
aspects of the issue on our agenda, which increasingly
encompasses an analysis of the specific problems that
women face in armed conflict situations.
A few days ago, I participated in a forum on the
impact of armed conflict on the lives of women and
girls. I heard at first hand a number of heart-wrenching
testimonies of the senseless and relentless violence that
destroys lives and extinguishes hope. The commitment
that Ecuador has undertaken in that regard to ensure
full respect for the rights of women and girls is one
we will strive to strengthen every day. We must take
concrete action so that victims do not suffer in silence,
while giving them a voice that can be heard in the
Security Council.
Ecuador’s position on the issue has been steadfast
throughout the years. The international community
cannot remain indifferent to the voices of the thousands
of women and girls across various conflict zones who
are calling for justice. Multilateralism offers spaces in
which to make such issues visible and to listen to victims,
promote and support cooperation between regional
organizations and analyse conflicts from a holistic
perspective. Moreover, we require multilateralism to
lead by example when it comes to respect for human
rights and to act as an ally to strengthen national
systems for accountability, justice and reparations for
the victims of armed groups.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Ecuador reiterates its support for the appeal
issued on 27 September, together with current and
other incoming members of the Security Council, for
the Taliban to reverse the decision taken to prevent
girls from accessing secondary education. Girls have
the right to an education, and women have a right to
participate in all areas of public life. It is vital that
women and girls be able to enjoy their rights and that,
through those rights, they be permitted to fulfil their
hopes and dreams.
The Council must work closely with other United
Nations organs to strengthen the women and peace
and security agenda and promote the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We will bolster those efforts
during our 2023-2024 term on the Council.
The increased presence of women in peacekeeping
operations and their enhanced participation in
conflict resolution processes will lead to positive
results, strengthen resilience and promote women’s
participation in public life and in leadership roles in
those areas plagued by armed groups.
Finally, in line with the principles my country
staunchly defends, Ecuador has signed the statement
of shared commitments to promote the women and
peace and security agenda, the implementation of
which we continue to resolutely support as we seek
to bolster the presence and participation of women.
In that connection, we endorse the press statement
made this morning calling on other delegations to join
that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mrs. Zalabata Torres (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia appreciates the efforts of the
Security Council, and of the Gabonese presidency in
particular, to recognize the importance of women’s
leadership in achieving peaceful conflict resolution
and peace.
The new Government of President Petro Urrego
prioritizes the development of policies and programmes
with a cross-cutting gender approach, taking into
account the needs and interests of all women in conflict
situations, especially those of indigenous, rural and
African descent, who suffer disproportionately from
the impacts of all forms of violence.
Our new peace policies and programmes will be
formulated and implemented with the participation

22-642599/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

of women, ensuring our political representation, our
right to a life free from violence and the exercise of
our autonomy to decide on matters pertaining to our
bodies and all other areas of our lives. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his report (S/2022/740), we believe that
guaranteeing women’s rights, including our sexual and
reproductive health and rights, is a necessary condition
for women to live and to be able to contribute to peace
and security. For that reason, we are pleased that the
Secretary-General recognizes the progress that my
country has made in that regard.
Peacebuilding requires acknowledgement of the
various issues and challenges that women experience in
all our forms of diversity, especially those of us who live
through armed, political, cultural and environmental
conflicts. The Government of Colombia, which includes
Vice-President Francia Márquez Mina, an AfroColombian woman, and myself as its representative,
an indigenous woman of the Arhuaco people, will
contribute to recognizing and guaranteeing access to
power for women who belong to minorities — not only
ethnic minorities but also gender, sexual orientation,
generational and regional minorities.
As women, we have the knowledge and skills
to mediate and resolve conflicts between armed
and unarmed actors in a peaceful, successful and
sustainable manner. For that reason, my Government
is committed to implementing affirmative measures to
guarantee gender equity in peacebuilding and peace
consolidation processes. In particular, it is committed
to implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
through a cross-cutting approach that respects women’s
various identities.
My Government is making rapid progress in
developing a road map and rolling out its national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We agree with the Secretary-General that national
action plans continue to be a key tool for prioritizing
issues related to women, peace and security in national
and foreign policy. In that process, we have enjoyed
the practical and logistical support of UN-Women in
facilitating dialogue with civil-society organizations
and sharing good practices and lessons learned.
In addition to that and to the increase in women’s
representation in the elections to our legislature, our
work in terms of political participation is already
reflected in, among other things, a parity Cabinet and
10/53

20/10/2022

our development of a feminist foreign policy with a
gender-transformative approach.
I would like to conclude by underscoring Colombia’s
progress in one of the areas that the Secretary-General
highlights in his report. Colombian women play a
decisive role in the work of the Truth Commission,
whose historic report includes a chapter dedicated
to women and members of the LGBTI community.
Despite the challenges that remain, we have tangible
proof that transformations are possible if women
wield decision-making power. We are aware that we
have a long way to go, but we are certain that only by
strengthening the role of women in their communities
and acknowledging their contributions will we be able
to build comprehensive peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Malefane (South Africa): I have the honour to
present this statement as South Africa’s focal point on
women and peace and security.
I would like to thank the delegation of Gabon for
convening this annual open debate on women and
peace and security under the theme “Strengthening
women’s resilience and leadership as a path to peace
in regions plagued by armed groups”. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/740)
and the briefers — Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Executive Director of UN-Women Sima
Bahous and the representatives of civil society — for
their insightful interventions.
South Africa fully supports the Security Council’s
continuing attention to the women and peace and
security agenda throughout this year. We see it as a
demonstration of the sustained commitment of the
United Nations and its Member States to supporting
gender equality, women’s empowerment and leadership
and ways to advance women’s full, equal, meaningful
and effective participation in peace processes. Despite
the Council’s efforts to advance the women and
peace and security agenda, its implementation has
not translated into concrete progress on the ground.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on the subject
recognizes the progress that has been made, as well
as the challenges that are still to be tackled. It has
become clear that an increase in violent conflicts,
increasing activity by terrorist and armed groups on the
African continent, military coups and unconstitutional
changes of Government have had a negative impact
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

on the advancement of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Armed groups are posing greater challenges to the
implementation of the agenda because of their expanded
activities. They not only undermine State authority but
engage in activities that violate international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, including
conflict-related sexual violence and restrictions on
women and girls’ participation in public life, which fuel
conflicts and exacerbate violence against women and
the marginalization of women’s participation in peace
processes. A key challenge concerning such armed
groups is the difficulty of holding them to account
for their illegal actions. With a view to strengthening
women’s resilience and leadership in such situations,
South Africa would like to share the following points.
First, it is important not only to combat the
activities of armed and terrorist groups and their
resurgence, proliferation and financing, but also to
address their genesis. A whole-of-society approach,
with all segments of the communities concerned
represented, including women, is needed to address
the proliferation and presence of armed groups in the
countries affected. However, a regional approach is
also needed for armed groups that have inter-State and
regional effects that result in large numbers of refugees
and the displaced. We are seeing that in most regions
on the African continent. Measures taken to combat the
activities of armed and terrorist groups should also not
be used against women’s civil-society organizations,
human rights defenders or journalists. In that regard,
adherence to obligations under international law,
in particular international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, remains critical.
Secondly, women in conflict-affected situations are
usually marginalized, and their access to and control of
productive resources are limited, as are their economic
opportunities compared to men’s. The women and peace
and security agenda should therefore always be linked
to the promotion of women’s economic empowerment.
It is by protecting women’s civil, political, economic
and social rights, including in situations of armed
conflict, that they will see their equal and meaningful
participation in public life and in decision-making
bodies realized. That also extends to the protection of
women’s sexual and reproductive health and rights.
Thirdly, we believe that women’s organizations
and networks are of cardinal importance in fostering

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

solidarity, cooperation and coordination on issues
concerning women in armed conflict. We are reminded
of the activities of our own South African Women in
Dialogue, which since its inception in 2003 has shared
the experiences of South African women in peace
negotiations and peacebuilding with various African
countries affected by conflict, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the Sudan,
among others. We also recognize the significant role
of the Mano River Union Women’s Peace Network in
contributing to peace in that region, which is an area
that was once overrun by armed groups. We believe
that they are some of the best practices for emulating
in building resilience and support for women in regions
plagued by armed groups. We are pleased that, in the
past few years, a number of global networks have been
established to accelerate the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. South Africa
currently co-chairs the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network and the Group of Friends of the
African Women Leaders Network (AWLN), important
platforms that galvanize support and engage in critical
advocacy aimed at advancing the women and peace
and security agenda at the national, regional and global
levels. Key to their activities is sharing experiences and
conducting fact-finding missions through solidarity
field missions, such as the AWLN Baeriswyl solidarity
missions to Mozambique and Mali.
Fourthly, the continuous skilling, training and
capacity-building of women in all sectors is important
so that they can meaningfully participate in peace
processes. South Africa continues to contribute to
training and capacity-building for women in peace
processes at the continental and local levels. We conduct
annual youth and women’s training programmes on
conflict resolution, mediation and negotiation, which
are offered by our Foreign Ministry to women from
conflict-affected countries. Some of the trainees are
now members of various peacebuilding initiatives in
their respective countries.
Fifthly, we are concerned about the vulnerabilities
of women involved in promoting peace and security in
conflict-affected countries. Understandably, the report
of the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security for the current period is dedicated to supporting
women human rights defenders, peacebuilders and
civil society. Consistent with resolution 2493 (2019),
Member States should create environments that are
conducive for all women involved in the promotion of

22-6425911/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

the women and peace and security agenda to carry out
their work independently, without fear or intimidation.
Any violations of the rights of women, including those
of women journalists, should be condemned and the
perpetrators must be held accountable. We also believe
that it is necessary for those women’s organizations to
be provided with the resources to carry out their work,
an issue also raised in resolution 2493 (2019).
Sixthly and finally, we would like to address the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence, a major
scourge in conflict situations. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict for developing the Model
Legislative Provisions and Guidance on Investigation
and Prosecution of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.
That framework will aid the relevant national authorities
in addressing acts of conflict-related sexual violence
and rendering justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to warmly thank the President
for organizing today’s open debate, and the briefers for
their valuable contributions.
The world is full of suffering, but it is also full
of overcoming — that is how women’s rights activist
Helen Keller described resilience. The Afghan author
Homeira Qaderi also illustrates that in her memoir
Dancing in the Mosque, in which she recounts her
adolescence in Herat under the Taliban regime, where
she managed, clandestinely, to teach young girls and
become a literary scholar herself.
Homeira Qaderi is exceptional, but she is not
an exception. Women are very often on the front
line of peacebuilding in their communities, not
only in Afghanistan but also in Myanmar, the Sahel
and Ukraine, to give only a few examples. Women
courageously engage in conflict prevention and
resolution as well as in efforts for reconstruction,
humanitarian aid and justice. In many countries, they
are at the forefront of movements against authoritarian
regimes and refuse to accept political proposals that do
not guarantee their rights.
Nevertheless, we are seeing challenges to our
gender-equality gains. The gap between normative
frameworks and reality continues to widen, while
women are missing out on opportunities to invest their
12/53

20/10/2022

immense potential in the future of their countries.
Relying primarily on women’s resilience is neither
sustainable nor fair. The Security Council has both the
duty and the power to support women peacemakers and
ensure that their rights are respected. As an elected
member of the Security Council, Switzerland will make
the following contributions.
In the Council itself, my country will seek to pursue
a systematic, innovative and action-oriented approach.
We will aim to integrate the women and peace and
security agenda in all contexts into the Council’s
agenda and to prevent reprisals. In that regard, we will
join the women and peace and security presidency
shared commitments.
With regard to action on the ground, the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/740) illustrates that
we are far from achieving the equal and meaningful
participation of women in all their diversity and at all
stages of peace processes. Switzerland will therefore
continue to support the creation of networks of women
mediators and peacebuilders, such as those in Lebanon,
where we support networking efforts among women
from different political backgrounds. We will focus on
women’s participation in peace processes and continue
to listen to the voices of civil society.
Finally, the success of all those efforts hinges on
ensuring a safe environment for women’s participation.
The increase in attacks on schools targeting female
students and teachers, as well as the large number of
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, signal a
disturbing negative trend. Respect for international
humanitarian law is an absolute obligation for all actors,
including non-State armed groups. When those rights
are not respected, the Council must use the instruments
at its disposal to ensure accountability. The inclusion of
sexual and gender-based violence designation criteria
in sanctions regimes is one such tool, and we will
therefore lend our support to those efforts.
The Council is regularly briefed by women
peacemakers and human rights defenders. It is essential
for the Council not only to rely on the resilience of
those women but also to take action to fully implement
the normative framework of the women and peace and
security agenda, to which my country will contribute.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Madam President, for convening
today’s important annual debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on women’s resilience and
leadership. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and the civil-society
representatives for their briefings.
Achieving sustainable peace and resilience in
conflict-affected countries requires comprehensive
and context-specific measures that ensure the human
security of every individual. With that in mind, Japan
has placed support for women’s resilience and leadership
at the core of its second national action plan on women
and peace and security, in which 79 actions to that end
are listed, such as supporting women to participate,
including in leadership and active roles, in formal and
informal peace negotiations and the decision-making of
peacebuilding processes.
Those actions have been reflected in the assistance
on the ground. For example, Japan has continued to
support a UN-Women-led project in Afghanistan to
enhance the resilience and leadership of internally
displaced and conflict-affected women and civilsociety stakeholders. Livelihood skills training has
enabled women to launch their community-based
essential economic activities.
At the same time, leadership training was provided
to women’s civil-society organizations working for
enhanced resilience. Japan also supported another UNWomen-led multi-partner project in the Lake Chad
region in Cameroon and Nigeria, which successfully
concluded last year. That project provided agricultural
skills training to women who were affected by Boko
Haram. Leadership training was also provided to civilsociety stakeholders to prevent violent extremism. As
evidenced by those examples, women’s resilience and
leadership can be effectively pursued in tandem.
Since 2014, Japan has hosted five iterations of the
World Assembly on Women in Tokyo, where the world’s
national leaders in various fields gather to discuss
gender equality and women’s empowerment. Women
and peace and security has always been a key agenda
item of the World Assembly for Women, with in-depth
discussions in that regard. After its coronavirus disease
hiatus, the sixth World Assembly for Women is coming
back on 3 December and will be held in Tokyo, with
women’s participation in peace and security featured
in the conference. I trust that it will be an excellent

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

opportunity to strengthen partnerships and accelerate
actions for the shared mission among member States
and other various stakeholders.
We are not short on ideas. What we need are
actions to enhance women’s reliance and leadership in
a sustainable manner. Japan looks forward to becoming
an even more integral part of the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda in the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland commends
Gabon for convening this important debate. We would
also like to express our appreciation to the Deputy
Secretary-General for her statement and for the
valuable report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/740),
and to all the briefers for their insightful and thoughtprovoking remarks.
Poland aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security, which underscore the
importance of keeping the issue of women and peace
and security high on the agenda of all relevant United
Nations bodies, especially now, when the number of
violent conflicts is higher than it has ever been since
1945. Sadly, this year’s anniversary of the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) is not a moment
for celebration, against the dire backdrop of a surge in
violent conflict and a reversal of generational gains in
women’s rights.
The takeover of power by the Taliban in Afghanistan
has practically wiped out the decades of progress that
had been made in women’s recognition, protection and
participation in public life. Instead, restrictions and
obstacles on women’s rights continue to mount and
their right to political participation has been virtually
eliminated. As a result, it is not only women but the
whole of Afghan society that is suffering from the
disruption of education, social and business processes.
In Ukraine, we are witnessing the devastating
impact of Russia’s aggression, which is deliberately
targeting the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure and disproportionately affecting women
and girls. It is horrifying that as Pramila Patten, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, recently stated, the rapes
and sexual assaults attributed to Moscow’s forces in

22-6425913/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

20/10/2022

Ukraine are part of Russia’s military strategy and a
deliberate tactic to dehumanize the victims. We need
to create efficient mechanisms to protect and support
women, including those forced into immigration or
displacement, who are more vulnerable to sexual and
gender-based violence and discrimination.

Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy welcomes the initiative
of Gabon to convene the Security Council’s annual
open debate on women and peace and security, which
enables us to reiterate our strong support for resolution
1325 (2000) and the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

In times of crisis and proliferating armed conflicts,
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in conflict prevention, crisis management, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding faces significant obstacles.
Despite all the challenges, the women in Afghanistan,
Colombia, Ethiopia, Myanmar, Ukraine, Syria, the
Sudan, Yemen and other war- and conflict-ridden
countries have continued working to build and sustain
peace. Their heroic resistance shows us that brute force
will never win against the human need for dignity and
freedom. Violence and intimidation targeting women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders are aimed
at preventing them from participating in political
engagement and curbing their public activity and are
therefore a serious threat to peace, democracy and
human rights. The current women and peace and security
normative framework is robust, but the international
community’s support strategies and response
mechanisms are still inadequate and underdeveloped.
Our main goal should therefore be the development
of effective protection mechanisms that will empower
all women and make good use of their resilience and
strength. Our actions should be more decisive. They also
need to be more focused and coordinated. The crucial
task remains to treat obligations under the women and
peace and security agenda as an indispensable part of
other multi-annual and global United Nations strategies
and agendas, in particular those related to peace and
security and development.

Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security and the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect, and would like to add a
few remarks in its national capacity.

Let me also emphasize the involvement of the
younger generation in building a culture of equality
between women and men and a culture of lasting peace
and security. Members of the younger generation, both
girls and boys, have a special role to play. They will
have a fundamental impact on the kind of world we will
live in. The sooner we commit to providing adequate
education and skills, the sooner we will lay the
foundations for lasting peace and security, sustainable
development, resilience and future prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
14/53

Promoting the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all areas of public life and in
our main decision-making processes is key to bringing
change and fostering peaceful coexistence. Since the
adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000) a lot has
been accomplished, but women and girls continue to
bear a disproportionate burden in conflict and remain
under- or unrepresented in peace-process efforts, in
spite of their constructive contribution to conflict
resolution at the grass-roots level and their presence on
the front lines.
Italy has a long-standing tradition of promoting
gender equality and women’s empowerment. We have
strongly supported resolution 1325 (2000) since its
adoption, and we devote significant effort and resources
to promoting women’s participation in peace and
international mediation processes. Women have proved
to be extremely successful in protecting civilians,
accessing communities and creating relationships
of trust with local populations, especially the most
vulnerable categories. Peacebuilding and peacekeeping
also mean mediation, a sector in which women
have proved to be particularly effective. It has been
demonstrated that peace agreements are 20 per cent
more likely to last at least two years and 35 per cent
more likely to last 15 years when women are included
in peace processes.
At the national level, we are implementing our
fourth action plan on women and peace and security, and
we are a proud supporter of the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network, launched in October 2017 to
promote gender equality and foster women’s inclusion in
peace processes, mediation efforts and peacebuilding in
the Mediterranean region. The Network offers training,
capacity-building and networking opportunities and
has led to the establishment of the Global Alliance of
Regional Women Mediators Network in September
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

2019, uniting voices from six different regions of the
world in a call to accelerate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on the ground.

women in decision-making processes contribute to
sustainable peace and conflict prevention, we seem to
be moving in the opposite direction.

At the international level, we have strengthened our
partnership with the United Nations system in favour of
women and girls through increased core funding to UNWomen and policy commitments. We support the action
of United Nations agencies on the ground in working for
the full realization of Sustainable Development Goal
5, and we have also increased our financial support to
UN-Women and the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund. We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, and we firmly believe in the benefits that
the presence of well-integrated female personnel in
peacekeeping operations provides. We also uphold
the importance of streamlining the women and peace
and security agenda in all the relevant discussions of
the Council.

Russia’s illegal war against Ukraine painfully shows
the devastating effects of armed conflict on women and
girls. As if targeted attacks on civilian neighbourhoods
and institutions, including schools and hospitals, were
not enough, sexual and gender-based violence is being
used as a weapon of war. We need decisive action to
sanction such crimes. Austria therefore supports the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine, in Vienna, and the ongoing investigations of
the International Criminal Court, in Ukraine.

In conclusion, the participation of women is a key
requisite for creating resilient, inclusive and peaceful
communities. We remain fully committed to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in our efforts to pursue the reinforcement of the
global peacekeeping and peacebuilding architecture.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): Austria also aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
We very much appreciate Gabon’s efforts to ensure
an open and focused debate today, and we thank the
briefers for sharing their views and encourage them to
keep up their important work.
Austria commends the Secretary-General for his
continued commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda and UN-Women Executive Director
Sima Bahous for spearheading women’s rights
and empowerment.
Once again, the annual women and peace and
security report (S/2022/740) paints a grim picture of
the situation of women and girls in conflict-affected
countries. We are facing a triple crisis in terms of
security, the global humanitarian situation and human
rights. And as so often occurs, women and girls are
disproportionately affected. Despite the clear evidence
that gender equality and the meaningful inclusion of

Those committed to the women and peace and
security agenda must implement it in their foreign,
security and development policies and in their
humanitarian assistance. That is not always easy to do,
as we all know, but Austria would like to share some
examples of what we do in that respect.
This year, €15 million of the Austrian international
emergency relief fund are earmarked for projects
supporting Ukrainian women and children in Ukraine
and its neighbouring countries. A gender-responsive
approach is integrated in all our efforts to support
Ukraine, including immediate and longer-term
responses. Local civil society organizations, especially
women’s rights organizations, are critical in that regard.
As another example, recently €5 million of
emergency assistance were given to UN-Women in
Afghanistan. Austrian-funded projects include the
establishment of the Afghan Women’s Advisory Board
in order to involve Afghan women in coordination
processes and strategic discussions, as well as support
for women human rights defenders. Austria will
continue to support the efforts of UN-Women, the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund and its Rapid
Response Window on women’s participation in local
peace processes, including in Afghanistan, Liberia,
Mali and South Sudan.
As freedom, independence and plurality of media
form the foundation of democratic societies, Austria
underlines the need for a gender-responsive approach to
the safety of journalists. We see that women journalists
are at an increased risk of online and offline harassment,
discrimination and violence — particularly in conflict
zones, where women’s voices often remain unheard. To
mark the tenth anniversary of the United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of

22-6425915/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Impunity, Austria will host an international conference
on the safety of journalists on 3 and 4 November, with
a special focus on female journalists.
In the area of peacekeeping, Austria continues to
work on increasing the number of uniformed women
in its military personnel. The Austrian Armed Forces
remain committed to a gender perspective in military
operations in order to enhance situational awareness
and improve preventive and protective measures. To that
end, a permanent advisory office to consider the gender
perspective was recently established. We reiterate
our call for the Security Council to systematically
include the women and peace and security agenda
in all mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions.
Yes, there are a lot of challenges and negative
developments in recent months, but there are also a few
sparks of hope, and they deserve to be mentioned. Those
include the crucial daily contributions of representatives
of civil society, local women peacebuilders, mediators
and human responders championing the women and
peace and security agenda, such as the Global Network
of Women Peacebuilders and its partners. Together
we have committed to continue implementing the
women and peace and security agenda through targeted
measures and joint action based on multilateral
cooperation. Together we will make a difference.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I warmly thank the Gabonese
presidency for organizing this important event, as well
as the briefers for their thorough interventions.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statements made
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and wishes to
add the following.
Strengthening women’s resilience and leadership
in conflict-torn areas requires coherent policy action
directed towards ensuring effective protection of the
rights and security of women and girls, in all their
diversity and according to their actual needs and local
realities; preventing and responding to violence and
discrimination against them; as well as enhancing
meaningful gender-equal participation and leadership
in peace efforts.
I would now like to draw the Council’s attention
to an issue of paramount importance. I am referring to
16/53

20/10/2022

security threats faced by women war correspondents
and media workers, who cover first-hand, with great
professionalism and self-sacrifice, the devastating
realities of conflicts. In 2021, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights verified
29 cases of conflict-related killings of women, among
them human rights defenders and journalists. I think
that is only the tip of the iceberg: women journalists
are often victims of undocumented conflict-related
sexual violence, as well as discrimination and sexual
harassment online and offline in the workplace.
In that regard, as my Austrian colleague noted
earlier, Greece, together with a group of like-minded
countries — Argentina, Austria, Costa Rica, France and
Tunisia — already stressed the importance of employing
a gender-responsive approach when addressing the
safety of journalists in conflict environments through
our joint initiative, General Assembly resolution 76/173,
on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity.
Additionally, at the national level, Greece recently
launched a task force on ensuring the protection, safety
and enhancement of the status of journalists and media
professionals. That inclusive national coordination
mechanism aims at strengthening — nationally and
internationally — the status of women journalists
and of those who report on gender-equality issues.
Nevertheless, let us not forget that the world of work
for women journalists, especially those who cover
conflicts, extends beyond the traditional workplace.
In conclusion, providing sustainable solutions to the
persistent and multifaceted challenges posed by armed
conflicts and their consequences on women and girls is
an extremely difficult task. Investing in the potential
of women peacebuilders, human rights defenders, local
civil society leaders and journalists seems to be the
right path towards peace, security and development in
order to ensure that no one is left behind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, the statement
delivered by the representative of Türkiye on behalf of
MIKTA — Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Türkiye and Australia — and the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Croatia on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

I would now like to deliver the following statement in
our national capacity, highlighting several points.
First, in redoubling our efforts to prevent and
respond to gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence against women and girls, the Republic
of Korea recently allocated $2 million of emergency
funds to underpin the activities of the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) for survivors of genderbased violence in Ukraine and Moldova. We also
emphasize a holistic approach in promoting the
resilience of survivors, and we would like to mention
the comprehensive support programme that we carried
out with UNFPA in the northern parts of Iraq.
Secondly, the Republic of Korea echoes the need
for women’s full participation in all peace processes.
In that vein, we remain committed to accomplishing
gender parity among United Nations peacekeepers.
The Republic of Korea made its first contribution
of $0.5 million to the Elsie Initiative Fund this year.
The Republic of Korea will also host the female
military officers course, together with UN-Women, to
encourage the deployment of women military officers
in peacekeeping operations.
I would like to take this opportunity to draw
attention to the multiple difficulties faced by women
defectors from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, who make up 72 per cent of almost 34,000 North
Korean defectors who have arrived in the Republic of
Korea since the 1990s. It is appalling and heartbreaking
that many of them reach the Republic of Korea only
after years of enduring the risks of detainment, human
trafficking, repatriation and subsequent reprisals,
including torture and other cruel punishment.
In that regard, we would like to remind the
neighbouring countries that the principle of
non-refoulement should be equally applied to defectors
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Republic of Korea supports the settlement of
women defectors in line with its women and peace and
security national action plan. In our experience, the
peer consultant training programme empowers women
survivors themselves to contribute to enhancing
the resilience of other survivors, based on a mutual
understanding of each other’s psychosocial needs.
As a country that faces formidable challenges in
building its own peace on the Korean peninsula, and
as a candidate for non-permanent membership of the

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Security Council for the 2024-2025 term, the Republic
of Korea reaffirms its commitment to translating the
women and peace and security agenda into action,
domestically and globally, in support of the resilience
and leadership of women.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Türkiye, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Georgia, Andorra, Monaco
and San Marino, align themselves with this statement.
I want to thank you, Madam President, and Gabon
for organizing this very important open debate. I also
want to thank the briefers not only for their inputs, but
also for the work that their organizations do every day.
I want to take this opportunity to extend our
appreciation for the unrelenting and crucial work of
women leaders in the pursuit of peace and security
around the world. For many years, the international
community has agreed on how central it is to any peace
effort that we support gender equality and women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation in conflict
prevention, crisis management, conflict resolution,
relief and recovery efforts and long-term peacebuilding.
Yet we meet today against a backdrop of worsening
pushback around the world against gender equality and
women’s and girls’ full and equal enjoyment of all human
rights. In Afghanistan, the Taliban have systematically
excluded women and girls from all aspects of public life.
In Ukraine, we see a highly disproportionate impact
of Russia’s war on women and girls. In other conflict
situations, such as in Ethiopia, Myanmar, Syria, Yemen
and in the Sahel region, we observe that women human
rights defenders and politically active women are being
persecuted, harassed or killed.
We echo the messages in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/740) and the open letter of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
signed by 481 civil-society organizations across the
world: not only do we need to create a more enabling
environment for women human rights defenders, women
peacebuilders, women journalists and media workers,
but we must simultaneously address and prevent

22-6425917/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

reprisals against them. We need to acknowledge that
women leaders are often targeted for speaking up, and
we strongly condemn threats or acts of reprisals against
them. We urge the members of the Security Council to
invite women human rights defenders and civil society
to this table, while taking all the necessary actions and
precautions to ensure their safety.
Armed groups, criminal gangs, increasing terrorist
insurgencies and violent conflicts and wars have a
devastating human impact, disproportionately affecting
women and girls. We know that women and girls in
areas affected by armed groups are often the victims of
sexual and gender-based violence, including trafficking,
forced migration and displacement. That is why the EU
supports building the resilience of local civil-society
networks and ensuring full access to comprehensive and
human rights-based health services, including sexual
and reproductive health-care services. The European
Union takes targeted actions and commits substantial
funding to the full and comprehensive implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and we
support the efforts of the United Nations to mainstream
that agenda at all levels.
For example, in line with our action plan on women
and peace and security, the EU is setting up consultative
mechanisms with grass-roots women activists in all
conflict-related settings, as well as conducting capacitybuilding and mentoring for women’s leadership, to
ensure that more peace processes can benefit from
the knowledge and skills that women negotiators and
mediators bring to the table.
In 2021, more than 70 per cent of the EU’s new
crisis-response and conflict-prevention actions had
gender equality and the participation of women in
peace processes either as their main objective or as a
significant component.
Gender mainstreaming is also a guiding principle
of the EU’s 18 civilian and military missions and
operations around the world. That gender focus is
critical to increasing the effectiveness and impact of
conflict prevention and crisis management, as well as
to promoting the full and equal enjoyment of all human
rights and empowerment of all women and girls.
The EU empowers women human rights defenders
and supports their resilience around the world. To
provide just a few examples, we have supported the
integration of a gender perspective into national and
local efforts to prevent violent extremism, as well as the
18/53

20/10/2022

participation of women civil-society leaders originating
from, and working in, conflict-affected communities
and communities affected by terrorism, including
in Somalia, Kenya, Mali, Nigeria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Tunisia. In South Sudan,
the EU is supporting the cohesion of communities
and inclusive ceasefire and transitional security
monitoring mechanisms through, among other things,
the establishment and further strengthening of the
capacity of a women’s protection team. In Venezuela,
the EU supports a targeted project on the participation
and leadership of women in violence prevention and
peacebuilding schemes in at-risk communities.
Furthermore, in Ukraine, we are engaged in the
governmental efforts to integrate a gender perspective
into the country’s future recovery and in enhancing
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence,
including through our support to local Ukrainian
women’s rights and feminist organizations. With regard
to Afghanistan, our work to ensure that Afghan women
can contribute to political dialogues will continue, in
particular through the Afghan Women Leaders Forum.
This week, Zarifa Ghafari, an Afghan women’s rights
defender, was awarded the Council of Europe’s NorthSouth Prize.
We know that there are still many gaps that need to
be addressed in the implementation of this agenda. We
all need to prioritize gender equality and women and
peace and security across all our work. Women across
the world are redefining the word “courage”. The EU
is resolutely committed to strengthening the resilience
and leadership of women and empowering them to fully
participate in the building of long-lasting peace on all
continents. We call on the international community to
do more. We will not be able to build long-lasting peace
without half of humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia thanks you,
Madam President, for organizing this important open
debate on the issue of women and peace and security.
As we commemorate the twenty-second anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) this month,
we are encouraged, as always, by the overwhelming
support for this agenda item.
Violent conflict disproportionately affects women
and girls, intensifying pre-existing gender inequalities
and discrimination.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Women are active agents of peace in armed conflict,
yet their role as key players and change agents of peace
remains largely unrecognized. Acknowledging and
integrating their different understanding, experiences
and capabilities into all aspects of peace operations
is essential for sustaining peace. The resilience of
Namibian women during our country’s 30-year-long
struggle for independence from the apartheid South
African regime lies at the core of Namibia’s early and
engaged involvement in the initiation of resolution 1325
(2000) 22 years ago. Not only did women provide food,
shelter and moral support, but they also led political
initiatives, including through petitioning international
organizations such as this one in the 1970s, essentially
challenging old beliefs and binary stereotypes of active
males versus passive females.
Namibia continues to maintain an active and
engaged leadership role in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. In this
regard, through the establishment of the International
Women’s Peace Centre in my country, we have taken
on the challenge of further conceptualizing and
operationalizing women’s influence in peace processes.
Through general advocacy for the women and peace
and security agenda, networking and partnerships, and
through capacity-building and training, the Namibian
Government has remained committed to elevating
Namibian women to full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes.
The proliferation of armed groups and small arms
and light weapons continues to play a key role in the
outbreak and escalation of modern armed conflicts,
which now consist largely of internal conflicts and
civil wars. In this regard, my delegation would like to
reiterate that the need to better integrate considerations
concerning small arms and light weapons (SALW) into
the women and peace and security agenda remains
a priority. We encourage States to consider how to
integrate SALW control in their national action plans
on women, peace and security. We also call on the
Security Council to support the collection of data on
small arms and light weapons, disaggregated by age
and sex. For the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda to occur, the full and
meaningful participation of women in the political,
economic and social aspects of States and societies also
needs to occur.
The inclusion of women in traditional security
institutions alone will not help to ameliorate the gaps

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

in implementation. A more comprehensive approach
that takes security into account alongside the removal
of structural inequalities across society is required. For
as long as there is inequality based on gender in our
societies, and without the full participation of women
in society, neither peace nor prosperity can be ensured
over the long term. The meaningful participation of
women measurably strengthens protection efforts and
deepens the effectiveness of peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in French): We
congratulate Gabon on its presidency of the Security
Council this month, and we thank it for organizing
this welcome annual debate. We take this opportunity
to also congratulate France for its able presidency of
the Council last month. We also thank the briefers for
their briefings.
(spoke in English)
We meet today at a very critical time for our world.
Women’s rights around the world have witnessed a
clear deterioration, and gender equality seems to be out
of reach, with UN-Women affirming that at the current
rate of progress, it may take close to 300 years to
achieve full gender equality. We cannot wait 300 years.
Achieving gender equality, strengthening women’s
resilience and leadership and ensuring the full, equal
and meaningful participation of all women, are all
needed today more than ever.
Lebanon has kept the women and peace and
security agenda front and centre. We have made
progress in implementing our first national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000), and we are currently
working on developing our second plan. During its visit
to Lebanon in June 2022, the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security was able to witness how
we are implementing our action plan. We once again
thank the Group and its Chairs, Ireland and Mexico,
and we look forward to continuing our collaboration.
This year, Lebanon has made a breakthrough in
enhancing women’s participation in the defence sector.
For the first time ever, in 2022, approximately 50 per
cent of the graduating Lebanese army cadets were
women, with the top three graduates of the class being
women. Moreover, and while we still have a long way
to go, there was

22-6425919/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

20/10/2022

“some momentum for increased participation
of women in public life”,

groups”. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable contributions.

as described by the Secretary-General in his report
on women and peace and security (S/2022/740, para.
51). In fact, we witnessed a record number of women
candidates during our most recent parliamentary
elections. We strongly believe that when women are
part of the solution, the solution is more effective,
more durable and more sustainable. When women are
empowered, everyone benefits, as Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed said earlier today.

Believing in the prominent role played by Jordanian
women in the development process in general, and in
enhancing means of security, peace and protection in
particular, Jordan drafted its national plan 2018-2021
to operationalize resolution 1325 (2000). We began the
implementation of the plan through the security sector,
Government institutions and civil society organizations.
A communication strategy related to the resolution
was prepared and launched after consultations with
all partners in the national plan to meet the needs of
the Jordanian society. Jordan is currently preparing
our second national plan to further operationalize
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.

It is of utmost importance to strengthen women’s
participation and leadership in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. For Lebanon, women
peacekeepers in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) play an important role, even
if their number is still very low. We salute UNIFIL
for becoming the first United Nations peacekeeping
mission to provide gender-sensitive housing and invest
in better working conditions for women peacekeepers,
thereby tackling challenges that impede women
peacekeepers’ full, equal and meaningful participation
in peacekeeping. We hope that this step will, as the
Secretary-General mentions in his report,
“incentivize[e] troop-contributing countries to
deploy more women”, (S/2022/740, para. 85).
While the world is still years away from achieving
real gender equality, the women and peace and security
agenda is put forward as a guiding tool to strengthen
women’s participation and leadership. As the SecretaryGeneral puts it,
“[t]he women and peace and security agenda
is not just an answer to historic wrongs and
marginalization, but an opportunity to do things
differently” (ibid., para. 7).
We must start doing things differently, we must do
more, and we must do it now.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mrs. Al-halique (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to congratulate Gabon on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and to thank it for convening
this debate on women and peace and security and the
topic “Strengthening women’s resilience and leadership
as a path to peace in regions plagued by armed
20/53

Jordan is eager to take the resolution’s strategic
objectives into consideration when implementing
its national plan to address gender issues, including
the active participation of women in the security,
military and peacebuilding sectors; ensuring the active
participation of women in preventing extremism and
violence; achieving national and regional peacebuilding;
guaranteeing the availability of humanitarian services
to respond to gender needs, including psychological,
social, legal and medical services; facilitating safe
access to such services, especially for Jordanian women
and girls, as well as female refugees, who are the most
vulnerable to violence and the most in need of protection
in host communities and refugee camps in Jordan; and,
finally, promoting a culture that acknowledges gender
needs, the importance of gender equality and the role
of women, including young women, in achieving peace
and security.
I would like now to review the best examples of
Jordan’s support to women’s leadership in striving
for peace, and the most prominent recorded figures
related to the first strategic objective of resolution
1325 (2000), namely, the increase in the percentage of
women working in the security and military sectors.
The percentage of female recruits in the Jordanian
army increased from 6.8 per cent in 2017 to 9.6 per
cent in 2021. In the general security and police forces,
the number of female recruits increased from 4.77 per
cent to 6.2 per cent over the same period. Similarly, the
percentage of women in leadership positions increased
from 0.2 per cent in 2017 to 1.64 per cent in 2021.
The participation of women in peacekeeping
missions also increased after Jordanian women were
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

among the first to join United Nations peacekeeping
missions in 2007. To date, 146 women have participated
in peacekeeping missions in the Congo, Cyprus,
South Sudan and Fiji, where they served refugees and
participated in training local police forces.
The Jordanian armed forces also seek to ensure that
women play a more effective role by participating in new
areas, such as in international peacekeeping forces and
special and humanitarian missions. Female personnel of
the Royal Medical Services have participated in several
external missions, such as to hospitals in Liberia and
the Congo.
To demonstrate some of the ways in which women’s
resilience can be supported, Jordan believes that
national action plans are the best way to translate the
women and peace and security agenda into action on the
ground, based on each country’s specific circumstances.
We also believe that the best way to ensure that the
commitments of resolution 1325 (2000) are fulfilled
is to provide the necessary funding and to establish a
normative framework that includes accountability for
the implementation of the agenda in an objective and
meaningful manner.
The President (spoke in French): I now give floor
to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): On behalf of the Group
of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network,
which is co-chaired by South Africa and Germany, we
congratulate Gabon on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October and for
convening the annual open debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on strengthening women’s
resilience and leadership as a path to peace in regions
plagued by armed groups. We also thank the briefers
for their insightful briefings.
We are currently faced with a worrisome multitude
of overlapping crises — worsening global climate
change, the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic
and a record number of violent armed conflicts — as
well as the ensuing food and energy crises, which all
undermine development in Africa and other parts of the
world and put at risk the realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Because of structural discrimination, women and
girls are disproportionately impacted by the negative
effects of those crises. However, as we keep saying,
women are far more than passive victims and survivors.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

We must not only shine a light on the plight of women
but also amplify their role as agents of change who make
constructive and essential contributions to the common
good and to more stable, peaceful and just societies.
The African Women Leaders Network, as an Africawide movement for women’s dynamic engagement and
participation in decision-making at all levels of society,
is a prime example of female self-organization and
agency. It demonstrates once more that women can
mobilize, demand actions and achieve great results
when structural barriers are addressed and overcome,
especially in domains from which they have been
excluded for generations. It is an example of women’s
leadership in multilateralism and of working together
to prevent conflict and promote inclusive peace and
sustainable development.
Established in 2017 in collaboration with the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations and
with the support of Germany, the Network comprises
women from all sectors — civil society and grass-roots
organizations as well as the political, public and private
sectors. The Network has to date established 30 national
chapters, made up of women leaders and professionals
from various fields, backgrounds and generations.
As a unique global platform for advocacy and
influence that uses its experience to serve as a key
agent for women and peace and security in Africa and
as a women-led intermediary between the AU and the
United Nations system, the Network’s advocacy aims to
ensure that women’s leadership is a regular agenda item
at AU and United Nations gatherings.
We are also proud to announce that the Group of
Friends of the African Women Leaders Network, which
was established in New York in 2018, has supported
the Network’s dynamic development and its efforts
to advance African women peacebuilders from the
perspective of the United Nations, and will continue
to work alongside all stakeholders in raising the voices
of women in dire situations in regions plagued by
armed groups.
As mentioned in the concept note prepared by
the delegation of Gabon for today’s meeting (see
S/2022/743), the Security Council is aware of the
important role that women’s organizations play in
conflict-affected countries as they strive to meet the
needs of local communities. Yet only 0.3 per cent of
bilateral aid in conflict-affected countries goes to
women’s organizations, which suffer from a constant

22-6425921/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

lack of funding and are hampered in their agency and
potential. We are therefore leaving out potentially some
of the most important actors in the management and
resolution of conflicts and crises. That needs to change.
We urge the members of the Council to continue to
expand the space for more civil society organization
briefers and to adopt a more inclusive approach to
finding lasting solutions to the menaces to women’s
well-being in conflict situations.
Violence against women and girls, especially in
times of conflict, is rampant. We must not rest until real
change has been achieved in the fight against sexual
and gender-based violence. Negative social norms and
cultural misconceptions are never reasons for violence
against women and girls.
Against that backdrop, we applaud the upcoming
second Men’s Conference on Positive Masculinity, on
the theme “Advancing actions and promoting positive
masculinity to end violence against women and girls”,
which will be convened by President Macky Sall of
Senegal, 2022 Chairperson of the AU, in collaboration
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Africa and Ghana, as well as the AU and African Women
Leaders Network Patron Her Excellency Ms. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, and will be held on 10 November
in Dakar.
Ensuring meaningful participation and equal
rights, with full resources for women and girls, is key
to securing peace, stability and prosperity for all. We
need to transform gender roles and power relations
by breaking the barriers to women’s meaningful
participation at all levels of peace processes and
in leadership and decision-making spheres. That is
necessary for ensuring women’s financial and economic
inclusion, which the African Union has set as its goal
for this decade.
Countless studies have shown that empowering
women economically and politically leads to sustainable
growth, stability and more resilience for society as a
whole. That makes countries better prepared to respond
effectively to crises. The same is true of peace and
security. Peace agreements are more likely to last when
women participate meaningfully.
The Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network will continue to support the women
and peace and security agenda and the instrumental role
of African women’s agency in achieving greater equity,
22/53

20/10/2022

fairness and stability, more inclusive governance and
effective conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
With your permission, Madam President, I shall
immediately start my national statement. I have
shortened it in the interest of time, and I apologize to
the interpreters as they have another version.
While we value the normative achievements of
the women and peace and security agenda, with its 10
Security Council resolutions, we must acknowledge
that women’s participation often remains minimal in
peace processes, humanitarian action and strategic
decision-making at all levels. What is more, we often see
how women and peace and security and gender equality
commitments are deprioritized during conflicts, despite
abundant evidence that gender equality offers a path to
sustainable peace and conflict prevention.
Germany is very concerned about the large-scale
pushback against the gains in women’s rights, including
sexual and reproductive health and rights. As noted in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/740), it is also
very important to look at the multitude of interlocking
crises in relation to the women and peace and
security agenda.
A current issue of particular concern to Germany is
the ongoing crackdown on women’s rights in Iran. We
must reverse all those trends and take full advantage
of the potential that lies in greater participation of all
genders and marginalized groups. That is why Germany
remains a committed supporter of the women and peace
and security agenda.
We will continue to support women peacebuilders,
peacekeepers and women-led organizations. They are
the ones that work day by day towards equal justice
and peaceful societies, often putting themselves in
danger in their pursuits. We need to listen to, support
and protect them. For instance, Germany will continue
supporting the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund. We were its largest donor last year. We will also
continue to support the growth of regional networks,
where women civil society activists and leaders come
together in safe spaces.
Germany will continue to support the African
Women Leaders Network and the Unidas Women’s
Network, which connects women from Latin
America and the Caribbean and Germany. Germany
has also initiated the Action Network on Forced
Displacement — Women as Agents of Change, with
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

the aim of supporting women in displacement contexts.
We will continue to fight for equal rights in letter and
spirit, with the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and equal resources for women and girls in all
their diversity and in marginalized communities. That
is why Germany has committed to feminist foreign and
development policies as an indispensable foundation
for securing peace, stability and prosperity for all.
The Security Council’s women and peace and
security agenda remains a priority for Germany in
the United Nations, and it can count on Germany’s
unwavering support in putting it into action.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): We commend Gabon for
organizing today’s debate on women and peace and
security. Slovenia aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the European Union, the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2022/740) and its presentation. Together with other
accessible information, the findings in the report point
to significant setbacks in the global situation of women
in recent years. Since 2019 the number of women and
girls living in fragile or conflict-affected countries has
doubled, while at the same time military expenditures
have risen to an all-time high. Appallingly, rape
and other forms of sexual violence in conflict have
increased, and we know that 98 per cent of survivors
of those attacks are women and girls. The gender gap
in food security between men and women has grown
eightfold since 2018, while in the same period global
spending on education has stagnated. On average, in
lower-income and lower-middle-income countries it
has decreased by 13 per cent. We know that girls will
endure the worst of those negative trends.
Another deeply worrisome trend pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s report is that of the increase in
mutually reinforcing misogyny and authoritarianism.
The lesson we have learned from recurring conflicts is
that efforts to achieve peace and stability will fail in the
long term if they are not fully inclusive. The full, equal
and meaningful participation of women is therefore key
to addressing lasting peace, stability and sustainable
development. We urgently need decisive steps to be
taken if we are to realize the women and peace and
security agenda.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

During the 30 years of Slovenia’s statehood, women
have achieved important milestones as political leaders.
The current President of our National Assembly is a
woman. We have had a woman Prime Minister, Minister
of Defence and Interior Minister, and for the first time
we have a female Minister for Foreign Affairs. Women
have already served as Chief of the General Staff of the
Slovenian Army and as Director General of our police.
Those achievements are a result of a long-standing
national commitment to the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in our society, and they have
also helped to make Slovenia the seventh most peaceful
country in the world according to the Global Peace
Index of 2022.
Women’s empowerment is a long-standing foreign
policy priority for Slovenia. Our Peace Operations
Training Centre conducts trainings in gender equality
and mainstreaming in international missions and
operations. From training Venezuelan women in
negotiations, mediation and conflict resolution to
holding beekeeping workshops for Afghan refugee girls
in Iran, and from enabling the work of female doctors in
Afghanistan to providing assistance and medical care
for Syrian refugee women and girls in Lebanon, our
development and humanitarian projects contain strong
cross-cutting elements for women’s empowerment. We
will raise the share of our development cooperation for
gender equality from the current 39 per cent to 60 per
cent by the end of the decade.
Since we live in a time when no place on Earth is
out of reach of technology, how can it be that we have
no clear picture of the extent of attacks on women
human rights defenders? Peace operations reporting
should consistently contain disaggregated data on
attacks on human rights defenders. In conflict, postconflict and transitional environments, where women
already bear a disproportionate burden of deprivation
and are also a target of armed groups, organized crime
and terrorist groups, women’s organizations need
assistance if they are to provide support. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s call to all who lead
peace operations and their country teams for annual
updates on measures contributing to a safe and enabling
environment for women’s organizations and women’s
human rights defenders.
In conclusion, Slovenia is strongly committed to
continuing to provide robust support to women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in all peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.

22-6425923/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): We
thank Gabon for convening this debate, as well as the
briefers for their presentations and their commitment.
Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Our thoughts today are with all women and girls
who are victims of the violence inflicted by armed
groups — in Ukraine, the Sahel, Afghanistan, Syria
and all other conflict situations around the world.
Earlier this week, in Lisbon, we held a ceremony
for the North-South Prize of the Council of Europe.
That award recognizes individuals or institutions
distinguishing themselves in the promotion of human
rights, democracy and the rule of law. One of its
laureates was Zarifa Ghafari. She was the youngest
person ever to become a mayor in Afghanistan, and one
of the few women ever to have assumed such a position.
Her example of courage and commitment in defending
the principle that women’s rights are human rights
should inspire us, especially in the context of a country
where women are now not even allowed to leave their
homes without male supervision and where girls have
been banned from secondary schools.
More than 20 years have gone by since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000). Since then, our
international framework has been made more robust,
with nine other important Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security. However, we are
witnessing a global backlash against gender equality,
restricting women and girls’ full and equal enjoyment
of all human rights. The Secretary-General rightly notes
in his report (S/2022/740) that we are experiencing a
reversal of generational gains in women’s rights and that
it is up to us and to the Council to reverse that reversal.
We must redouble our efforts to fight sexual and genderbased violence, put an end to human trafficking, protect
migrant women and ensure women’s human rights to
education and health. That intersectional and multilevel
lens is needed in the women and peace and security
agenda. The Compact on Women, Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action, launched at the Generation
Equality Forum in 2021, has strengthened the means
at our disposal for acting on the triple nexus between
peace, development and human rights. In Portugal,
too, we are currently preparing our third national plan
24/53

20/10/2022

on women and peace and security and also our 2030
Development Cooperation Strategy, with the aim of
fostering synergies between the two plans in line with
the triple nexus.
Protecting women against sexual violence and
protecting the rights of women in situations of conflict
all around the world are collective responsibilities. We
therefore encourage collective action and the building
of bridges with institutions such as UN-Women and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as with civil-society organizations. The work at
the local level remains essential to build resilience. We
need to focus on preventive diplomacy and mediation.
We need to ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation at every stage of peace processes. And we
need to put an end to intimidation and reprisals against
women peacebuilders. The right of women human
rights defenders to participate in peace processes is
non-negotiable. Any form of reprisal, harassment or
arbitrary detention must be met with a response, and
above all, accountability must be ensured.
Portugal remains fully committed to the women
and peace and security agenda, and you can count on
our support, Madam President.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate Gabon on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and I thank the President
for organizing this open debate.
Women have an undeniable capacity to contribute
to processes of peace and security. On the other hand,
they are also the most at risk, especially in times of
conflict, and they are frequently the victims of violence
and discrimination in areas that are directly affected by
terrorist and armed groups. Preventing and resolving
armed conflicts are equally important. To achieve this,
we must first address their underlying causes. The
international community, and in particular the Security
Council, should keep up its efforts aimed at resolving
conflicts through peaceful means and find political
solutions to conflict hotspots through dialogue,
diplomacy and mediation. At every stage of the peace
process, it is advantageous to include women as they
are a vital component of society.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Since its establishment, the Islamic Republic of Iran
has always considered the promotion of the cultural,
social, economic and political status of women as a key
element in its policymaking, legislation and national
planning. As a result, Iranian women have the right to
fully participate in opportunities for advancement.
Education is just one example of the opportunities
critical for women’s empowerment. Women and girls
account for more than half of all university students,
and currently 73 per cent of medical professionals and
49 per cent of doctors in Iran are female. Such significant
progress has also provided the Government with the
ability to appoint women to management positions
and work to improve female employees’ managerial
skills and executive expertise, thus increasing women’s
participation in decision-making. This figure has risen
from 13 per cent in 2017 to over 25 per cent in 2021.
Furthermore, the Islamic Republic of Iran has created
an environment in which Iranian women can proudly
represent their nation’s religious and patriotic beliefs at
the international level in all fields, including science,
sports and the arts. My country is on the rise in these
fields, as shown by statistics.
Given the unintended and disastrous consequences
for Iranian women’s rights of the inhumane unilateral
coercive measures by the United States, as well as
its violation of their basic rights, the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, should not shirk its
responsibility and speak out against these illegal and
cruel measures.
In conclusion, I would like to respond to certain
Western countries that have misused this forum to
make unfounded allegations against my country while
claiming to support the rights of Iranian women. We
denounce these allegations, which are nothing more
than an attempt to politicize women’s rights. We see
no good faith or genuineness in these States’ claims to
support Iranian women, given their hypocrisy, double
standards and selective application of human rights.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is fully committed to
respecting, protecting and promoting the human rights
of all, including women and girls. We believe that
no country can claim to be perfect when it comes to
human rights or the rights of women and girls, and Iran,
like other countries, strives to improve human rights,
including the rights of women and girls.
The tragic death of Mahsa Amini, a young Iranian
girl, has broken the hearts not only of the individuals

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

who form our Government but also of the people of
my country. We regret the incident and hope never
to have to witness such a heartbreaking loss again. A
thorough investigation was carried out to determine the
circumstances that led to this tragic death. So far, the
findings of two preliminary investigations have been
shared with Member States and organizations affiliated
with the United Nations.
Iranian women are smart, well-educated, dedicated
and patriotic. And they are aware of their rights. They
also understand how to engage with the Government
in a peaceful and constructive manner to advance their
rights. We therefore advise those Western States that
they are not required to act as guardians or caretakers
of Iranian women or speak on their behalf.
On numerous occasions, including recently, we
have heard claims from Western States that they are
defending the United Nations Charter and international
law. We urge those States to keep their promises,
uphold their international obligations under the United
Nations Charter, and respect the principles of national
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of other sovereign States, which are the cornerstones
of the United Nations and the international legal order.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks Gabon for convening
today’s open debate and the briefers for their briefings.
In both conflict and post-conflict situations, resilience
and recovery depend on hidden, unpaid and domestic
work that is largely performed by women. In this
regard, Costa Rica wishes to highlight three aspects.
First, although the resolutions on women, peace
and security do not explicitly mention widows or
widowhood, 50 per cent of the female population in
post-conflict contexts are widows. Often impoverished,
widows and their children have been recruited by armed
and extremist groups in the hope of finding physical and
economic security there. In 2017, the United Nations
Development Programme estimated that more than
30 per cent of recruited children come from families
with a widowed or single female head of household.
More than two decades and 10 resolutions later, we
have not sufficiently explored the role of the private
sector in advancing the women, peace and security
agenda. Public-private partnerships can promote the

22-6425925/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

post-conflict recovery of local communities, especially
by hiring and supporting widows, and they can even
encourage their political participation. However,
although current efforts have been scattered, we see the
potential and urgently need to maximize it.
Secondly, there is an urgent need to expand
existing funding mechanisms for women human rights
defenders and for new funding streams to be created
to deliver resources to civil society organizations led
by women or members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex communities that are
working in conflict-affected areas. We welcome the
development of the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund for Women Human Rights Defenders, which aims
to provide rapid and flexible resources to women-led
civil society organizations.
Thirdly, Costa Rica calls for the strengthening
and expansion of response mechanisms to prevent and
respond to conflict-related sexual violence, end impunity
for perpetrators and provide comprehensive support to
survivors. The Security Council and all United Nations
bodies, including the International Court of Justice
and the International Criminal Court, must recognize
crimes of gender-based persecution, including sexual
violence and other forms of persecution perpetrated
on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity,
physical characteristics and self-expression. We must
also leverage the presence of United Nations agencies
in humanitarian settings to expand access to justice
for survivors of sexual violence at the community and
State levels.
We have seen organizations led by young women
emerge in post-conflict situations in many parts of
the world. Their goal is to place women under the age
of 35 at the centre of resilience and peacebuilding
efforts. Young women are the missing piece in the
peacebuilding puzzle. It is time to integrate them into
our peace, development and security efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of New Zealand.
New Zealand aligns itself with the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security statement delivered by the
representative of Canada.
New Zealand thanks Gabon for choosing to focus
on women’s resilience and leadership in conflict
26/53

20/10/2022

settings. Without a doubt, the role of women’s
leadership and resilience is a pivotal issue in finding
a path out of conflict in many regions around the
world. In Yemen, Afghanistan, Ukraine, Myanmar,
Syria, Haiti and many other fragile settings, women
and girls are leading crucial efforts towards building
peace and conflict resolution. They have demonstrated
harrowing determination, leadership and resilience
amid dangerous contexts where their basic right to life
is threatened on a daily basis.
Resolution 1325 (2000) represents a significant
step forward; nonetheless, we have a long way to go in
ensuring the participation of women and incorporating
gender perspectives in all United Nations peace and
security efforts. This year’s Secretary-General report
(S/2022/740) shows the persistent implementation
gaps to which we must pay attention. The report also
highlights how the combined impacts of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, climate and conflict presented
greater challenges for women and peace and security. It
is now more crucial than ever that we not only recover
lost ground, but also redouble efforts to tackle those
pressing challenges.
Based on our own experience, New Zealand
recommends the following three initiatives for
strengthening women’s leadership and resilience in
conflict settings.
First, it is crucial that we, as Member States, insist on
women’s meaningful participation in all peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and make that
a centrepiece for the new agenda for peace. We strongly
support the call for all United Nations-supported peace
processes to require and ensure women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation and leadership at all stages
and levels of United Nations-led peace processes.
That means taking concrete measure to address longstanding barriers to women’s leadership and redoubling
our efforts to build resilience. For New Zealand’s part,
our Wahine Toa Leadership Programme is designed
to increase women’s leadership and participation in
defence, including in peacekeeping operation and
peace processes.
Secondly, New Zealand has seen first-hand the
immense value of women peacebuilders, human
rights defenders and civil society representatives.
That has rung true in our experience supporting
peace efforts in the South Pacific, including in
Solomon Islands. Within New Zealand’s membership
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

of the Peacebuilding Commission and support for the
Peacebuilding Fund, we are committed to advancing
the Organization’s peacebuilding gender strategy to
ensure gender-responsive engagement in all aspects
of the Organization’s peacebuilding work. Inclusion
is fundamental to sustainable peace, and we will
seek to ground our engagement in gender-responsive
peacebuilding and bringing women’s diverse
perspectives to the fore.
Thirdly, listening to the female civil society briefers
today, it is clear that their voices and the diverse voices
of female civil society are indispensable to advancing
women’s involvement in peace processes. We urge all
Member States to prioritize the creation of safe and
enabling environments for all women peacebuilders,
women human rights defenders and women civil
society leaders. It is high time we ensured our actions
match our words when it comes to women’s leadership
and participation in conflict-resolution efforts. We will
continue to do our utmost in pursuing that end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the presidency of Gabon for convening today’s
debate. I also thank the speakers for their important
contribution to this debate.
Chile aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
In 2021, the United Nations verified almost 3,300
cases of conflict-related sexual violence, 800 more
than the previous year. In addition, rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children in conflict
situations increased by 20 per cent in 2021, and 98 per
cent of the survivors were girls. How do we explain the
gradual detriment each year of the situation of women
and girls in conflict, while we have at our disposal
the Rome Statute, the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the
women and peace and security agenda and the various
provisions of international humanitarian law? We can
do more, as an international community, to ensure that
those frameworks interact and complement each other,
fully prioritizing their implementation.
Furthermore, the fact that female representation
in conflict-resolution processes stood at 19 per cent,
as compared to 23 per cent in 2020, reminds us that

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

the quality of a peace agreement is demonstrated in its
implementation and its potential to produce positive
effects on people’s daily lives. Chile promotes structural
approaches where the full and meaningful participation
of all women at all levels of decision-making
is guaranteed.
We will also not succeed in paving the road to
long-term peace if measures are not adopted to not only
prevent and condemn sexual and gender-based violence,
in particular harmful practices and the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, but to guarantee access
to justice for survivors while ensuring accountability
for perpetrators.
In particular, I would like to refer to three
transformative elements — women’s economic
empowerment, the collection and analysis of
disaggregated data and the importance of access
to education.
Everyone has the right to an education without fear
of violence or attack. Education also plays a unique role
in preventing violence and empowering children and
youth to succeed and be agents of change despite their
complex circumstances.
Moreover, good practices of inclusion have shown
that conflict-affected women and girls have gained
gradual economic security and autonomy through
increased access to, and control over, resources, the
promotion of specific skills and the generation of the
employment and education opportunities they need. We
recognize the gaps in funding and data collection in
order to be able to promote the approaches described
above. We invite the international community, within
the framework of the current situation and in line
with the commitments to reduce military spending,
to better channel resources to education and social
protection systems.
Chile reiterates its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its nine
subsequent resolutions in hopes that as an international
community we will be able to respond to the challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Ms. Jiménez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, of which it is
a member.

22-6425927/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

We thank the Gabonese presidency for organizing
this debate, which is particularly relevant at a time when,
as the Secretary-General’s latest report on women and
peace and security (S/2022/740) indicates, the world
is, unfortunately, facing a setback in the generational
gains of certain women’s rights, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations, with an increase of sexual
violence in conflict, but also in the face of the rise of
authoritarianism and violent extremism. In countries
such as Afghanistan, Syria, Colombia, Yemen and
Ukraine, women human rights defenders, journalists
and activists risk their lives every day to promote
women’s rights and their role in peacebuilding and
political participation.
The women and peace and security agenda is part of
Spain’s foreign policy priorities. In 2007, we approved
our first national action plan for women, peace and
security — becoming one of the first three countries in
the world to do so. We are also one of the nine countries
that the Secretary-General’s latest report identifies as
having developed a feminist foreign policy, with the aim
of incorporating the gender perspective into all areas
of foreign affairs. Since 2017, Spain has participated in
more than 26 bilateral political dialogues, consultations
and visits to conflict and post-conflict countries. We
also provide technical and financial support for the
promotion of the national action plans on women and
peace and security in countries such as Colombia,
Jordan, Mali and Chad.
In the context of regional organizations, since
2020, we have been promoting the women and peace
and security programme of the Economic Community
of West African States and the Group of Five for the
Sahel Women’s Platform through a memorandum of
understanding and our technical and financial support.
In the context of the United Nations, we have also
demonstrated our constructive commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, including in the
Security Council, when in 2015, as a Council member,
together with the United Kingdom, we sponsored
resolution 2242 (2015) and the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security. Spain also hosted
the first meeting of the informal Women and Peace and
Security Focal Points Network in Alicante in April 2017.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest
report, mainstreaming the women and peace and
security agenda in the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and in the mandates of peace operations has
28/53

20/10/2022

a genuine impact in improving their performance. For
that reason, Spain, together with the Netherlands, hosts
the course on a comprehensive approach to gender in
operations, which is held four times a year. My country
is also currently leading the gender training programme
for European Union (EU) missions as the EU Gender
Military Training Discipline Leader.
If we want to further strengthen women’s resilience
and leadership, the United Nations and the political
support of regional actors, such as the European
Union, are essential. It is also crucial to strengthen
relations with civil society and facilitate a suitable
environment for women’s organizations and human
rights defenders and activists to carry out their work
with full security assurances. For Spain’s part, we
will continue to finance mechanisms, instruments and
funds that promote the women and peace and security
agenda. We will continue to support the Commitment
2025 initiative, launched with Finland in 2018 and
involving countries from several continents, to promote
the meaningful participation of women in peace and
mediation processes.
I would like to conclude my statement by mentioning
two specific situations, in Afghanistan and Ukraine.
I would like to emphasize Spain’s strong
commitment to protecting the rights of Afghan women
and girls, including their full, equal and meaningful
participation in institutions and the strengthening of
their political leadership. To that end, in Madrid in
February this year, we launched the Hear Us initiative,
which enables Afghan women in exile to speak out
against rights violations in Afghanistan and influence
the humanitarian, development and security agenda in
the country.
In Ukraine, where the unjustified Russian military
aggression is approaching its eighth month, we are
deeply concerned about the increasing evidence of
sexual and gender-based violence against Ukrainian
women, some of them minors.
Spain will continue to work with international
partners to prevent abuses against displaced persons,
particularly women and children. We will support
all efforts to fight against impunity and ensure
accountability in all cases of sexual and gender-based
violence, for which it is essential to strengthen datacollection and investigation capacities, as recommended
in the latest report of the Secretary-General.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Fellin.
Ms. Fellin (spoke in French): I would like to thank
Gabon for having convened today’s open debate.
(spoke in English)
Twenty-two years ago, the Security Council made
clear its commitment to women and peace and security
and set the baseline for the nexus between women
and security. While anniversaries are normally a
time of celebration, today I address the Council with
sadness. I address it at a time when women’s rights
are being challenged and when women need to stand
up against too often violent pushback, such as in Iran
and Afghanistan. We are also in a time of widespread
conflict with disastrous effects on people — our people,
women, men, girls and boys, young and old — in far
too many countries, such as Myanmar, Yemen, Libya,
Syria, Palestine and Ukraine.
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
has shattered peace in Europe and has shaken the
international order. We have witnessed indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure and
the use of conflict-related sexual violence as a tactic
of war. That is contrary to international law. However,
the Ukrainian population, including women, remain
resilient in the face of displacement, killings, torture,
forced deportations and rape. Those horrific war crimes
have an impact on all people — women, men, girls and
boys. But we know the extent of the disproportionate
impact on women and girls.
We at NATO recognize the fundamental importance
of advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
Our founders recognized the importance of rooting
peace in our enduring values — freedom, democracy,
individual liberty, the rule of law and respect for the
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
human rights.
Now, for the first time, our new Strategic Concept,
adopted in Madrid in June, explicitly recognizes women
and peace and security and gender equality as integral
to NATO’s values and what we do. That is an important
milestone. Indeed, NATO has long recognized the
important role that women play in achieving peace
and ensuring our security. Since 2007, our policies and
action plans on women and peace and security have
continued to reflect an ever-deeper understanding of
how applying a gender perspective enhances our work

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

and strengthens our mission. When we think of human
security, we also think of gender perspectives. Those
two agendas complement and reinforce each other.
When the Alliance first started implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), our original focus was limited
to operations. Today women and peace and security is
integrated across all core tasks. We have come a long
way, but there is still a long way to go.
As we look towards the future, we are working
to integrate gender perspectives into our work
on emerging challenges, such as climate change,
cybersecurity, artificial intelligence and emerging
disruptive technology. We are also exploring the
synergies between the women and peace and security
agenda and the global youth and peace and security
agenda within the framework of our mandate.
On the occasion of this twenty-second anniversary,
I made a personal pledge to push for further change in
favour of this agenda, and I invited NATO allied and
partner leadership to do the same. Political commitments
do not work in isolation. To mean something, there
needs to be accountability and leadership. Each of us
here has a responsibility, and it is time to move from
principles to practice.
Anniversaries are a great opportunity to remind
ourselves of what we have done and to look forward.
We must remain active to safeguard what was
achieved. We must push to protect against continuing
and new violations. We need to promote the increased
participation of women at all levels — in politics,
diplomacy, mediation and peacebuilding. We need to
link up with our youth for the future. We need our
leaders to lead by example.
As a country, a NATO partner, a people and
individuals, Ukraine is an example of resilience,
standing up for values shared by most. Resilience is
based on believing in, and feeling and acting on, our
enduring values. Resilience brings us together, and it
is through resilience that we will push the women and
peace and security forward.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): My delegation would like to
express its appreciation to you, Madam President, for
convening today’s important open debate on women
and peace and security, with a focus on strengthening
women’s resilience and leadership as a path to peace in

22-6425929/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

20/10/2022

regions plagued by armed groups. Malaysia would also
like to thank the briefers for their statements.

Regional Plan of Action on Women, Peace and Security
at the fortieth ASEAN Summit, to be held next month.

Malaysia is concerned about the reports of a global
surge in negative trends concerning the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We note
with concern the decrease in commitment to gender
equality, as well as the rise in violence and attacks
against women human rights defenders, including
journalists, in many parts of the world. More must
clearly be done to dismantle the structures that support
and promote barriers to building sustained peace and
security. In that regard, we must revitalize efforts to
advance the women and peace and security agenda by
giving greater attention to ensuring better protection
for women peace advocates, including through political,
financial and capacity-building support.

Malaysia believes that ASEAN has a lot to offer
in strengthening women’s leadership and resilience
in peace and security activities. We believe it is
important to share with others our mediation, disastermanagement and capacity-building experiences, among
other things, while also learning from others as we
strive to break the barriers in realizing the women and
peace and security agenda.

Malaysia remains convinced that women’s
participation is key to the success and longevity of peace
processes. We are committed to building capacity and
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
at the national, regional and international levels. We
continue to support UN-Women, including through
contributions, in enhancing women’s meaningful
participation and the integration of gender perspectives
in peace and security actions.

No one should bear the brunt of war and conflict.
We must make greater collective efforts to encourage
dialogue, constructive engagement and peaceful
resolution in order to prevent conflict and war. In the
meantime, we must do more to improve gender equality
in peace processes. We must create an environment
that is conducive to enabling women peacekeepers and
peacebuilders to take on their rightful place and roles in
building lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): First of all, I would
like to commend Gabon for convening today’s timely
and very important open debate on women and peace
and security.

Malaysia is fully committed to supporting the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
by increasing the number of civilians and uniformed
women personnel in peacekeeping missions at all
levels and in key positions. Currently, 849 Malaysian
peacekeepers serve in five United Nations peacekeeping
operations, 85 of whom are women peacekeepers
deployed in Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Western Sahara. We are also preparing a
national action plan on women and peace and security.

Estonia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security, and I would like to
make a few observations in my national capacity.

At the regional level along with our fellow
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
members, Malaysia will continue to apply a gender
lens to our collective efforts to integrate women
and peace and security in South-East Asia. Several
milestones have been achieved, including through the
establishment of the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry
and the Expanded Advisory Group on Women, Peace
and Security, as well as the participation of ASEAN
women military and law enforcement officers in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We look forward
to the planned adoption by ASEAN leaders of the

In February, Ukrainians woke up to shelling by
the Russian army, which initiated an imperial conquest
attempt similar to the grim practices of past centuries.
As a result, more than 12 million people, mostly women
and children, have been forced to flee their homes. In
addition to their massive death toll, women and girls
have been subjected to rape, deportation, exploitation
and abuse. In the face of those continuous horrors,
Ukrainian women have demonstrated incredible
resolve by taking leading roles in the political,
military and humanitarian spheres in order to resist the
Russian aggression.

30/53

Estonia welcomes the Security Council’s annual
open debate on women and peace and security and
remains committed to standing firm in advancing
women’s rights, security and leadership, as we did
during our elected membership of the Security Council
in 2020 and 2021.

22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Unfortunately, there are numerous other
examples. In Afghanistan, women and girls are still
deprived of education, jobs and political and social
rights. In Ethiopia, women and girls have faced mass
displacement. In Iran, women are fighting for their
rights, at the cost of their own lives, and they deserve
our respect and support.
As our focus today is on women’s resilience and
leadership, Estonia affirms its efforts to further advance
the role of women. We will continue to support UNWomen, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund
and the Offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in their activities.
To conclude, women are so often a decisive driving
force of change, yet they also pay the heaviest price
in times of conflict. We at the United Nations must
work together to empower women and ensure their fair
participation in building societies that are resilient,
inclusive and peaceful. That is a sacred commitment
we can make for future generations of women and girls.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I would like to start by
thanking Gabon for initiating today’s open debate, as
well as all the briefers for their testimonies.
Latvia welcomes the continued practice of
inviting women civil-society representatives to
brief the Security Council. Latvia also welcomes the
report of the Secretary General (S/2022/740) and the
recommendations it contains.
Latvia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security concerning the situations
in the Sudan, Ukraine, Afghanistan, Yemen and other
fragile and conflict-affected countries. Allow me to
focus my statement today mostly on Russia’s ongoing
aggression against Ukraine.
This month, we mark the twenty-second
anniversary of the adoption of the women and peace
and security agenda in resolution 1325 (2000), a
landmark resolution that recognized importance
of women’s leadership in achieving international
peace and security, as well as their contribution to
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping,

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

peacebuilding and humanitarian responses and postconflict reconstruction.
In that resolution and the nine other resolutions
adopted over the following two decades, the Council
also recognized the suffering that armed conflict
brings to women and girls and declared sexual violence
a war crime. The Council called on parties to respect
international law and take measures to protect women
and girls from gender-based violence.
Nevertheless, a member of this very Council, the
Russian Federation, instead of working to alleviate
adversities and hardships in the conflict-ridden world,
chose to cause misery and commit crimes. Women and
girls are experiencing immense suffering, including
sexual violence, because of the unprovoked, unjustified
war that the Russian Federation chose to wage against
its neighbouring country Ukraine. The Russian
Federation must and will be held accountable for the
crimes it has committed, including through a special
tribunal for crimes of aggression.
Latvia firmly supports the women and peace
and security agenda, since ensuring women’s rights
and peace is a priority for us as a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Commission
on the Status of Women, as well as the UN-Women
Executive Board starting next January. Latvia respects
international law and works in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council to help women and girls
affected by armed conflict.
Beginning on the very first days of Russia’s war
against Ukraine, Latvia rapidly allocated additional
funds to providing physical and emotional rehabilitation
to victims of the war, especially women and girls, who
have suffered from sexual violence committed by
Russian soldiers, as documented by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine.
Latvia has welcomed more than 35,000 Ukrainian
refugees. Latvia is ensuring that the human rights of
the survivors of sexual violence are at the heart of its
response. We follow standards for the safe and effective
documentation to record survivors’ experiences,
respecting their rights to dignity, privacy and health.
As part of its development cooperation, Latvia
supports civil society organizations to help women
and girls in Ukraine. For example, in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations, Latvia is supporting
the establishment of a rehabilitation centre in Ukraine
to help victims of war crimes and will provide support

22-6425931/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to Ukraine in the development of its national action
plan on women and peace and security. We know that
many other countries and organizations are coming
together to alleviate the situation. We are thankful for
the important work that UN-Women and other United
Nations entities are doing to help women and girls
in Ukraine.
We commend Ukrainian women for their bravery
and resilience in the light of Russia’s aggression. We
acknowledge the evident truth that women are a force of
change. What we need to do is to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all decision-making processes
during and after the war, when Ukrainians will rebuild
their country. To that end, Latvia is, and always will be,
a friend and partner of Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Webster (Australia): Australia thanks Gabon
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security, 22 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). The full and effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda is of pressing
importance, as the global community is confronted
with conflicts, crises, climate change and pandemic
recovery, intertwined with resurgent misogyny
and authoritarianism.
We are again reminded by the Secretary-General
in his 2022 annual report (S/2022/740) on women and
peace and security that progress is slow and that, in
too many instances, it has reversed — with regard to
women’s participation in peace processes, leadership
across contexts and access to justice, undermining
human rights and preventing the achievement of
gender equality.
Today’s topic is not one for debate. The evidence
is clear that pathways to peace are paved with women’s
resilience and leadership. Across the world, women
demand to be heard, advocate for the fulfilment of human
rights, mediate conflicts and negotiate peace. Where
women are absent as a result of force or discriminatory
norms and structures, peace does not prevail. Where
women human rights defenders are persecuted, peace
does not prevail. Where the knowledge and networks
of diverse women are disregarded, including in relation
to climate, disasters and terrorism, insecurity and
instability reign.
32/53

20/10/2022

Australia is gravely concerned about the growing
levels of hostility towards women, particularly
women facing intersectional inequalities. The
reprisals, intimidation and violence against women
peacebuilders, human rights defenders, community
activists, protesters, students and educators are
abhorrent. We must stand with everyone and every
organization fighting for peace and security, grounded
in gender justice.
Australia condemned last month’s deadly and
disproportionate use of force against protesters in
Iran and called for truth, justice and the cessation of
oppression against women. That is yet another example
of why the women and peace and security agenda
matters and why we must do more to translate the four
pillars from policy to practice. As we step up, we do so
in partnership with women and girls, recognizing their
resilience and leadership. All women and girls have
the right to be fully and equally part of peacekeeping
operations, peace negotiations and political processes.
And we need the capabilities, insights, strength and
transformative leadership of diverse women and girls
to attain and sustain peace.
Australia invests in such partnerships by,
for example, supporting the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, regional networks of women
negotiators and mediators, and gender justice initiatives
in the investigation and prosecution of international
crimes. Australia is a committed advocate and actor
for the women and peace and security agenda, and
we appreciate the efforts of so many stakeholders.
We welcome collaboration in the implementation of
our national action plan and encourage all Member
States to adopt, provide resources for and implement
the frameworks that will guide us towards peace and
security, with inclusion, equity and accountability.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the
outset, allow me to express our appreciation to the
Gabonese Republic for convening this open debate and
to the briefers for their insightful presentations.
For more than 20 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the meaningful participation
of women in peace processes has seen some progress.
However, gender inequality, exclusion, discrimination,
poverty, violence and conflicts are some of the many
issues facing them today.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Despite being vulnerable victims, women are
also active agents of change. The first revolution for
independence in Viet Nam’s history, for example,
was led by two women. Be it at war or at peace,
Vietnamese women have been playing an indispensable
role. Nowadays, we are proud to have Vietnamese
women serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Our commitment to the advancement of
women is therefore deeply rooted in our long history
of women’s participation and leadership in the quest
for independence and development. Enhancing the
participation of women in every sphere of life is a key
priority for Viet Nam.
We acknowledge that women and their empowerment
are crucial to advancing the culture of peace based
on their actual knowledge, wisdom, tolerance and
understanding. They play a vital role in educating
young people, especially their children, to value peace,
not war. That was clearly manifested throughout our
membership in the Council. From our own experience,
we recognize the important and diverse roles assumed
by women in the prevention and resolution of conflict,
as well as in the building of sustainable peace.
In order to effectively implement the women and
peace and security agenda, we need to enhance its
visibility and share best practices among Member
States. The role, leadership and contribution of women
should be guaranteed and promoted at the local,
national and international levels by mainstreaming their
rights, interests and needs within legal frameworks,
strategies and policies to ensure their full, equal and
meaningful participation.
In United Nations peacekeeping operations, we also
need to increase the number of women peacekeepers
and ensure their meaningful contributions. In addition,
for women’s resilience to make a difference, the
international community must further support their
efforts. Therefore, we echo the call to earmark at
least 15 per cent of official development assistance
dedicated to advancing gender equality in conflictaffected countries.
In closing, we would like to reiterate our readiness
and commitment to join the international community’
efforts to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in related processes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Feruță (Romania): I would like to thank Gabon
for convening this important debate. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women and the briefers.
We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union, and
we also subscribe to the statement made on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
I would nevertheless like to add several points in
the national context on behalf of Romania.
We are indeed faced with unprecedented challenges
to peace and security in Europe. Unfortunately, as
a consequence of the Russian aggression against
Ukraine, women are severely affected. More than
2.6 million Ukrainian refugees crossed our borders
in Romania, mostly women and children, and some
of those women returned to defend their country. We
are deeply impressed by their courage and sacrifice
and applaud their contribution to the national effort to
defend their country.
I would also like to extend that appreciation to
women everywhere who are faced with situations of
violence and armed conflict — in Afghanistan, Mali,
Nigeria, Iran and Myanmar, to name just a few. Their
courage and resilience are an inspiration and a call to
duty for us all.
Romania has a proactive approach to the
empowerment of women, both as a human rights
objective and as a precondition for social justice,
development and peace. We adopted and implemented
a national strategy and a national plan of action on
women and peace and security, covering the period
2020 to 2023 — the first of their kind at the national
level, and both of them build on resolution 1325 (2000).
The national plan of action advances women’s
participation in the areas of national security and
defence, public order and safety and, in a broader
sense, in the social and economic realm of the country.
Its objectives were established in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000), and we will soon start the
inter-institutional process to prepare the second
action plan.
I want to stress the importance of the role of women,
both uniformed and civilian personnel, in the national
defence system, public order and safety in Romania.
They make up an important part of Romania’s presence
in the field missions of international organizations,

22-6425933/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

including United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Some 37.5 per cent of the Romanian military and
police personnel in international field missions are
women, and they have a vital role in understanding
and addressing crisis situations and engaging the most
vulnerable groups.
We remain committed to upholding the relevant
resolutions on the women and peace and security
agenda and, as a newly elected member of the Human
Rights Council, to promoting and protecting human
rights — a fundamental pillar of our foreign policy.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Bulgaria.
Mrs. Beshkova (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union, the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
I would also like to share some views in my
national capacity.
At the outset, let me thank Gabon for organizing
today’s open debate on such a relevant topic.
Furthermore, I would like to express appreciation for
the Secretary-General’s most recent report on women
and peace and security (S/2022/740), its pertinent
recommendations and its sobering warning that the
world is experiencing a reversal of generational gains in
women’s rights and that takes us far away from building
stable and prosperous societies.
We see those warnings manifested most clearly in
regions plagued by armed groups. Whether those are
terrorist groups motivated by religious extremism,
mercenaries serving the Russian war machine against
Ukraine or ill-trained conscripts, armed groups are
usually male and often involved in sexual and genderbased violence against women and girls.
Most recently, we have seen the victimization of
women as a result of the ongoing illegal, unprovoked
and unjustified aggression of the Russian Federation
against Ukraine, which has also led to millions of
refugees, mostly women and children. Similar tragedies
have played out in Africa, the Middle East, Afghanistan
and Myanmar, just to name a few.
Women’s
exclusion
from
decision-making
processes and positions of authority contributes to their
victimization. There are two key words — inclusion
34/53

20/10/2022

and empowerment, including economic empowerment
and access to education. Today Bulgaria reconfirms
its commitment to protect, respect and promote the
human rights of all women and girls and calls upon the
international community to mobilize further efforts
in that regard and to create a safe framework where
women will be able to make their voices heard and hold
professional and leadership positions in all spheres
of social life, without fear of reprisals or visible or
invisible barriers.
The Security Council has a special role in that
regard, because of its say over the way in which
peacekeeping operations are mandated and conducted.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women
and girls in all spheres of life is crucial if we are to have
peaceful, functional and prosperous societies. Ensuring
such participation should not be seen as something that
comes after peace has been achieved, but should rather
be one of the instruments to contain armed groups that
are plaguing regions.
Turning now to our national implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, I would like
to point out that this year, we are taking stock of our
mid-term progress on the implementation of our national
action plan on women and peace and security for the
period 2020–2025. We call upon all relevant actors
to ensure that the values of the women and peace and
security agenda are reflected in their national measures
to ensure women’s inclusion and empowerment and that
in peacebuilding settings, they form a substantial part
of their national peacebuilding priorities.
Let me conclude by clearly stating the position of my
country — making commitments just sets the direction
of travel and imagines our societies few years or even
few decades ahead. Stepping up for those commitments
is already transforming our societies. Stepping back
from those commitments, as, regrettably, we have
witnessed in many areas of the globe, is equivalent to
ruining individual lives and societies with bullets.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
the European Union.
I would like to start by thanking you, Madam
President, for organizing today’s important debate
on women and peace and security, with a focus on
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

strengthening women’s resilience and leadership.
We consider it important to increase our joint efforts
to ensure gender equality as a path to sustainable
peace, although current challenges indicate that we
are unfortunately moving in the opposite direction. It
is therefore crucial that the Security Council continue
to address various aspects of conflicts within the
framework of these thematic debates. Today’s debate
also contributes to a systematic advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda in the work and
decision-making of the Security Council.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the Executive Director of UN-Women for their
insightful briefings earlier today.
Slovakia reiterates its appreciation for resolution
2594 (2021) on United Nations peacekeeping mission
transitions, which was unanimously adopted in
September 2021, which underlines the need to include
engagement with the local community and civil society,
with the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women, youth and persons with disabilities.
Slovakia considers prevention to be the cornerstone
of all United Nations efforts aimed at peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. The women and peace and
security agenda, together with the goals of inclusivity
and gender equality, definitely fits into the broader
prevention agenda promoted by the Secretary-General.
It is also instrumental to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially
SDGs 5 and 16, which recognize gender equality, as
well as peace, justice and strong institutions as global
development priorities.
As a co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, Slovakia would like to point to
resolution 2151 (2014), on security-sector reform,
which underscores the importance of women’s equal,
meaningful and effective participation and full
involvement in the security sector in order to build
inclusive, accountable and legitimate institutions
that protect populations more efficiently and promote
lasting peace and sustainable development. Gendersensitive security-sector reform is key to developing
security-sector institutions that are non-discriminatory,
representative of the population and capable of
responding effectively to the specific security needs
of diverse groups, thereby playing a crucial role in
prevention. That is also a governance issue that should
be highlighted in that particular context.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Advocating for women leaders in conflict is crucial
to adequately addressing the complexity and diversity of
crises and the peace and security agenda in general. In
that regard, Slovakia continues in its effort to increase
the number of women deployed to missions such as the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, in which
we have proudly served and played a key role for many
years. Women now make up 13 per cent of deployed
personnel in that mission, which is more than the target
of 9 per cent set for 2022. Of course, we realize that this
is not merely a statistical exercise. We are also looking
at the structural issues related to the deployment of
capable and experienced women.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2022/740) and commend his
commitment and leadership, and not just in relation
to the women and peace and security agenda. While
taking note of the conclusions and recommendations of
the report, which should be duly reflected in our future
action, we would expect a greater focus on the situation
in Ukraine, owing to Russia’s ongoing unprovoked and
unjustified war on that country. The war has resulted in
unprecedented suffering for women and girls, including
due to their mass displacement, which means that they
face risks of human trafficking and sexual and genderbased violence. And we have seen how real and horrific
those risks are.
Attacks on education, and using schools for military
purposes, are serious impediments to the education
of women and girls, and that ultimately limits their
participation in social, political and economic life.
We would like to take this opportunity to express our
support for the Safe Schools Declaration and encourage
all States to endorse it in order to create a clear link
between the protection of schools from attacks and
military use and women’s security and participation
in all forms of decision-making processes. In that
regard and in conclusion, we are deeply concerned
about the deterioration of the human rights situation in
Afghanistan, as is also pointed out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The situation of Afghan women and
girls is particularly alarming. Their right to education
and work is now at stake. Overall, they are facing a
highly uncertain future, which is a problem that
deserves our continued and urgent attention.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of Palestine.

22-6425935/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): On behalf of
the State of Palestine, I express our appreciation for
Gabon’s leadership of the Security Council this month
and for its convening of this important debate on
women and peace and security. I also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, the
Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous,
the African Union Special Envoy, Ms. Bineta Diop, and
Ms. Zahra Nader for their briefings.
The women and peace and security agenda is a crisisprevention agenda, but it is also a life agenda. Women’s
networks, including women human rights defenders,
have long been lifelines for their communities. They
have demonstrated leadership in conflict-affected
countries and humanitarian emergencies, and their
work has been essential to maintaining social cohesion,
fostering resilience and promoting stability, even
against formidable odds. They must be protected and
supported. The indispensability of their role is amplified
today against a backdrop of converging global crises
that are affecting every country and people. Women
must be a central part of the solutions we seek.
In our country, Palestinian women have long
played a prominent role in leading and shaping the
national liberation struggle and carrying their share of
the nation’s burdens. Since its inauguration in 1929, the
Palestinian Women’s Movement has been a unifying
force, helping to rally our people around one identity
and one national vision for justice and freedom.
Palestine remains committed to preserving the gains of
our historic women’s movement and pledges to continue
engaging and supporting our younger generation of
women and girls in all aspects of life, with the human
security perspective being central to all our efforts.
We are committed to protecting women from
violence and discrimination; promoting their full
and equal participation at all decision-making levels,
whether in peacebuilding, conflict resolution or
negotiations, including our reconciliation dialogue; and
promoting their empowerment to ensure individual wellbeing, as well as their collective contribution to national
recovery and the development and strengthening of
national capacities. In fact, though Palestine remains
deprived of independence, we would point to many
of our experiences as representing best practices long
supported by the international community, including
UN-Women. The State of Palestine acceded to the
United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women in 2014 and
36/53

20/10/2022

established a national committee to harmonize national
legislation with international treaties. Despite countless
obstructions by the illegal Israeli occupation and
societal constraints, we have persisted with that effort.
Similarly, we have established a national committee
for implementing Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), and with Sustainable Development Goals 5 and
16 in mind we have developed a national action plan for
the period from 2020 to 2024 that focuses on the four
pillars of prevention and protection, accountability,
participation and relief and recovery. Work is under
way to provide sustainable social, legal, psychosocial
and health, shelter and protection services to women
and girls to meet their needs and enable them to
thrive. We are also working on building women’s
capacities as front-liners and early responders to
conflict-related emergencies and humanitarian crises.
In fact, a Palestinian woman, as Minister of Health,
has successfully led our national response to the
coronavirus disease.
But despite all the gains made, Palestinian women
continue to face immense challenges and are paying the
heaviest price for the ongoing injustice being done to
the Palestinian people. The reality faced by Palestinian
women and their families is one of widespread violence
and terror inflicted both by the Israeli occupying army
and the Israeli settlers, who wilfully kill and injure
civilians, including women and their children, carry out
arbitrary arrests and unlawful detentions and practise
physical and psychological harassment and intimidation
at checkpoints. Other forms of such violence and terror
include the confiscation and annexation of lands; the
construction of settlements and the annexation wall;
home demolitions and expulsions; forced displacement;
the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip; and the
systematic denial of Palestinians’ basic and inalienable
rights, including their fundamental right to return, to
self-determination and to live in peace and security.
Moreover, Israel targets human rights defenders,
including women. While their protection has been
among the primary demands in this Chamber today,
Israel has instead launched a hostile campaign against
them, going so far as to designate Palestinian civilsociety organizations, including the Union of Palestinian
Women’s Committees, as terrorist organizations. All of
that is being done for the sole purpose of maintaining
the illegal colonial occupation and its subjugation,
persecution and domination of the Palestinian people
under a system of apartheid. There can be no doubt
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

that the Israeli occupation remains the main obstacle
to achieving women’s rights and peace and security
in occupied Palestine. The impact is generational,
continual and enormous.
At its first meeting on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, which was
held in June, the Informal Expert Group on Women,
Peace and Security of the Security Council called on
Israel to cease
“all measures that affect the physical and
psychological well-being and that have an impact on
all aspects of the daily lives of Palestinian women
living under occupation” (S/2022/557, annex, p. 4).
As Israel has openly declared its intent to continue
its illegal occupation and all its illegal practices, we call
on the Security Council to act. The Council must adopt
measures in line with international law, including its
own resolutions, to hold Israel accountable and provide
protection to the Palestinian people, including women.
Only by ending impunity and achieving accountability
can the Palestinian people, including its women, be
enabled to finally realize their rights to live in peace,
security and dignity.
In conclusion, I convey the solidarity of Palestine’s
women with all women around the world who struggle
against violence and oppression and strive for justice,
peace and better lives for themselves, their families,
their communities, their nations and our world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to stress that Belgium fully supports
the statements made on behalf of the European Union
and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Belgium thanks the Gabonese Republic for
having centred this annual debate on women’s
resilience and leadership. Indeed, effective action to
counter underinvestment and persistent gaps in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda is vital.
Let us begin by recognizing women’s resilience
and leadership in the face of adversity and systemic
discrimination. I would like to highlight three
key points.
First, we must remove structural barriers,
especially in areas plagued by armed groups. Failure

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

to combat inequalities, guarantee women’s rights and
eliminate conflict-related sexual violence impedes the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women at
all levels of decision-making. In that regard, the global
anti-gender movement is particularly worrisome,
reversing generational gains, as the Secretary-General
has demonstrated in his report (S/2022/740).
Secondly, we need concrete implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. Belgium
takes seriously the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and the calls of civil society. In that
spirit, my country is already implementing its fourth
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the period 2022-2026. We encourage all States that
have not yet adopted a national action plan to start
working on such a plan. Belgium stands ready to share
its experience.
Thirdly,
supporting
women
peacebuilders,
women human rights defenders and women’s rights
organizations is crucial. Therefore, I am proud of our
support for the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mali
and now also in Ukraine. The Fund helps women-led
organizations and women’s rights organizations to
participate in decision-making, prevent conflict and
respond to crises, such as Russia’s war of aggression
in Ukraine.
Finally, let us give the women and peace and
security agenda the priority it deserves in regional
organizations. A transformative approach to gender
is needed everywhere. To that end, Belgium has used
its current chairmanship of the Forum for Security
Cooperation, within the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, to integrate the women and
peace and security agenda into the Forum’s work.
Belgium is convinced that today’s discussion will
help identify ways to further value the resilience and
leadership of women and girls. It is up to States to move
from analysis and promises to effective action. Without
that, we will not be able to reverse current trends or
build a lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important debate on the theme

22-6425937/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

“Strengthening women’s resilience and leadership as a
path to peace in regions plagued by armed groups”.
Women play an essential role in all areas of life,
including through their participation in political life
and socioeconomic reconstruction, in addition to their
pivotal role in preventing and resolving conflicts, peace
talks, peacebuilding, maintaining peace, humanitarian
response and post-conflict reconstruction.
The Government of Yemen has adopted a national
action plan in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000). It includes programmes to implement the four
strategic goals of protection, participation, prevention
and assistance, with the participation of political
decision makers and policymakers from all levels of
Government, including security authorities, women-led
civil society organizations, young people, academia and
the private sector, with a view to implementing national
programmes based on the principles of partnership,
inclusive leadership and accountability.
Yemeni women participated in the Comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference held in January 2014,
which was a major national event and an exemplary
forum that reflected women’s interests and political
will; indeed, 30 per cent of the participants were
women. Women also participated in the constitutional
drafting committee, which included four women among
its 17 members. Yemeni women also participated in
delegations to peace negotiations.
The Yemeni Government issued a directive to
reactivate the women’s national committee after the
interruption of its work following the coup by Houthi
militias, which had resulted in the loss of all the
committee’s achievements for Yemeni women at the
national level. The committee is currently reactivating
its branches in the governorates in order to provide
essential support for women’s work, women’s issues
and women’s development
We have also set up a national commission, including
women representatives, which will investigate alleged
violations of human rights, in particular violations
against Yemeni women in all governorates, and will
refer violations to special courts in which perpetrators
will be prosecuted.
The Ministry of Social Affairs is working
with the Ministry of the Interior and civil society
organizations of young people and women to identify
the security concerns of women, men and children,
38/53

20/10/2022

as well as to identify gaps in the security sector and
issue recommendations for adopting protection and
preventive measures against all aspects of violence
and establishing an electronic system for reporting and
documenting such matters. Efforts are under way with
various ministries to integrate the women and peace
and security agenda into their institutional structures
with the aim of building capacity for policymaking
and planning.
Women’s participation in decision-making leads
to radical changes in achieving transitional justice.
In that context, the Presidential Leadership Council
is committed to upholding the Charter of the United
Nations, advancing peace, ending human suffering,
promoting equal citizenship and empowering women
and young people in order to realize their goals.
The Presidential Leadership Council also adopted
important measures for promoting the meaningful
participation of women by appointing eight women to
subsidiary committees of the Presidential Leadership
Council, who will contribute their expertise and
technical support to creating conditions conducive to
achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace, including
the participation of women leaders in the efforts to
establish and implement a United Nations truce and the
work of the group negotiating with the Houthi militias
to reopen the main roads to Tai’z governorate, which
has been besieged for more than eight years.
The Presidential Leadership Council appointed a
female judge to the Supreme Judicial Council, which
represents an additional improvement in the composition
of the judiciary. Consultations are currently ongoing
in the Presidential Leadership Council to appoint two
women to the governmental team that will negotiate
with the Houthi militias on achieving a comprehensive
peace and resuming the political process.
The Yemeni Government welcomed the early
2021 decision taken by the Security Council Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) to list the Houthi leader, Sultan Zaben, as a
terrorist. He played a major role in terrorizing, detaining,
torturing and raping Yemeni female political activists
held in secret prisons. Even so, the Houthi militias
have continued their violations against Yemeni women,
depriving them of their political and economic rights
while limiting their freedom of movement, despite it
being a basic right guaranteed by the Constitution.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, the Yemeni Government recognizes
the importance of the distinctive role played by
women when it comes to achieving social cohesion,
socioeconomic and political transformation. It also
recognizes their ability to be resilient and make
fundamental contributions to peacebuilding. In that
regard, we thank all our regional and international
partners, in particular the Government of Norway, which
supported Yemen in the implementation of our national
action plan for women, peace and security by providing
funds and expertise. We call on the international
community as well as sisterly and friendly countries to
lend further support to the Yemeni Government so that
we can meet our commitments in relation to fulfilling
the women, peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand wishes to express its appreciation to Gabon
for convening today’s important open debate to advance
the women and peace and security agenda.
Women constitute half of the world’s population
and are a crucial part of our efforts to achieve peace,
security and sustainable development. As different
forms of armed conflicts plague various regions
of the world, women and girls continue to suffer
disproportionately therefrom. They face multiple
challenges in times of instability and strife, from sexual
and gender-based violence to deteriorating livelihoods,
from forced displacement to loss of human security.
Despite that, however, women and girls should not
only be seen as victims of conflicts and instability.
We must also see them as active agents for peace and
transformative change. In this regard, I would like to
highlight the following four points.
First, women’s participation is crucial. We must
promote the role and leadership of women in peace
processes and in policy decision-making at all levels.
Given the fact that women are key pillars of every
society, their inclusion can certainly give more chances
for peace and security, as well as for sustainable
development. In Thailand, our national measures
and guidelines on women, peace and security seek to
enhance the role of women with a view to addressing
conflict and political and social unrest. Currently,
in collaboration with the UN-Women, we are in the
process of developing new measures and guidelines for
the next cycle.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, women’s empowerment is equally
important. When women are empowered, they become
more resilient, which enables them to effectively
participate in peace talks, political discussions,
institution-building and so on. They can better engage
in a wider range of economic activities and contribute to
efforts aimed at growth and development, which could
in turn lead to reducing the likelihood of conflicts and
to increasing chances for enduring peace and stability.
Out of this conviction, Thai peacekeepers,
working under the auspices of the United Nations, have
undertaken development activities and engaged with
local community leaders, including women and girls,
to help address their vulnerabilities and promote their
empowerment through capacity-building and training,
based on Thailand’s experience and best practices.
We believe that it is our responsibility to support host
countries in building a solid foundation for sustainable
development and lasting peace for all.
Thirdly, increasing women personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping operations must be encouraged.
We are convinced that their abilities to build trust
and gain access to communities and women in host
countries are invaluable assets. Thailand supports
the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy that seeks to
increase the representation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in a sustainable manner.
As a troop-contributing country, the ratio of women
peacekeepers that Thailand has employed is high, and
we will continue to work to further promote women’s
participation at higher levels, including by providing
training and capacity-building. A specialized training
is in effect to generate more women peacekeepers, who
have already been deployed in the field, including in
South Sudan.
Lastly, Thailand believes that for any arrangement
for peace and stability in conflict areas to be effective
and sustainable, there needs to be close dialogue and
engagement with the region concerned. The views of
the region affected by conflict, including the ideas and
concerns of women of the region, from community
leaders to policymakers to those at the grass roots, must
be taken into account. In sum, the voices of the affected
region matter. The voices of women and girls matter,
and the voices of women and girls in regions affected
by conflict matter even more.
In closing, in pursuing the women and peace and
security agenda, Thailand reaffirms its commitment

22-6425939/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to gender equality and women’s empowerment,
as highlighted by our Prime Minister’s inaugural
statement at the Global Summit of Women in Bangkok
in June 2022. It is our firm belief that only through
the realization of diversity, equality and inclusion will
a society enjoy enduring stability and the fruits of
sustainable development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, which
consists of 55 States Members of the United Nations
and the European Union, and is co-chaired this year by
Botswana, Costa Rica and Croatia.
The women and peace and security agenda
continues to play a pivotal role in advancing women’s
full, equal, effective and meaningful participation and
leadership in all stages of political, peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention processes, consequently making
the processes more effective and inclusive. The
inclusion of women is also important for successfully
preventing atrocity crimes and for the effectiveness and
sustainability of peace processes.
Genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing entail a gender perspective and have a
gender impact. As a result, there is a complementarity
and mutual support between the responsibility to
protect (R2P) and mechanisms that address sexual and
gender-based crimes. By improving prevention and
protecting women and girls from all forms of sexual
and gender-based violence, abduction and other crimes,
and by including women in atrocity-prevention efforts,
as well as by facilitating their role as agents of change,
the United Nations and its Member States can take
practical action to uphold the responsibility to protect.
Analyses of situations in which there is a risk
of atrocity crimes often fail to include gender and
intersecting inequalities. When a gender perspective
is applied, it often groups women with children as a
vulnerable group. This is insensitive to the many ways
in which gender permeates atrocity crimes.
Gender-based discrimination and inequality,
including the systematic oppression of women and
girls, are important risk factors that can contribute to
atrocity crimes. Addressing root causes of gender-based
discrimination and violence, as well as hearing and
40/53

20/10/2022

elevating women’s voices on their unique experiences
and needs in atrocity situations, can enhance
prevention strategies and contribute to lasting peace.
We underscore that women’s organizations play a key
role in providing timely and sensitive early-warning
information, resolving tensions among communities
through intercommunal dialogue and countering hate
speech and incitement to violence. Women’s full, equal,
effective and meaningful participation and leadership
must be integral to all efforts across the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus, and gender equality
and human rights must be a central part of all
peace agreements.
In this context, the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect would like to call upon all
States Members of the United Nations to increase
support for the women and peace and security agenda,
resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent related
resolutions, and to meaningfully contribute to their
swift and full implementation. We urge all Member
States to respect and fulfil all their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We also call on Member States to work to prevent
and respond to all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence and discrimination targeting women and girls.
This includes Member States working to end impunity
for serious crimes committed against women and girls
and ensuring that all incidents of sexual violence are
fully investigated, prosecuted and tried in a competent
court and in accordance with international standards.
By enhancing our understanding of the gender
dynamics of atrocity crimes and their risks, including
through consultation and meaningful engagement with
affected populations, strengthened analysis, as well as
monitoring and reporting, we can improve the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect. States
must recognize the various roles that women play and
take that into account in all conflict- and atrocityprevention strategies. States must uphold gender equality
and eliminate sexual and gender-based violence as part
of atrocity prevention and ensure women’s full, equal
and safe participation and leadership as a key element
of fulfilling their responsibility to protect populations
from atrocity crimes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Estrada Girón (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank His Excellency Mr. Michael Moussa
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Adamo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Gabonese
Republic, for convening this open debate. I also thank
the panellists for their valuable insights.
The historic resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent resolutions reaffirm the important role
of women in conflict prevention and resolution,
negotiations, peacebuilding and peacekeeping, as
well as humanitarian response and post-conflict
reconstruction. In that regard, it is the responsibility
of States and of the United Nations to ensure effective
compliance with the provisions of the global women
and peace and security agenda.
There is no doubt that strengthening the resilience
of women in regions plagued by armed groups is a
fundamental issue and should prevail on the agenda of
the Council. States’ actions to achieve that end must
be complemented by binding commitments, such as the
implementation of existing disarmament legislation.
Armed violence is a scourge that is strengthened
by the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
undermining their protection, their physical and moral
integrity, and undoubtedly hinders the creation of
an environment that fosters integral and sustainable
human development. We believe that the Arms Trade
Treaty is an accurate instrument capable of guiding
States on an effective regulation of the international
arms trade, whose guidelines prevent the diversion of
weapons. Likewise, it is a priority to comply with the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and to incorporate the participation of
women as agents of peace and prevention.
Guatemala gives special priority to the participation
of women in peacekeeping operations. According to
national data from the Ministry of Defence, a total of
300 women have been deployed as military and civilian
personnel in various missions. Those women have
demonstrated that they can perform adequately under
the same difficult conditions as their male counterparts.
It is imperative that our countries hire and retain women
in peacekeeping, as data shows that they have had a
positive impact in those environments.
In addition, Guatemala considers that regional
organizations are among the key actors in charge of
implementing this important agenda. As stipulated
in resolution 2242 (2015) and subsequent resolutions
2467 (2019) and 2493 (2019), while the main role
of implementing this global agenda falls on States,

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

regional organizations and United Nations entities play
an important complementary role.
National action plans are a vital product of
resolution 1325 (2000) and should be a valuable tool
for States to implement their commitments and for civil
society to support them in implementation efforts. They
are practical documents that provide an opportunity for
national stakeholders to identify priorities, determine
responsibilities, allocate resources and initiate strategic
actions within a defined time frame to implement
policies and programmes that respond to the needs and
priorities of countries currently affected by conflict or
in post-conflict situations.
Guatemala reaffirms the importance of national
ownership and leadership in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping and stresses the importance of the
inclusion of all segments of society in order to ensure
that the needs of all sectors, especially the most
vulnerable, are addressed.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Bakradze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to express my gratitude to the presidency of Gabon
for convening today’s meeting. I would also like to
join my colleagues in thanking the briefers for their
excellent presentations.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, and I
would like to make some additional comments in my
national capacity.
While global gender parity in the peace and
security dimension has yet to be achieved, we welcome
every effort by participating States to increase women’s
participation in areas pertaining to international peace
and security. Regrettably, despite the increasing
awareness of their contributions worldwide, girls and
women face various obstacles to their activism. We
share the concerns raised in the Secretary-General’s
report on women and peace and security (S/2022/740)
regarding the numerous barriers compounded by
predominant gender stereotypes that girls and women
have to overcome in order to exercise their right to
participate in public and political life.
Georgia spares no effort to ensure the meaningful
engagement of women in the peace process and continues
to attach significant importance to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, in

22-6425941/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

accordance with the subsequent Security Council
resolutions and the respective national action plan. Let
me note that the Government of Georgia is finalizing
its fourth national action plan on women and peace
and security. The plan is based on the Government’s
approach of integrating gender perspectives in the
security sector and in decision-making processes by
using a gender lens in peace negotiations and promoting
the meaningful participation of women and girls in
conflict prevention and resolution.
Women and girls are disproportionately and
dissimilarly affected by wars, conflicts and crises.
Russia’s illegal, unprovoked and brutal war against
Ukraine has highlighted the importance of focusing on
women and the women and peace and security agenda.
The continued occupation and creeping annexation
of the Georgian regions of Tskhinvali/South Ossetia
and Abkhazia bluntly violate the principles of the
United Nations Charter and undermine the rules-based
international order, threatening regional and global
security. Regrettably, women and girls living in the
Russia-occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia continue to suffer from persistent violations
of their fundamental human rights and are unable to
benefit from the human rights protection framework of
the Government of Georgia.
At each round of the Geneva International
Discussions and the Incident Prevention and Response
Mechanism, the Georgian delegation actively raises
the needs and priorities of women internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and conflict-affected women. The
topics are highlighted with the co-Chairs of the
Geneva International Discussions — the European
Union, the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as with
other international and regional organizations, in
order to properly reflect the needs and priorities of
women IDPs and conflict-affected women in peaceful
conflict-resolution processes. Furthermore, for the
same purpose, with the support of UN-Women Georgia,
participants from the Georgian side of the Geneva
International Discussions hold regular meetings with
representatives of civil society, including forcefully
displaced conflict-affected women, as well as women’s
rights defender non-governmental organizations.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Georgia’s
commitment to advancing the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
42/53

20/10/2022

level, as well as to contribute towards the promotion of
its implementation globally.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The Dominican Republic commends Gabon
for the convening of this important open debate, and we
acknowledge its leadership in including in the women
and peace and security agenda the crucial perspective
of women’s resilience and leadership as a path to peace
in regions plagued by armed groups.
Women’s resilience and leadership are key
factors on the path towards sustainable peace. To
foster them is to foster peace. Supporting them is our
shared responsibility.
In a context of escalating armed conflict and
violence, women’s leadership as human rights defenders
has led to a more comprehensive response and a greater
awareness of the need to protect the dignity of all people
in conflict. However, unfortunately, women have paid
a high price.
The Security Council already met on this issue,
when earlier this year it addressed the reprisals
suffered by women human rights defenders (see
S/PV.9016). Many were imprisoned, abused, harassed
or disappeared for advocating for the rights of the most
vulnerable or for simply claiming their essential place
at the negotiating table.
We note with regret that the situation continues
to deteriorate. Structural and practical obstacles
to women’s participation in peace processes and
peacebuilding still persist. Despite that, women do not,
and will not, give up because they are certain that their
efforts are for the common good, not for the benefit of
special groups. That is called resilience.
While there continues to be a sharp increase in
global military spending, little is being invested in
breaking down barriers. The truth is that, when it
comes to peace, the only viable investment is one that
is directed, with political will, towards the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and the full and meaningful
participation of women with their unique and inclusive
perspectives, such as their activist demands to silence
the guns in Africa, ensure access to education in
Afghanistan or report on missing persons in Syria.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Despite the many challenges ahead, the Dominican
Republic remains firmly committed to supporting
an international system that allows for women’s
participation, recognizes their contributions and
accepts, as a common principle, that no significant
change is possible without their full participation.
We call on all relevant bodies, particularly the United
Nations system, to uphold as a priority the defence
and protection of women who, with leadership and
resilience, remain determined to contribute to the
building of better countries for all.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I thank the presidency
of Gabon for organizing this important annual open
debate. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous, and the
other briefers for their comprehensive remarks.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Canada, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security,
and of Croatia, on behalf of Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.
The implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda is imperative to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, especially in conflict-affected
situations. The Security Council adopted the historic
and landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, in 2000, when Bangladesh was a
member of the Council. However, the implementation
scenario is not very bright. We have many pending tasks
in order to achieve its full implementation. Nevertheless,
we may take inspiration from the latest report of the
Secretary-General, wherein he mentioned that:
“The women, peace and security agenda
is not just an answer to historic wrongs and
marginalization, but an opportunity to do things
differently.” (S/2022/740, para. 7)
Bangladesh had its own horrific experience of sexual
violence against women during its war of liberation in
1971, when more than 200,000 women were violated.
Despite being occupied with numerous challenges in
rebuilding a war-ravaged country, we took measures
for their immediate rehabilitation. The perpetrators
were brought to justice through a trial process, and the
contribution of victims was officially recognized.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Inspired by our own experience, we gave shelter
to more than 1 million forcibly displaced Myanmar
nationals — the Rohingyas — a large majority of whom
are women and girls. We are providing all critical
support necessary for them. Unfortunately, five years
later, no progress has been made on their repatriation
due to a lack of genuine goodwill on the part of
Myanmar.
Let me now offer a few thoughts to reinforce
women’s resilience in advancing the cause of peace.
First, through political support, an effective
national action plan is critical to taking forward the
women and peace and security commitments in a
country. Bangladesh is among the 103 countries that
have formulated national action plans on women
and peace and security. We encourage all Member
States to formulate a national action plan with
performance indicators.
Secondly, financing has remained a major concern
for the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in conflict-affected areas. It is
alarming that, instead of diverting necessary resources
to support causes, such as the women and peace and
security agenda, we continue to see an increase in world
military spending, which reached an all-time high of
$2.1 trillion in 2021. We place emphasis on partnerships
among United Nations agencies, international financial
institutions, the public sector and non-traditional
donors to find new and innovative sources of funding.
Thirdly, material support to women peacebuilders
and their families, including psychosocial support
to women victims, is essential for the meaningful
participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in conflict situations. Effective early
warning, community engagement and information
campaigns by peacekeeping missions can ensure a
conducive environment for women peacebuilders.
We also emphasize the role and involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in advocating the
women and peace and security agenda in conflict
areas. As the current Chair of the PBC, we have put
women and peace and security in the priority list of its
programme of work for 2022.
Fourthly, we are deeply concerned over the wide
range of security, humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences resulting from the illicit flows of
small arms and light weapons (SALWs). We also
express our concern that such proliferation of SALWs

22-6425943/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

disproportionately affects women and girls. We call
upon all States to ensure that the supply of SALWs
is limited only to Governments or to entities duly
authorized by them.
Finally, we underscore the importance of
institutionalizing gender equality and women’s
participation in the capacity-building of national
institutions. Capacity-building in the security and
judicial sectors in a fragile setting is also crucial
to holding the perpetrators of violence against
women accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Let me begin by
commending your initiative, Madam President, to hold
today’s debate on the women and peace and security
agenda. We thank the briefers for their briefings.
Strengthening women’s resilience in emergency and
complex situations is essential to the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. However, as
highlighted by the briefers, we witness how challenges
remain, both in protection efforts and in the participation
of women, and how compounding factors intertwine to
create a perfect storm against the collective efforts to
implement the women and peace and security agenda.
Such
extraordinary
challenges
require
extraordinary efforts. In that context, Indonesia
supports the proposal set out by the Secretary-General
on the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
to insist on women’s meaningful participation in all
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
meaningful contribution of women should be present
across the peace continuum, from prevention and
conflict resolution to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development. To realize that notion, allow me to put
forward three points.
First, we must ensure the highest political
commitment and support. That principle has always
guided us. In 2014, a presidential regulation was signed
to provide the highest political basis for the protection
of women and children in conflict situations. In less
than a year, we issued a ministerial guidance to ensure
the implementation of the presidential regulation at
the national and subnational levels. Since then, the
implementation of the agenda has advanced significantly,
resulting in a large increase in Indonesian women’s
participation in peace and security programmes.
44/53

20/10/2022

Secondly, we must establish platforms and
bolster human capital. In 2020, Indonesia initiated
the establishment of the Southeast Asian Network
of Women Peace Negotiators and Mediators. The
Network has grown stronger through the exchange of
best practices and the capacity of the women of SouthEast Asia for peace negotiation and mediation has
been strengthened. Together with the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Myanmar, Indonesia is
working to help empower women and young people
in Myanmar’s peace and development process. In
Afghanistan, the Afghanistan-Indonesia Women’s
Solidarity Network aims to empower Afghan women as
agents of peace at all levels, particularly at the grassroots level. Of course, lasting change can come only
from the people themselves and cannot be implanted
from the outside. Any assistance should be geared to
what the people need to establish a peaceful, stable and
prosperous nation.
Finally — and this is my last point — we must
amplify the substantive role of women’s leadership
in order to foster long-lasting and sustainable
peace. Women in United Nations operations are still
underrepresented in most leadership roles. Only 12 of
37 United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions are led by women. As the Secretary-General
says in his report (S/2022/740), the need for women’s
leadership is important, especially in areas such as
Afghanistan where there are major issues related to the
protection of women. Indonesia shares and supports
the view that a specific and targeted focus on women’s
empowerment and protection in Afghanistan is
needed. They must be better heard. One way to ensure
that would be to create a United Nations function or
position focused on Afghan women that could help
everyone better understand the unique circumstances
facing Afghan women and find practical, long-lasting
solutions to those problems.
We need to redouble our efforts to increase
women’s meaningful participation in advocating
the peace agenda within the United Nations system.
Indonesia remains steadfast and stands ready to support
the United Nations in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda. Investing in women’s resilience
and leadership is indeed investing in a sustainable and
peaceful future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by commending the delegation of Gabon
for its admirable leadership of the Security Council
this month. I should note that Gabon’s presidency has
been marked by important initiatives such as today’s
open debate on strengthening the resilience of women
in regions plagued by armed groups — a burning issue
of our times.

conflict-related violence via specific centres that have
been set up in several localities in Mali. Fifthly, we
have adopted and are continuing our implementation of
our national action plan for resolution 1325 (2000). I
would like to remind the Council that Mali, which was
a member of the Security Council for the period from
2000 to 2001, strongly supported the adoption of that
historic resolution on women and peace and security.

As the Council knows, since January 2012 my
country, Mali, has been going through a deep and
multidimensional crisis whose innocent victims
unfortunately are mainly women, children and the
elderly. Those vulnerable segments of our society are
regularly subjected to physical, psychological and moral
violence by illegal armed groups and other organized
crime entities. Our experience as a country in conflict
has clearly shown that women, beyond being mere
victims, have a strong capacity for resilience. Their
crucial roles in conflict prevention, management and
resolution makes them true actors for peace. The fact
is that since the outbreak of the crisis, Malian women
have continued to work actively through associations,
non-governmental organizations and cooperatives
to support civilian populations in protecting and
defending women’s and children’s rights, rebuilding the
social fabric and institutions and engaging in dialogue
and reconciliation among communities. Similarly, they
have continued to combat gender-based violence while
pursuing income-generating activities in the most
remote regions of my country. As true local mediators,
Malian women continue to work to promote peaceful
coexistence among our communities, despite a hostile
environment of insecurity and sociocultural constraints.

Lastly, the number of women members of the
follow-up committee for the 2015 Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali resulting from the Algiers
process has increased from eight to 12. It also bears
remembering that the Agreement contains provisions
relating to the protection of women and combating
impunity, including ensuring women’s economic
autonomy through income-generating activities.

In order to promote and encourage the role of
women and women’s leadership, the Government of
Mali has adopted a national gender policy and a number
of legislative and regulatory measures, including the
following. First, in December 2015 we enacted a law
requiring that at least 30 percent of elected or appointed
officials in Mali’s institutions and Administration have
to be women, which has significantly contributed to
women’s political emergence in Mali. Secondly, in
December 2017 we enacted and are implementing
a law on the protection of human rights defenders,
with specific provisions for rural women, particularly
those in regions affected by insecurity. Thirdly, we
have established a support fund for the empowerment
of women and the development of children. Fourthly,
we are ensuring holistic care for women victims of

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the
Government of Mali’s commitment to pursuing its
efforts to enable the women of Mali to continue
contributing to peace, national reconciliation, peaceful
coexistence and the socioeconomic development of our
country. In that context, I thank all of the partners who
are assisting our efforts in that area and hope for their
continued support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and would like to add the following remarks in
its national capacity.
First, we thank Gabon for organizing this very
important debate on the women and peace and security
agenda, and we are grateful to all the briefers for their
presentations, including Ms. Zahra Nader for her
moving testimony.
Gender equality is an essential factor in ensuring
a country’s security and stability. There is evidence to
suggest that the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in decision-making process offers a path to
sustainable peace and conflict prevention. However,
despite the acknowledged fact that women are crucial to
peace and security and despite their strong leadership
at the forefront of protests against authoritarian leaders,
women and girls all around the world are still facing
suppression and being attacked and are still vastly
underrepresented in public life.

22-6425945/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Most recently, Iran has been plunged into deep
public unrest with the demonstrations and protests
triggered by the tragic death of Mahsa Amini. Iranian
women in all their diversity are leading the change
and demanding justice. The acts of violence and use
of lethal force by the authorities against protesters and
women human rights defenders are shocking. We also
condemn Belarus for denying women many rights and
freedoms guaranteed by international human rights
law and for imprisoning women activists and human
rights defenders, such as Maria Kolesnikova and Maria
Rabkova, who led grass-roots movements protesting
the fraudulent presidential elections in 2020.
We are appalled by the Taliban’s systematic
repression of women and girls of Afghanistan. Nearly
20 million Afghan women and girls are denied basic
rights, such as the right to education and employment.
Lithuania is also deeply concerned about reports of
the women’s rights situation in Haiti, where armed
gangs are widely using rape and other forms of sexual
violence to instil fear and to punish, subjugate and
inflict pain on local populations. Russia’s brutal and
unprovoked military aggression against Ukraine is
causing yet another humanitarian crisis, which is
disproportionately affecting women and girls. Ongoing
sexual and gender-based violence and the growing
number of reported cases of rape of Ukrainian women
and girls must be investigated, and those responsible
should be brought to justice.
All forms of violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, are deeply rooted in cultural
norms and gender stereotypes and indisputably
play a role in fuelling gender-based discrimination,
perpetuating gender inequalities and holding women
back. That is a huge adaptive challenge to our societies
and should be addressed through appropriate changes,
while including all constituents and stakeholders in
the dialogue.
Evidence also shows that, in general, women
human rights defenders are more likely to be targeted
by State and non-State actors, including in the form
of hate speech, harassment and sexual and genderbased violence. Women human rights defenders face
additional and different threats compared to those
faced by men, and once again such threats are shaped
by entrenched gender stereotypes and ingrained social
perceptions of women. As stated in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/740), such attacks are more
likely to target women’s personal behaviour and moral
46/53

20/10/2022

conduct in order to belittle and shame them. We have to
acknowledge that, despite the efforts of the international
community, the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda must be strengthened at all
levels around the globe.
Lithuania remains committed to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda
nationally, as well as to supporting and promoting
its implementation internationally. Lithuania has
continuously supported the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund since its launch in 2016. We also
cooperate closely with non-governmental organizations
focused on Ukrainian women’s rights with a view to
providing humanitarian aid to respond to the needs of
Ukrainian women and girls, both those in Ukraine and
those displaced to other countries.
We encourage all Member States to create and
maintain a safe and enabling environment for all those
who work for the protection and promotion of gender
equality, including women peacebuilders, human rights
defenders and advocates for gender equality, and to
ensure that there is no place for impunity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): Let me start by
thanking you, Madam President, for organizing today’s
important debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union,
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security,
the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan and the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
We would like to make some additional remarks in
our national capacity.
We welcome the debate’s focus on women’s
resilience and leadership. As the Secretary-General
rightly states in his report (S/2022/740), and as my
colleague from Bangladesh just reiterated, the women
and peace and security agenda is not just an answer
to historic wrongs and marginalization but also an
opportunity to do things differently. It is an opportunity
for us to address the great challenges faced by women
and girls in conflict situations in many corners of the
world, from Afghanistan to Ukraine and from Mali
to Yemen.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

At a time when progress in women and girls’ rights
is being reversed, the number of conflicts is increasing
and armed groups are committing atrocious human
rights violations, we need a strong United Nations and
collective action to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women leaders, peacebuilders and
human rights defenders at all levels.
We also need collective action on prevention in order
to address the root causes of conflict and instability,
including unequal power relations, and to eliminate the
gender stereotypes and negative social norms on which
gender-based discrimination and gender inequality are
based. To that end, we can learn from the work being
done at the community and grass-roots levels, such as
peace committees. We can learn from initiatives that
involve men and boys, as they are an important part of
the solution. And we can learn from such approaches
and their success in de-escalating emerging conflicts.
Let me share the example of the work of one of
our partners with pastoralist groups in South Sudan.
Through so-called peace caravans, men and boys in
cattle camps come together with women, girls and the
elderly to reflect on gender, positive male participation
and inclusive peace.
Finally, protection is key. It is unacceptable that
the space for women leaders, women peacebuilders
and women human rights defenders is shrinking and
that they face threats and violence that place them in
physical danger and prevent them from doing their
important work.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains strongly
committed to supporting the work of the United Nations
on the women and peace and security agenda, protecting
and defending the hard-won progress made for the sake
of women and girls in all their diversity, protecting
their rights and continuing to work collectively to
ensure that their voices are heard, their contributions
are recognized and their leadership is embraced. Let us
seize this opportunity and do things differently.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Ms. Moutchou (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate on an issue
of the utmost importance — women and peace and
security — under Gabon’s presidency of the Security
Council. We also welcome the choice of the theme

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

this year on strengthening women’s resilience and
leadership as a path to peace in regions plagued by
armed groups.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is the international
framework of reference for respecting and promoting
the protection of women’s rights in conflict situations
and peacebuilding, and it emphasizes the importance
of women’s active participation in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has
strengthened the role and contribution of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations and their ability
to stand up to various forms of discrimination and
abuse committed by armed groups in several regions
of the world.
On 23 March, Morocco officially launched its first
national action plan on women, peace and security in
support of resolution 1325 (2000). The overall goal of
Morocco’s first national action plan is to contribute
to the protection and comprehensive development
of policies promoting equality for women, based on
resolution 1325 (2000). Morocco has worked towards
meeting the goals of the resolution by following a
participatory and inclusive approach, with the inclusion
of all relevant ministerial departments and national
institutions and representatives of civil society.
The past two years have demonstrated to the
international community that we no longer face only
conflict-related dangers in the world, but that today’s
threats, including the threats to our health and the
natural disasters related to climate change, are as
important as military and conflict-related threats.
That is why, in developing its national action plan, the
Kingdom of Morocco opted for a more comprehensive
and integrated approach by looking beyond the purely
military concept of security. The goal is to strengthen
women’s resiliency in confronting emerging threats in a
constantly changing regional and international context.
In order to address those issues, Morocco’s national
action plan is based on three main pillars.
The first pillar involves strengthening women’s
participation in preventive diplomacy, mediation and
peacekeeping operations. In its continued commitment
to peacekeeping and international security, Morocco
encourages and calls for the strengthening of women’s
participation in those areas, based on the idea that
sustainable peace can be built only through the full and
effective participation of women in peace processes.

22-6425947/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The second pillar involves the promotion of a
culture of peace and gender equality. Within that
framework, Morocco strives to strengthen the
foundations of an open society in accordance with
the principles of freedom, justice, democracy, human
rights, tolerance, solidarity and the rejection of violence.
Through awareness campaigns and education, Morocco
emphasizes the importance of a culture of human
rights and gender equality based on the fundamental
principle that everyone — women and men — can
enjoy their rights and participate fully in the country’s
development process.
The third pillar is women’s economic empowerment.
Morocco seeks to improve the conditions of its
citizens, without discrimination, and to combat
social inequalities in order to achieve sustainable
and inclusive development. Women’s economic
empowerment is therefore Morocco’s top priority in its
national action plan on women and peace and security.
In addition, Morocco has implemented gendersensitive policies. We were the among the first in the
world to implement gender-sensitive budgeting, which
takes a comprehensive approach to equality between
men and women in the financing of public policies,
which enhances women’s participation, resilience and
leadership in all areas and at all levels.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
underscore that including the gender approach in postconflict situations is key to ensuring, from the very
start of the reconstruction process, sustainable and
equitable development, in which men and women share
resources, opportunities, decision-making and power.
Prioritizing the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security remains
crucial, in particular in building back the economy
through post-conflict planning, economic recovery and
the re-establishment of governance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Niger.
Mr. Ousman (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Gabon for including on the programme
of work, during its presidency of the Security Council,
the relevant and timely issue of women and peace
and security.
As we approach the twenty-second anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, the international community faces a
proliferation of security threats, of which women and
48/53

20/10/2022

girls are, regrettably, the main victims. The recent
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2022/740) draws our attention to the
indescribable suffering that women endure in conflict
and humanitarian emergency situations, in particular
the resurgence of attacks against women human rights
defenders and increase in conflict-related sexual
violence. My delegation expresses its deep concern
about the 3,300 cases of conflict-related sexual
violence that have been reported and calls for greater
cooperation and coordination to ensure accountability
and put an end to the stigma faced by the survivors of
sexual violence.
With regard to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, the Niger developed a
national action plan for the period 2020–2024, which
focuses on the following strategic areas: prevention,
protection, participation, partnership and coordination.
To ensure the active involvement of women’s groups
and women-led civil society organizations in peace
processes and political transitions, the plan focuses
on removing obstacles to the meaningful involvement
of women in sustainable conflict prevention and in
strengthening social cohesion.
In addition, to promote the full and effective
participation of women in the various spheres of public
life, law number 2000-008 of 7 June 2000 instituted a
quota system for elected positions in the Government
and State public administration. Furthermore, to
guarantee peace and prosperity, the national strategy
for gender-sensitive inclusive finance, which has
resulted in a considerable increase in women’s access to
diversified, innovative, quality and low-cost financial
products and services, seeks to ensure the economic
inclusion of women.
Cognizant of the fact that the rule of law and
access to justice are essential to the construction of a
just and peaceful society, through law No. 2011-042 of
14 December 2011 establishing a national agency for
legal and judicial assistance, the Niger has ensured,
without discrimination of any kind, unhindered access
to justice for citizens.
At the international level, my country has
participated in many initiatives aimed at advancing the
women and peace and security agenda. I would like to
mention the creation, in collaboration with the African
Union and the European Union, on 2 January 2021, of
the Group of Friends of Women of the Sahel, during an
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Arria Formula meeting, co-sponsored by 12 members
of the Security Council, including the Niger.

President, every success in conducting its duties during
the rest of the presidency.

Allow me to express my delegation’s satisfaction
with the significant progress made in considering
the gender dimension in peacekeeping and peace
operations — a trend that should be encouraged, as it
helps to improve mandate delivery.

I would also like to thank all briefers for their
valuable information and express my appreciation for
their ideas on the topic of today’s debate regarding
women and peace and security.

The climate emergency creates additional
humanitarian needs and exacerbates and prolongs
existing development issues. Indeed, climate-related
natural disasters, although varied in nature from
region to region, are becoming increasingly frequent.
They have a negative impact on human rights, disrupt
livelihoods and threaten lives worldwide. In the Sahel,
a region to which my country belongs, climate change,
with its negative impact on agricultural and pastoral
activities, as well as on water resources, is also the cause
of extreme droughts and heavy rains that undermine
the socioeconomic conditions of populations.
In such an environment, in which competition
to ensure livelihoods fuels intercommunal conflicts
that are compounded by threats to peace and security
from the activities of armed terrorist groups, the
disproportionate adverse impact on women and girls is
clear. The Niger is of the view that the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda is inseparable
from Government policies to combat climate change
that include the gender dimension.
At this juncture, I would like to recall that my country
has revised its national gender policy to address new
challenges related to the environment and sustainable
development. The policy’s third pillar focuses on the
empowerment of women and inclusive growth in relation
to sustainable environmental management, disaster risk
management and humanitarian emergency situations.
In conclusion, the programmes and subprogrammes
of the Niger’s national strategy and plan for adaptation
to climate change in the agricultural sector are being
implemented with a gender-sensitive approach.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to sincerely thank Gabon
for convening today’s important open debate during
its presidency of the Security Council. I take this
opportunity to wish your friendly country, Madam

Our world is today facing major, complex and
interconnected challenges, including that of combating
the spread of pandemics such as the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, and responding to natural
disasters, climate change, persistent armed conflicts
and wars, in addition to economic and financial
crises, food insecurity, famine in some States and
other monumental challenges. All of these have direct
impacts on the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of
people, particularly women and girls.
We all agree that the issue of the advancement and
empowerment of women is an extremely important
item on the agenda of the international community.
However, despite the well-deserved interest in the issue
of women’s empowerment, we still see that there is more
to do in order to empower women in various areas.
Resolution 1325 (2000), which created the women
and peace and security agenda, has been a key pillar
in multilateral efforts at the international level and
an important tool in promoting national, regional and
international efforts in the areas of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, the advancement of societies and
achieving progress in socioeconomic, development and
political areas.
History has shown that women have always
been the first victims of wars, conflicts and social,
political, economic and security upheavals, and even
those related to climate change. Nevertheless, they
have demonstrated time and again, including in armed
conflicts, that they have sustained an admirable
capacity to endure hardships and remain resilient in the
face of adversity. Women have played important and
essential roles in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, political processes,
humanitarian responses and reconciliation and
mediation, reconstruction and post-conflict and war
recovery efforts.
Despite the commitments in the 10 resolutions that
the Security Council has adopted on the women and
peace and security agenda, it is important to note that the
item on our agenda today requires more commitment and

22-6425949/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

political will in order to ensure its full implementation,
in particular within the context of the Council’s work.
We believe in the important role of women in various
fields and stress that their participation in political
processes and peacebuilding has a positive impact on
the outcome of those operations. According to relevant
reports and statistics, the participation of women
increases the likelihood that peace agreements will last
longer and be more sustainable. Women’s empowerment
in crises and conflict situations should therefore be one
of our most important tools in peace processes.
The State of Kuwait pays great attention to the
issues of the advancement and empowerment of Kuwaiti
women and the promotion and protection of their rights.
In that regard, we reiterate that Kuwaiti women have
continued to make gains year after year, especially
after gaining their political right to candidacy and
voting in 2005. Kuwaiti women have participated in
political decision-making processes for many years and
have occupied many high-level positions. We recently
witnessed a democratic milestone in my country thanks
to parliamentary elections when Kuwaiti women were
once again returned to parliament after two women won
their elections. And two women were also appointed to
the new Government. Under the guidance of Kuwait’s
political leadership, we recently established the first
ministry in the country’s history dedicated to women
and children, with the aim of building a balanced
and cohesive society based on women’s rights and
children’s protection against any kind of violation,
exploitation or abuse. Its goal is also to promote the
role of Kuwaiti women in advancing the country and
its future while empowering women in various fields.
The State of Kuwait emphasizes its continuing efforts
to empower Kuwaiti women and promote their civil,
political, economic and social rights in accordance with
its Constitution and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), especially Goal 5, on
gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls.
Here I would like to pay heartfelt tribute to the
sacrifices made throughout our history by Kuwaiti
women, who in particular faced the occupation of
our country with great courage until its liberation,
thanks in part to resolutions adopted by the Council.
Kuwaiti women also played an important role in the
country’s reconstruction and building phase and in
its social renaissance, and have been essential to the
50/53

20/10/2022

State of Kuwait’s efforts to address the impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, I would like to note an important
part of this month’s report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2022/740), which is
the Council’s consideration of the women and peace
and security agenda. According to the report, 69 per
cent of Council resolutions included references in 2021
to women and peace and security, representing a 5 per
cent increase compared to 2020. Moreover, a larger
and indeed unprecedented number of women briefed
the Security Council in 2021, with 62 women civilsociety representatives invited to brief the Council
that year, compared to 25 for the years between 2000
and 2015. We welcome that important progress and
commend the Member States that contributed to it. We
hope that this progress will continue to ensure that the
voices of women are heard and that they can participate
effectively in the Council’s work.
We are proud that the delegation of our sister
nation of the United Arab Emirates, the current Arab
representative on the Security Council, is led by a
woman, along with a team of women diplomats, and
we salute their exceptional efforts to make Arab voices
heard in the Council, including those of Arab women.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guyana.
Ms. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I congratulate
you, Madam, and the Gabonese Republic on your
presidency and am grateful for the convening of this
annual Security Council debate on women and peace
and security under the theme “Strengthening women’s
resilience and leadership as a path to peace and in
regions plagued by armed groups.” I thank Ms. Amina
Mohamed, Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Sima
Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women and our
other briefers for their presentations, and would like to
recognize their active role in advancing the women and
peace and security agenda.
We are meeting at a time when it appears that
gains in the women and peace and security agenda
are being rolled back. We must therefore redouble
our efforts. Guyana remains fully committed to the
agenda and to the overall empowerment of women. We
reaffirm our support for ongoing efforts to strengthen
women’s resilience and leadership and to address the
disproportionate impact of conflict on women and girls.
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

In regions affected by armed conflict, women
continue to demonstrate immense resilience in the
direst circumstances. The Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2022/740) highlights some of the growing
challenges faced by women and girls in conflictaffected countries, from forced marriages, trafficking
and sexual violence and exploitation to acute hunger
and the inability to access medical care. The report lays
bare the urgent need to enhance women’s participation in
decision-making, among other things. Women are part
of the solution and must be part of decision-making in
an equal and meaningful manner. That is fundamental
to the maintenance and sustenance of international
peace and security.
But for us to build resilience and strengthen
women’s leadership, we must address existing barriers.
One of the most important indicators for strengthening
leadership and building resilience for peace is the extent
to which women are included in the institutions of
governance. In Guyana, we have increased and continue
to promote women’s political participation, leadership
and representation at all levels of Government. At the
international level, we continue to advocate for women’s
inclusion and empowerment, while contributing to
humanitarian efforts aimed at protecting women and
children. Guyana has also consistently registered its
strong support for the women and peace and security
agenda through the establishment and implementation
of mechanisms that seek to realize the full and equal
participation of women in conflict prevention and
peacemaking processes. That includes disarmament,
arms-control and non-proliferation matters, as well
as promoting the greater involvement of women at all
levels in the prevention and reduction of armed violence
and armed conflict.
A gender-intersectional approach is imperative
if we are to meaningfully address the involvement of
women in peace and security. There are already robust
frameworks in place, including the Beijing Platform
for Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We must together
take collective action to fulfil the implementation of
those obligations.
In conclusion, Guyana stands ready to support
all constructive efforts aimed at the advancement of
women in all spheres in order to build a better future
for all.

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Shapir Ben Naftaly (Israel): Allow me to
congratulate Gabon on its presidency.
Israel ratified resolution 1325 (2000) in 2005,
appointed a Special Envoy to address the issue and
works constantly with leading partners to implement
the resolution.
Israel was the third country in the world to have
a woman, Golda Meir, fulfil the highest political
responsibilities as Prime Minister. Gender equality is
enshrined in Israel’s Declaration of Independence.
Israel has always believed that women play an integral
part in the prevention of conflict, dispute resolution,
peace processes and negotiations, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction. For that reason, Israel has
repeatedly demonstrated its commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda at all levels — locally,
nationally and internationally.
Terrorism and war are global phenomena to which,
unfortunately, the Israeli people are exposed on a regular
basis. The citizens of many Israeli southern cities have
had to cope with the long-term effects of attacks at the
hands of terrorist organizations, including Hamas and
the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, both during emergencies
and in their day-to-day lives.
That has emphasized the need to establish a unique
model that supports those communities as a whole,
as well as each of their members individually. The
Israeli Trauma Coalition, in partnership with relevant
Israeli authorities, established five resilience centres in
southern Israel, which provide individual and family
care and strengthen local authorities’ preparedness for
emergency situations and security threats.
Resilience is measured in times of conflict but
is built in times of peace. At Beit Hagefen in Haifa,
groups of Christian, Muslim and Jewish women gather
regularly to train as volunteers in order to assist the
community in times of emergency. Those women
from diverse backgrounds are taught practical tools,
while strengthening their resilience. Another group
consisting of Bedouin and Orthodox Jewish women
regularly hold meetings to enhance common discourse.
Through their narratives, both personal and communal,
those women help build trust and strengthen channels
of communications. It is those channels that enable
dialogue when most needed.

22-6425951/53

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Over the years, mass casualty events and
emergencies in Israel brought about the need for a
comprehensive, multidisciplinary continuum of care
based on cross-sectoral cooperation and a proactive
approach to emergency preparedness. Israel stands
ready to work further to bring about better involvement
of women in conflict-solving and resilience-building.
Israel’s Agency for International Development
Cooperation, MASHAV, implements programmes that
strengthen economic and social development and build
capacities for women living around the world. Those
programmes, which focus on empowerment through
agriculture, entrepreneurship and technology and
holistic development of the health-care system aim
to address gender inequality and critical aspects of
sustainable development.
Humanitarian aid and guidance for promoting
the global resilience of women is also provided by
Israeli civil society organizations. Most recently, such
a series of training programmes was designed for
Ukrainian professionals and conducted in Israel. Those
programmes provide the necessary tools to strengthen
resilience through Israeli methods of coping with
trauma in schools and communities.
The involvement of women in the fields of peace
and security is vital and must be further promoted.
Yet tragically, many women around the world are still
fighting for their most basic human rights. The Iranian
regime is guilty of severe human rights abuses against its
own population, women and girls especially. The brutal
suppression of women’s rights by the Iranian regime,
as well as the horrific repression of those protesting
against such brutality, which has led to the death of
hundreds of demonstrators at the hands of the Iranian
police, clearly contradict the basic principles of human
rights, as well as the Charter of the United Nations.
There is an undeniable correlation between
inclusiveness and creating long-lasting sustainable
peace. Israel is keen and willing to share its knowledge
and expertise in the field of women and peace and
security globally.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Boivin.
Ms. Boivin (spoke in French): On behalf of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
I would like to thank the Security Council for the
52/53

20/10/2022

opportunity to take part in the annual open debate on
women and peace and security.
(spoke in English)
As we come together to report on progress made in
the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, we find that the momentum created 20 years
ago is as critical as ever. In situations of armed conflict,
gender-related harms, including sexual violence,
remain rife. Today the international community must
assertively recommit itself to the advancement of the
situation of women and girls in conflict.
We know that gender inequality exacerbates the
impact of conflict on women, who often have fewer
financial resources to recover from their injuries and
from damage to their property; are more likely to be
discriminated against because of injury or disability;
may face additional barriers to getting medical care;
and are less involved in deciding where humanitarian
aid is delivered. We know that military operations do
not therefore take place on an equal playing field for
women and girls.
Parties to armed conflict must take better account
of that inequality as they fight. When it comes to the
specific impact of the conduct of hostilities, gender
analysis can reveal significant variations in the harmful
effects of hostilities on women and men. Such trends are
predictable. Military operations should be sufficiently
informed by evidence of their effect on women and girls.
As set out in our recent report, we believe that
incorporating a gender perspective into the application
and interpretation of international humanitarian
law is a building block for progress towards the
alleviation of harm against women and girls in armed
conflict. Specifically, international humanitarian law
requires parties to armed conflict to assess and take
steps to reduce the expected civilian harm as part of
the application of their obligations. In our view, the
expected civilian harm is more likely to be accurately
assessed if viewed from a gender perspective.
A gender perspective is critical not only for
ensuring respect for international humanitarian law
and the principles of humanity and impartiality but also
for delivering an effective response, because it helps us
identify people’s sources of strength, their capacities
and coping mechanisms.
We have seen time and again how women have had
to step into new roles in times of war and how they
22-64259

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

do so with determination and strength. While men
continue to be those most likely to be injured or killed,
go missing or be detained, women become the primary
breadwinners, leaders and activists searching for their
loved ones. And they do that all while still undertaking
traditional caretaking work and other undervalued or
unrecognized labour.
Women’s capacities to adapt to and take on new
roles are critical for the stability and protection of their
communities. We cannot effectively build resilience
without paying attention to gender in terms of both
the challenges and the opportunities that it uncovers,
especially in times of conflict and disruption. That
is why the ICRC has committed to deepening its
understanding of how a gender perspective across all
areas of its work can help it better achieve its mandate.
We all have a part to play in addressing the gendered
impacts of armed conflict, and the ICRC fully intends
to play its part. We are encouraged to see that several
States have taken concrete steps to implement their
international humanitarian law-related commitments
under the women and peace and security resolutions.
And we ask that States do more.
First and foremost, we ask that States do more to
ensure that the clear prohibition of sexual violence
under international humanitarian law is integrated into
national law, military doctrine and training. We also
recommend that States incorporate a gender perspective
into the application of international humanitarian law
in their national action plans and other relevant policies
that address international humanitarian law.
We stand ready to support States in that process and
work together with them to better protect, support and
empower women and girls affected by armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation had no intention of making any further
statements on this agenda item considering the length

S/PV.9158 (Resumption 1)

of the meeting, which has already lasted the entire day,
but, because the representative of the Israeli regime,
in her statement, once again misused this forum and
deviated from the main subject before the Security
Council, levelling baseless claims against my country, I
feel compelled to respond to such unfounded allegations.
It comes as no real surprise to us for two reasons.
First, the Israeli regime has always had an agenda that
involves deception and the use of lies. Its villainous
purpose is clear: to conceal the Zionist regime’s
expansionist, disruptive and terrorist policies in
the region and deflect attention from the horrifying
atrocities that are still being carried out in occupied
Palestine, particularly against Palestinian women
and girls.
Secondly, in response to international crimes,
including crimes against humanity, war crimes and
acts of aggression committed by this regime against
the people of Palestine and other nations of the region,
the Security Council has failed to uphold its mandate
under the United Nations Charter. This is owing to the
fact that a permanent member of the Security Council
has given the Israeli regime carte blanche. The Security
Council’s inaction and silence will therefore encourage
the Israeli regime to commit further heinous crimes.
Accordingly, it not surprising that the Israeli
apartheid regime attends as important a meeting as
this and speaks about women’s and girls’ rights, while
Palestinian women and girls continue to suffer the
decades-long occupation and the regime’s colonial and
apartheid policies and practices in occupied Palestine.
The representative of the Israeli regime should have
spoken about the countless numbers of Palestinian
women and girls who have been victims of her regime’s
atrocities in Gaza and other parts of occupied Palestine.
We urge the Security Council to take responsibility
and show its concern through action rather than words
by constraining the Israeli apartheid regime to stop its
heinous crimes and brutalities against Palestinians, in
particular Palestinian women and girls.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.

22-6425953/53
