General Auembly -

20

1500 (XV). Refugees from Algeria in Morocco
and Tunisia
The General Assembly,
Having examined chapter IV of the report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,2
l?ecalling its resolution 1389 (XlV) of 20 November
1959,
Considering the action takrn by the High Commissioner and the encouraging results achieved during the
World Refugee Year,
Noting with appreciation the progress made OJ?- ?ehalf
of refugees from Algeria in Morocco and Tums1a,
Regret ting that the situation which is the cause of
this problem continues,
Recognizing that the living conditions of these refugees, and in particular those of the children, remain
precarious and require constant improvement,
Recommends that the United :'\Jations High Commissioner for Refugees should :
(a) Continue his present action;
( b) Use his influence to ensure the continuation of
the operation carried out jointly by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the League of Red Cross Societies, and, should this
prove impossible, draw llf and execute_ a progran_nn_e for
the assumption by the Office of the High Comm1ss1oner
of responsibility for these refugees from 1 July 1961.
935th plenary meeting,
5 December 1960.
1501 (XV). Expression of appreciation to the
United Nations High Commil-lsioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Noting with regret that the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees will shortly leave office,
Considering that remarkahle and encouraging progress has been made during his years in office in solving
many of the problems of refugees, both under his mandate and through the use of his good offices,
Confident that these achievement;; will lead to further
improvement of the refugee situation under the Office
of the High Commissioner,
1. Expresses its thanks to Mr. Auguste Lindt and
its admiration for the brilliant and important work he
has performed during his years as United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Extends its good wishes to Mr. Lindt for equally
great success in all his future undertakings.
935th plenary meeting,
5 December 1960.
1502 (XV). World Refugee Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1285 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 and 1390 (XIV) of 20 November 1959 on the
W oriel Refugee Year,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the World Refugee Year ,3
2 lbid., Supplement No. 11 (A/4378/Rev. l ).
3 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda

A/4546.

item 33, document

Fifteenth Session

Noting with gratification the remarkable success of
the World Refugee Year in many parts of the world,
not only financially but also in promoting solution~ of
problems relating to large numbers of refugees, particularly those who are handicapped,
Noting f urtlzcr that the World Refugee Year has
focused the attention of world opinion on the problems
of refugees,
H clieving that the enthusiasm and interest aroused
bv the \Vorlcl l{efugee Year can, if maintained, make
a" vital contribution to this end,
l. Expresses its thanks to all Governments, national
committees, non-governmental organizations and private
individuals who have contributed to the success of the
'A'orld Refugee Y car, as well as to the SecretaryCcneral and his Special Representative for the \Vorld
Refugee Year, for their efforts in this regard;
2. Requests St;ites Members of the united Nations
and members of the specialized agencies, as well as
international non-governmental organizations, to continue their efforts to assist refugees on a purely lmrnanitarian basis, especially by:
(a) Increased co-operation with the programmes of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Relief and \Vorks Agency for
l'alestine Refugees in the Near East;
·
( f,) Efforts to maintain the public interest aroused
hy the \Vorld Refugee Y car in the solution of refugee
problems;
( c) The encouragement of additional opportunities
for permanent refugee solutions through voluntary repatriation, resettlenwnt or integration in accordance
with the freely expressed wishes of the refugees themselves;
( d) The further encouragement of financial contributions for international assistance to refugees including
crmtrihutions from non-governmental organizations and
the gmeral public;
3. Expresses the hope that all people everywhere will
take into consideration the problems of refugees and
the need for sustained and increased efforts for their
ultimate solution.
935th plenarv meeting,
5 Dece,;tbcr 1960.
1507 (XV). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
f1/ clcoming the action of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund in elaborating the
activities to be undertaken by the Fund, within the
framework of its responsibilities, in helping countries
give effect to the high principles proclaimed in the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child,
N ccogni:::ing the significant contribution the Fund is
making to better living conditions in developing countries and the manner in which it reinforces the effectiveness of other measures taken to this end,
Noting that the Fund is taking steps to ascertain the
priority needs of children in present changing conditions and to identify the fields in which it might assist
in order to contribute to the greatest possible extent
to the present and future welfare of children,
1. Commends the United Nations Children's Fund
on its achievements;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Encourages the Fund to increase aid to countries
passing through difficult transitional stages, particularly
in Africa, without prejudicing the level of aid to othe"r
countries requiring assistance;
3. Expresses the hope that the Fund will receive
the necessary financial support to enable it not only to
continue its successful work but also increasingly to
meet the challeuge of extending its services.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1508 (XV). Low-cost housing and related
community facilities

The General /lssembly,
Recalling its resolution 1393 (XIV) of 20 K ovember
1959 regarding low-cost housing,
Having noted section I of chapter V of the report
of the Economic and Social Council4 on progress made
towards the implementation of the long-range programme of concerted international action in the field of
housing and related community facilities,
Recognizing the importance of adequate housing and
community facilities and services for a rise in the levels
of living of the lower income groups in the congested
urban areas,
Recognizing the significant role of Governments in
the planning, financing and execution of programmes for
low-cost hous,ing and community facilities,
Considering that, owing to limited resources the developing and newly independent countries have difficulty
in meeting demands for simultaneous investment in
economic d_evelopment projects and in housing, health
and education,
Recognizing the need to utilize more fully the peoples'
own resources and the local sources of materials and
finances for the solution of the housing and urban
development problem,
1. R.equests Member States to review their housing
requirements, policies and programmes as well as the
extent of investment in this field from all sources in
their countries, and to indicate to the United Nations
the areas in which outside assistance is most needed ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in connexion
with the concerted programme of practical action in
this field, to investigate in consultation with interested
Member States the possibility of obtaining technical
services, equipment and funds for establishing or multiplying pilot projects:
(a) In low-cost housing and related community
facilities, services and utilities in the areas of rapid
urbanization in the developing countries ;
( b) In the production from local sources of suitable
materials, accessories and construction elements and
equipment for the execution of housing and urban development programmes ;
3. Further requests the Economic and Social Council to investigate, on the basis of work already done
by its functional commissions and regional economic
commissions, the possibilities for domestic and international financing of low-cost housing programmes in
less developed countries;
4. Invi.tes the Economic and Social Council to submit to the General Assembly a report on the implementation of the present resolution together with the com• IIJid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/4415).

21

ments of the Social Commission, the regional economic
commissions and the sprcialized agencies concerned.

9../3rd plenary mectinff,
12 December 1960.

1509 (XV). United Nations as8i8tance for the
advancen1ent
countries

of

women

in

devPlupin~

The General .lssembly,
Taking note of section VIlI 0£ chapter VI of the
report of the Economic and Social Counci1 4 and of
Council_ resolu'.ion i71 H (XXX) of 25 July 1960
concermng Umted ~ations assistance for the aclvancement of women in under-developed countries,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1163 (XII)
of_ 2~ November 1957 concerning the work of the Com1111s~1on o_n the ?atus of vV omen and the progress
adueved Ill the held of women's rights,
Noting wit7i satisfaction that the Commission is
showing a special interest in the condition of women in
developing countries,
l. Expresses the hope that the Governments of Member S'.ates, _ancl particularly those of the developing
cour~tnes, will take full advantage of existing United
:.J at10ns programmes designed to improve the status of
"":omen, t?at they will coll~borate with the SecretaryGeneral Ill the study which he has undertaken in
compliance with Economic and Social Council resolution 771 H (XXX) and that the United Nations and
the specialized agencies will, for their part, direct their
programmes to a greater extent towards achieving this
end;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council and the
Commis_sion on the Status of Vi/ omen to pursue their
efforts m the matter and take, in connexion with this
stu~y. appropriate me_asures t~at would lead to special
ass1st~nce by the Umted Nations and the specialized
~genc1es f~r the advancement of women in the developmg countries.
943rd plenary meetiny,
12 Drcember 1960.

1510 (XV). Manifestations of racial and national
hatred

The General Assembly,
I~ecalling. that the fundamental purposes of the
Umte_d Nations are to maintain international peace and
security and to. develop_ fr_iendly relations among nations
and t~at, to this encl, 1t 1s necessary to strengthen cooperat10n among peoples and nations and to educate the
younger generation in this spirit,
Noting 'With gratification that the manifestations of
racial and national hatred, religious intolerance and racial
prejudice which still exist in the world have been
consistently condemned by the United Nations,
Sharing the grave concern of the Commission on
Human Rights and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities about
these manifestations,
Being alarmed by the fact that tendencies to racial
~nd national hatred are still not sufficiently combatted
m many parts of the world by orienting youth in
acco_rdance with the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations,
