S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6479th meeting
Friday, 11 February 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Machado/Mrs. Dunlop/Mr. Moretti/ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Jaillon
Mr. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Retzlaff
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Jaber
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Ms. Steele
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
The interdependence between security and development
Letter dated 2 February 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/50)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-23198 (E)

*1123198*

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): As the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica indicated this morning, I
am speaking today on behalf of the Human Security
Network, which comprises Austria, Chile, Costa Rica
as Chair, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Switzerland, Thailand and Slovenia, and South Africa
as an observer.
Let me also extend my sincere appreciation to
you, Madame President, for convening this open debate
of the Council. Security, development and human
rights are the three interdependent pillars of the United
Nations system. The Human Security Network feels
strongly that the Council should consider this
interdependence when formulating peacekeeping
mandates. This would enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in promoting
sustainable peace and development.
The Network is a group of developed and
developing countries united by our belief in using a
people-centred approach to address interrelated
challenges. Every individual should be guaranteed
freedom from fear and freedom from want, with equal
opportunities to develop their human potential.
Achieving and balancing these two pillars of human
security will help to build a lasting foundation for
effective transition from conflict, sustainable peace and
meaningful, people-centred development.
That said, we are equally convinced that no
attempt to establish security today can ignore the
essential role of human rights. Security, development
and human rights all depend on one another. It is
difficult to achieve one without the other. In particular,
respect for human rights in each and every country is
an essential contribution to peace and security on the
national, regional and international levels. We believe
that it is essential to recognize this.
Over the years, the experience of the United
Nations in peacekeeping operations and subsequent
post-conflict peacebuilding and development has

2

shown that security, development and human rights are
inextricably linked. This has revealed that sustainable
development and promoting human rights help to
address the root causes of conflict, as acknowledged in
the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Promoting
development through the reduction and prevention of
armed violence” (A/64/228).
Therefore, a comprehensive approach to security
means that post-conflict peacebuilding must be closely
linked to the primary responsibilities of the Council.
There is a broad understanding today that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not a linear
process but should go hand in hand. The various actors
in these fields are obliged to cooperate and coordinate
closely. In this regard, we welcome the current efforts
of the Secretariat to develop an early peacebuilding
strategy for peacekeepers, which would also help to
facilitate a smooth transition from peacekeeping
missions to other forms of United Nations engagement.
We must also explore further how the Council can also
consider future development priorities early on.
The Network recognizes that the mandates of the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council are clearly separate. At the same time,
that does not mean we should refrain from pursuing
coordination and system-wide coherence within the
entire United Nations system. Overall coordination
with financial institutions is also key.
National ownership must also be a core element
in all peacekeeping and peacebuilding mandates and
missions. Peacekeepers come and go, but only national
participation, involvement and ownership from all
segments of society, particularly disadvantaged groups
such as women and children, can create the sort of
organic development that will sustain long-term peace.
Better integration of all these dimensions of security
can also result in the greater inclusion of women and
those groups previously excluded from decisionmaking processes. The promotion of human rights and
the strengthening of the rule of law are essential in this
context.
The Brazilian presidency of the Council has
drafted a very concise concept paper for today’s open
debate (S/2011/50). It has framed our discussions well
while pointing the way forward in a clear manner. The
Network wishes to share its view on a key action
identified in the concept paper.

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

We believe that the Council must increasingly
make a habit of considering the root causes and socioeconomic dynamics of all conflict situations on its
agenda. It should be encouraged to interact more
through informal dialogue with relevant stakeholders
during the whole cycle of peacekeeping missions. This
means, in particular, interaction with the affected
countries, the troop- and police-contributing countries,
and key financial institutions, as well as drawing on the
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission.
This interaction and coordination need to be
enhanced. We should explore what formal linkages can
be established to ensure that the Council can more
actively and systematically take into account a
comprehensive picture of the causes of conflict and
sustainable ways to address those causes.
Members of the Network have the common
objective to promote the full development of human
potential and the ability of people to live in dignity,
free from fear and free from want. Both security and
development are therefore integral components of our
common vision and objective. We fully support taking
this agenda forward in the Council.
Lastly, in my national capacity, let me state that
Thailand sees development as key to promoting human
security, potential and dignity. Our policies reflect this
recognition. As a police- and troop-contributing
country, Thailand is actively engaged with the recent
deployment of more than 600 infantry soldiers in
Darfur who, as I speak today, are being joined by a
further 200 troops to meet the full complement of 800.
Our naval vessels are also currently involved in patrols
off the coast of Somalia. We look forward to doing our
part to strengthen the effectiveness of the Councilmandated role and to promote a more integrated and
comprehensive assessment of conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): I would like to congratulate
you, Madame President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to commend the
initiative of Brazil in organizing the present debate.
Japan shares Brazil’s interest in focusing on the
interdependence between security and development. It
is our responsibility, as members of the international
community, to establish a system to ensure a seamless

11-23198

transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
development without delay.
Japan recently assumed the chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s Working Group on
Lessons Learned and has initiated consultations on this
year’s work plan. Japan will strive, in cooperation with
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, to ensure
concrete outcomes and pursue clearly defined followup in the Group’s work. Through the agenda that we
wish to take up in the Working Group, Japan intends to
respond to some of the questions raised by the Council
President today, including the issue of strengthening
the
relationship
between
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council.
Today, Japan would like to offer some practical
proposals for making progress in three areas.
The first is enhancing coordination. We have
been consistently emphasizing the importance of
ensuring
coordination,
complementarities
and
coherence among diverse actors, such as the entities of
the United Nations system and international financial
institutions. We are happy to hear that integrated
strategic planning is progressing, but more work is
required throughout the United Nations system to
ensure a clear division of labour and allocation of
resources to focused priorities.
To that end, there should be strong leadership on
the ground. The reports of the Secretary-General
should include more extensive analysis of the status of
the integration process and the socio-economic
elements that affect security. That would provide
greater guidance as to how we can refocus our efforts
on fewer priorities and where more resources and
attention need to be invested. Japan intends to take up
the issue in the Working Group on Lessons Learned so
that the Peacebuilding Commission can make a greater
contribution in that area.
Secondly, the peacebuilding tasks carried out by
peacekeepers are often described in three words:
“articulate, enable and implement”. Peacekeepers
cannot undertake all peacebuilding tasks. Efforts should
first be made to enable others to implement them.
However, some peacebuilding tasks must be
directly implemented by peacekeepers. At present,
there is insufficient capacity worldwide for typical
peacebuilding mandates of peacekeepers, such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,

3

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

security sector reform and establishment of the rule of
law. It is urgent that we accelerate our efforts, on the
basis of the findings of the forthcoming review of
international civilian capacities, to institute a system
for fostering and deploying civilian capacities to that
end.
Furthermore, I would like to underscore the
importance of generating youth employment and
avoiding a vicious circle in which young people
lacking employment resort to arms and conflict. The
peace dividend must include security and jobs. There
are many ways in which peacekeeping missions could
have a positive impact on the local economy through
strengthened collaboration with development actors.
Quick-impact projects and efforts to increase local
procurement of goods and services are examples of
areas in which such cooperation could be pursued. The
missions and the development community should also
develop national staff policies so as to avoid a drain of
talented people away from the local labour market and
to take advantage of opportunities for local institutionbuilding.
To avoid a relapse into resorting to arms, I would
further point out that there may be cases in which we
could benefit from enhancing cooperation between
peacekeeping missions and the panels of experts that
monitor sanctions. For instance, a peacekeeping
mission could be mandated to monitor sanctions in
cooperation with a given panel of experts.
The third area concerns women’s empowerment.
Women are the key to development and security. The
international community has just commemorated the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and
established UN Women. The international community
should make a concerted effort to maximize the current
political momentum so as to bring more attention to the
role of women.
In
that
regard,
Japan
welcomes
the
recommendations put forward in the recently released
impact study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security in peacekeeping.
One practical way in which we can make a difference
is to increase the number of female military and police
officers joining peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, Madame President, I would like to
reiterate Japan’s standing commitment to progress in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding areas and our
readiness to work with the international community

4

towards the common goal of ensuring a smooth
transition to sustainable peace, security and
development.
The President: I give
representative of Pakistan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I wish to congratulate
you, Madame President, on the attendance and your
presidency today. I would like to thank you for
convening this debate.
At the outset, I wish to say that I find something
terribly short, or missing, in this house today, an
imperative that should not have been overlooked.
While I appreciate the fact that our document today
(S/2011/50) is a concept paper arising from last
month’s discussions on institution-building and postconflict peacebuilding, there must be more emphasis
on financial availability. Much of what we are saying
here today — and what I am hearing here today —
would have been better put had more stress been
placed on making finances available. The sum of
$350 million on peacekeeping and peacebuilding is a
very small percentage contribution by the United
Nations to this awesome — really awesome — task
before us. It is not enough.
Having stressed the imperative of talking about
finances, I now move to today’s theme. I would like to
speak about a comprehensive approach. While we
might envisage that comprehensive approach as
already happening, it is not.
We have not been addressing the root causes of
conflict through such means as the peaceful settlement
of disputes — the preventive factor. We have not been
disengaging conflicting parties and reducing violence
by deploying initial peacekeeping. We have not been
creating conditions conducive to socio-political
stability through innovative peacebuilding. We have
not ensured overall coordination among all
stakeholders, especially here, to forge synergies. Those
are the four pillars of a comprehensive approach which
need to be re-examined.
I speak of four possible ways of going forward.
Conflict analysis cannot be rationalized without
addressing the underlying causes. A dispassionate
analysis is needed for effective intervention. The
Council’s presidential statement of 23 September 2010
(S/PRST/2010/18) underlined that fact. We must also
understand, within and outside the United Nations, that

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

peacekeeping and peacebuilding are disciplines with
cross-cutting themes. They have the common objective
of preventing a relapse into conflict. Ten United
Nations missions are performing that task at the
moment, but neither process is explicitly defined, and
they must be. I believe that national ownership and
local actors must be involved to ensure smooth
implementation. The impression that the two
disciplines are competing for resources and attention
must be dispelled. We can minimize the chances of
relapse through that alone. The Security Council can
discharge its Charter responsibilities only by adopting
a judicious and not merely political approach.
Finally, as I have stated, we must ensure
coordination within and without the United Nations.
First of all, when we speak of coordination, our
principal organs — the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the Secretariat — and the
regional organizations must choose to address any
issue in one chosen form. The issue must be vetted,
discussed and put together in a way that can produce
cohesion. I believe that I must stress to the Chairman
of the Peacebuilding Commission how important the
Commission’s role is in putting together, jointly with
all those organs, a cohesive programme and in refining
the nexus between all these bodies.
I believe that international financial institutions
tied to the United Nations must be brought into more
significant play and urged to make more significant
contributions. I believe that all this is within the
purview of the Secretariat and the immense efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. And, finally, I
reiterate that a comprehensive solution and approach,
which must be coordinated to the maximum possible, is
the only way to move forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to congratulate Brazil on assuming this month’s
presidency of the Security Council, as well as the new
members on their election. I take this opportunity to
express our gratitude and firm commitment to
cooperating with all of them. We acknowledge the wise
decision to convene this debate on interdependence
between security and development for consideration by
Member States, both as a contribution to this topic and
as a gesture of transparency in the working methods of
the Security Council.

11-23198

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ms. Cliffe of the World Bank for their statements.
The fast-paced transformation of communications
over the past few decades has created a new reality for
the coexistence and interrelationship of the people in
the world in which we live. Nothing is outside of
knowledge, and there are no limitations of distance or
ignorance when we can obtain, in mere seconds,
information on events taking place on the far side of
the planet. So graphic and instantaneous is the
transmission of information that there are no isolated
nations or peoples who might feel themselves
imprisoned by the confining geography of their borders
when those borders extend as far as, or should we say
as close to, the most distant regions of the world.
Our peoples today can compare and contrast the
realities of our nations in an instant solely by observing
their surroundings and beyond. The limitations of scant
development, compared to the comforts enjoyed by the
more fortunate countries, make national deficiencies,
injustices, shortages and gaps apparent with crude
intensity and an increased sense of the enormous gulf
of inequality that separates us.
Recognizing with crystal clarity what others have
achieved, and what underdevelopment denies, deepens
dissatisfaction and triggers a rebellion of spirit among
those who lack in their lives what others have in
overabundance. No one can feel resignation in the
presence of these terrible differences. I am speaking of
those who have been marginalized from the blessings
of development and have no access to health, education
or other opportunities for individual and collective
advancement. The sense of powerlessness to achieve a
decent standard of living — a right due to the vast
multitudes who, in different latitudes of the Earth,
subsist in the most precarious economic and social
conditions — is undeniably a latent source of conflict.
I ramble on about these concepts precisely
because I come from a corner of the world where such
conspicuous and painful conditions of vulnerability can
be found. We can testify to the threats posed to internal
peace, in the smallest context, or to world peace, in a
more universal perspective, by the continued
exacerbation of these distressing circumstances and
deep-rooted causes that breed discontent and create
flash points for conflict. However, just as I am not
indifferent to those evils, I can at the same time attest

5

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

to the great benefit that accrues to domestic peace from
the enthusiastic provision of assistance to those who
require a helping hand to escape the invisibility of their
pathetic realities.
Honduras has been hard hit by the appalling
violence of discord leading to conflict and by Mother
Nature’s fatal and destructive blows. My country has
overcome difficult times with diligence and enormous
faith, assisted by the helping hands of good friends to
whom we are infinitely grateful. By closing the
distance between need and abundance, all resources
invested in development and in providing opportunities
to those who see their opportunities to advance and
succeed truncated are a contribution to international
peace and security.
The financing and cooperation that are required
in the continual struggle for well-being should not be
denied to the people of any nation. Indeed, we need
reform to ensure that all those resources that are
wasted, funds that are squandered in large amounts,
and money that is spent on superfluous things when
essentials are lacking are made available to
development, with an emphasis on the most vulnerable
and fragile sectors of our communities, in order to
prevent the deterioration of our ecosystems. That
would make the greatest contribution to peace in and
among nations and to global security.
With respect to the question underlying the topic
we are addressing, what can the delegations of this
world Organization do to contribute to that end? We
respectfully suggest that a taskforce be created among
us, with sufficient power to identify the existence and
provenance of resources, and to recommend their
reallocation once it has been concluded that they are
being poorly used. Impatience causes anxiety, just as
the possibility of change gives cause for hope. Our
peoples are eager for solutions that will improve their
fate and brighten their future. It is imperative to defuse
the outbreaks of impatience and convert them into
sources of hope.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Brazil for convening this important debate, which of
course goes to the heart of the United Nations role and
responsibilities to help foster conditions for peace,
stability, prosperity and economic opportunity for all
Member States and their peoples.

6

All speakers today have reaffirmed that peace,
security and development are inextricably linked and
require a comprehensive approach. The Security
Council has an organic and decisive role to play in that.
We see constantly how the lack of development
opportunities is one of the fundamental underlying
causes of conflict. We have all heard the statistics and
are familiar with them — no low-income, fragile or
conflict-affected country has yet achieved a single
Millennium Development Goal. This fact should be
compelling. Lack of development is itself an important
contributor to conflict.
When the Council seeks to fulfil its
responsibilities under the Charter it must be fully
appraised of the root causes of the conflicts before it.
The Council must continually seek fresh approaches to
interact and work within the United Nations system,
including with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and institutional financial bodies, in order to fulfil its
own responsibilities. This is needed not only during the
post-conflict peacebuilding phase, but also as part of
the Council’s preventive diplomacy tool kit and in its
mandate formulation.
Inclusive economic development can help to
prevent conflict and its recurrence, as has been stated.
Australia has learned from its own work on peace and
security issues, particularly in our own region, the
importance of taking this comprehensive, whole-ofGovernment approach that combines development
assistance with defence, law enforcement and
diplomatic resources.
The Council is obviously not the place to take on
the core business of development, and no one is
arguing that it should. Various actors must play to their
mandates, strengths and comparative advantages. The
General Assembly, United Nations committees, United
Nations agencies, Member States and others must all
do a better job in meeting development goals.
The Council should continue to mandate
peacekeeping operations, support peacebuilding
activities from the earliest stages of planning and
implementation, and give this due attention in the
renewal of mission mandates. It should continue to
mandate integrated missions to ensure coherent
approaches. It should encourage coordination and
coherence within mission structures and between
missions and other actors. We also need better
definition of roles and responsibilities within the

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

United Nations system in key peacebuilding sectors. To
properly consider development issues, the Council
needs access, as we know, to contextual socioeconomic information, and we welcome the Council’s
request that the Secretary-General include this
information in reporting to it.
As mentioned by the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda, the Commission is a unique organ within the
United Nations that brings together security and
development actors. It has a key role to play in
coordination and in sharing lessons and best practice.
We welcome the Council’s intention to make greater
use of the advisory role of the PBC. We hope that can
be strengthened, and we certainly welcome steps to
include the participation of PBC country-specific
configuration chairs in Council briefings and informal
interactive dialogues. This is a relationship that we all
need to work at. Australia also encourages greater
coordination between the Council and the World Bank,
as we have seen today. And we support the comments
made by the representative of South Africa on the
important role of regional institutions.
Whether we are helping with the immediate task
of restoring the rule of law, facilitating basic service
delivery or helping build stable institutions for
governance and economic growth, obviously we must
do so with a view to promoting local leadership and
ownership and inclusiveness, particularly of women
and youth. We will not have security unless we give
balance to promoting development in urban and rural
settings alike. As others have said, it is important to
identify from the beginning those activities that are
most relevant to securing long-term stability and
security, and we agree strongly with comments made
by others about the importance of security sector
reform and the rule of law.
Briefly, I will mention youth unemployment and
the management of natural resources. As we all know
and see today, youth unemployment can potentially be
one of the most destabilizing elements in any society.
We must handle this not only through supply-side
activities — training and skills development — but
through generating demand. That is easy to say. United
Nations agencies and the banks need to give continuing
priority to finding creative and effective ways to draw
young people into productive society.

11-23198

We will also not have security unless we ensure
sound management of natural resources. As has been
pointed out, in so many countries resource wealth has
not translated into stability, and resources have had a
particular role in fuelling a large number of conflicts.
The so-called paradox of plenty is something with
which we are all familiar, but little has been done in a
coordinated way to see what it means and what can be
done about it. This is something that the United
Nations has yet to grapple with effectively.
The Intergovernmental Forum on Mining,
Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development,
chaired by Malawi, has done good work, including on
guidelines, and we welcome the fact that sustainable
mining is one of the themes to be addressed at this
year’s session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development.
In the meantime, much can also be achieved at
the national level, and the onus does not rest solely
with the host country. In many cases, it cannot easily
do so. It is a growing priority in Australia’s own
development assistance to work with countries on
natural resource management, including now in Africa.
I will stop here without going into detail, but my
written statement will say more about that.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate the
Secretary-General’s own call for stronger coherence by
the United Nations across the security/development
spectrum and stronger coordination with other actors.
It is imperative, as we know, that we turn this enhanced
coherence and coordination into a reality in the
interests of the huge vulnerable communities of the
world — most compellingly, the 1.5 billion people who
live in countries affected by recurrent cycles of
violence and are living with that violence today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): As I did at the Security
Council debate on institution-building on 21 January
(see S/PV.6472), today I also speak on behalf of the
Permanent Representatives of Brazil, Canada, Jordan
and Switzerland in our respective capacities as Chairs
of the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission for the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Burundi. We also associate ourselves with the remarks
of the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Gasana of Rwanda.

7

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

We welcome Brazil’s initiative to hold an open
debate on this important topic, and would like to take
this opportunity to offer our perspective based on our
experiences. Our intervention has three elements: first,
the need for a comprehensive approach to security and
development; secondly, the unique role of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and thirdly, the need for
more coordination. History has shown time and again
that there is a mutual interdependence among peace
and security, development and human rights. Whereas
in the short term there can be no inception of
development without security, in the long term it is not
possible to maintain security and achieve sustainable
peace without development.
Therefore, a comprehensive approach to security
taken by the Security Council and the entire United
Nations system unavoidably needs to take account the
social and economic situation on the ground in order to
address the root causes of conflicts. Respect for human
rights is an integral part and precondition of such a
comprehensive approach, as there can be no real
security and development in a repressive society.
An integrated and coherent combination of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities is essential
to attaining security and development goals alike.
Closer interaction between peacekeepers and
development actors, while respecting each other’s roles
and responsibilities, can certainly contribute to a more
efficient
and
sustainable
fulfilment
of
the
peacebuilding-related
tasks
of
peacekeeping
operations, as representatives of funds and programmes
are often more experienced and stay longer to deal with
such issues as institution-building, the reintegration of
communities affected by conflict, electoral support,
economic revitalization, natural resource management,
the provision of basic services and governance issues.
Peacebuilding activities can also contribute to
increasing local support for peacekeeping missions. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, a
draft peace consolidation programme has been
prepared in close cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations country
team, and it has been well received by the local
authorities. Greater efforts must therefore be made to
enhance the cooperation between peacekeepers and
development actors, allowing for joint approaches in
the interest of post-conflict countries.

8

The Peacebuilding Commission has a unique role
to play in that regard, as the nexus between security
and development lies at the heart of its mandate.
Peacebuilding relates to building the foundations of
society to avoid a relapse into conflict as much as to
sowing the seeds for lasting development. For that
reason, peacebuilding activities should start at the
earliest stages of United Nations engagement.
The country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission serve as a forum for
dialogue and coordination between all stakeholders in
the country concerned, including United Nations
agencies, bilateral partners, international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations,
both in the field and at the level of capitals. They also
provide analysis and guidance on issues at the
intersection of governance, security and development
policy and advocate and mobilize resources for the
post-conflict recovery agendas of the countries in
question.
One of the most crucial partnerships for the
country-specific configurations of the PBC has to do
with building a privileged working relationship with
the World Bank to design a coherent approach to the
peacebuilding and development needs of the countries
on its agenda, taking into account the views and needs
of local stakeholders. This can be done through the
organization of joint events such as donors’
conferences and through stimulating a convergence
between
the
peacebuilding
and
development
frameworks of the country in question.
This unique role makes the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations a
valuable partner for a deepened strategic dialogue with
the Security Council when designing a comprehensive
approach to security. While some steps have already
been taken in this regard, including the participation of
configuration Chairs in Security Council briefings and
interactive consultative dialogues, much more can be
done to enhance this working relationship. When
dealing with pressing peace and security issues, the
Council could also benefit from information on
development-related issues that may hinder the
implementation of its mandates.
The advice of the Peacebuilding Commission
could be sought on such issues through a flexible,
multi-tiered approach, both at the outset and when
assessing progress in these areas, including in progress

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

reports of the Secretary-General. As the Peacebuilding
Commission accumulates more experience and takes
on board more countries, it will gradually be in a
position to provide better and richer advice to the
Security Council, to the benefit of post-conflict
countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada, like others,
congratulates Brazil on this important debate.
As Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Canada also fully
associates itself with the statement just delivered by
the Ambassador of Belgium on behalf of the countryspecific
configurations
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
Today’s debate reflects how far we have all
moved beyond sterile discussions about whether
security or development comes first; they are clearly
interdependent. As the World Bank has shown,
countries plagued by war are also the ones lagging
furthest behind in attaining the Millennium
Development
Goals.
Painful
experience
also
demonstrates that social and economic inequalities can
cause and even exacerbate conflict. Women and
children suffer particularly harsh consequences as a
result of conflict. It can take many years, or even
decades, to restore their social and economic wellbeing.
This poses significant challenges for the United
Nations. One of the primary challenges is
organizational. Canada’s adoption of a whole-ofgovernment approach in Haiti, the Sudan and
Afghanistan has demonstrated that working in a
coherent fashion yields dividends. Yet successful
integration requires clarity about roles and
responsibilities, a common strategy and the ability to
act rapidly in response to changing realities. Despite
recent progress, the United Nations must continue to
improve in these respects. Duplication of roles and
responsibilities still exists among United Nations
departments,
agencies
and
programmes,
and
Headquarters support to senior leaders in the field is
too frequently delayed or inadequate.
It is not only within the United Nations system
where improved coordination is essential. As noted in
last year’s Dili Declaration and eloquently expressed

11-23198

by the Group of Seven Plus, national ownership is
necessary for effective peacebuilding. The international
community must better align assistance behind national
priorities, thereby enabling the more rapid
re-establishment of core Government functions.
The interdependence of security and development
also points to the need for rapid access to tailored
civilian deployable expertise. In that regard, Canada
looks forward to the recommendations of the review of
international civilian capacities.
Beyond the United Nations, the international
community as a whole must also be ready to respond.
There is an urgent need to reinforce national capacity
and engage expertise resident in the global South,
especially in the areas of governance, the rule of law,
public administration, women, peace and security and
basic social services.
While a case-by-case approach is needed, it is
also clear that recurrent gaps exist. For example,
governance and the rule of law consistently emerge as
areas of weakness, with the justice sector frequently
suffering from inadequate attention. This unbalanced
approach is especially dangerous given that the
establishment of a functioning, capable State is a
fundamental precondition for lasting security and
sustainable development.
Finally, the interdependence between security and
development has implications for the work of the
Council. The growing practice of designating
integrated missions with mandates to coordinate a
coherent United Nations approach is of course
welcome. However, it will be important to draw on the
comparative advantages within the United Nations
system wherever possible, rather than expanding the
range of responsibilities imposed on peace operations.
These are areas in which enhanced cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission offers much
promise. Not only has the PBC begun to establish
partnerships with relevant development partners,
including the World Bank and regional organizations,
but its composition and mandate are ideally suited to
working at the nexus between security and
development.
(spoke in French)
Two roles should be strengthened. First, the
Security Council should increasingly draw on, and the
Peacebuilding Commission better provide, concrete

9

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

analysis on development issues that either undermine
security in the short term or will require early action to
deliver peace dividends.

that sustainable peace cannot be solely based on
security or development and that both should go hand
in hand so as to form a coherent whole.

Secondly, the Commission can deepen its
engagement with a wider circle of peacebuilding actors
in order to better coordinate efforts and systematize
lessons learned. At the country level, the PBC
configurations provide the constant and close attention
necessary to gaps, resource needs and the less pressing
consideration of questions of sequencing. Within the
United Nations system, the Commission can also play
an important role by encouraging greater cohesion
within the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and by supporting reform processes outlined in the
Secretary-General’s reports, as well as the five-year
peacebuilding architecture and civilian capacity
reviews. More regular interaction between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, especially
in advance of defining mission mandates and in the
context of transition processes, could enhance the
ability of both parties to work more effectively.

There is no doubt that conflict stalls development
and the lack of development breeds further instability
and strife. There is a vicious circle between conflict
and underdevelopment, which needs to be broken
through coherent, inclusive and holistic strategies. We
have to be cautious not to adopt simplistic approaches
and generalizations, since the relationship between
peace, security and development depends on a complex
web of issues and every conflict situation has its own
specific dynamics and conditions that need to be taken
into account in calibrating our policies.

In conclusion, Madame President, let me assure
you of Canada’s continued commitment to improving
the ability of the United Nations to meet these strategic
and organizational challenges and to strengthen the
foundations for development in the long-term.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of Brazil for organizing this
open debate on this important issue.
I wish to also commend Ambassador Viotti,
Permanent Representative of Brazil, and her team for
preparing the comprehensive concept note (S/2011/50)
and the presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/4), which
highlight the issues and challenges that require greater
attention by the United Nations and other actors
involved in security and development.
I shall dwell upon only a few points that I believe
are of particular importance.
In the past couple of years, the Security Council
has been very much preoccupied with how to improve
its response to conflict situations. In that context, it has
grappled with the need to establish the right
connections between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and, in that regard, between security and development.
This suggests that there is an ever growing recognition

10

A unique mix of factors influences the interplay
between security and development in each country. In
that regard, we need to pay particular attention to the
context-specific political dynamics and institutional
features in each country to ensure an environment
where lasting security and development can be made
possible.
To achieve durable security and development, we
should ensure the active engagement of all local
stakeholders. It is of critical importance to work
closely with the local people. National ownership and
national responsibility are key factors for sustainable
peace.
As the Secretary-General underlined in his
statement, fragile countries facing stark inequality and
weak institutions are at increased risk of conflict. For
this reason, it is important to build and strengthen
national institutions. In our efforts, we should give due
consideration to production capacity and job creation
as well.
A regional approach is also necessary for our
efforts to succeed. In many cases, both security and
development have regional implications. In our view,
effective cooperation at the regional level, an active
role played by subregional and regional organizations
and close coordination and partnership among various
United Nations entities, the World Bank and other
financial and regional organizations are of particular
importance.
On the other hand, the linkage between security
and development is also changing. There is therefore a
need for a new and fresh assessment to better cope with
evolving challenges.

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

We should also pay due attention to the need to
improve the effectiveness and impact of ongoing
peacebuilding programmes and activities, which,
among other things, require the deployment of staff
with a better understanding of the interlinkages
between security and development.
We should also place special emphasis on the role
of women in all phases of our efforts in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. We should further try
to ensure increased participation by women.
Rethinking development policies, investing in
preventive diplomacy, building capacities and
integrating peacekeeping and peacebuilding are all
priority issues for Turkey. As an emerging donor
country, we will continue to actively pursue these
issues within the United Nations and other forums.
With this understanding, Turkey will host the
fourth United Nations Conference on the LeastDeveloped Countries next may in Istanbul. We expect
that the Conference will bring fresh impetus to the
process of development cooperation in assisting least
developed countries move towards sustainable
economic growth and development. In that regard, we
hope that the crucial interrelationship between
development and security will be an important part of
our discussions in Istanbul.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a great pleasure to see you, Madame President,
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. I
also congratulate you on the initiative of your
Government to promote this open debate of the
Council on such a relevant and topical issue.
As expressly indicated in the note (S/2011/50)
sent by Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, to all
Member States on 2 February, the provisions of the
Organization’s Charter are clear and it is
unquestionably a fact that the responsibilities of the
Security Council lie in, and are limited to, the field of
international peace and security.
It is not the purpose of this debate — nor would
Cuba support it — for the Security Council to deal
with economic and social development issues, which
are the remit of other principal organs of the United
Nations. However, it is important to highlight the

11-23198

economic and social difficulties that are the root causes
of many conflicts that, regrettably, seem to be either
ignored or disregarded.
In the last two years of the 1980s, when the
bipolar world of international relations that had existed
for many years was about to come to an end, the
Security Council approved five new peacekeeping
operations. However, it is important to recall that the
Council had only established 13 such operations in all
of the preceding 40 years.
That was the trend in the work of the Security
Council as we left behind the bipolar world in order to
enter a new period that we thought would be
characterized by a multipolar approach to international
relations in which all countries, large and small, would
enjoy equal opportunity and have the same say in the
decision-making process. The reality, however, proved
to be otherwise. We all became involved in the current
unipolar global order.
In the 1990s, at the request of the Security
Council, the then Secretary-General introduced his
well-known report entitled “An Agenda for Peace”
(S/24111), which was much discussed at the time, as it
contained proposals and approaches considered by
many to be harmful to the sovereignty of States.
Nevertheless, that document was followed almost to
the letter, and the total budget for peacekeeping
operations now stands at nearly $7.82 billion — that is,
1.35 times the regular budget of the United Nations.
However, “An Agenda for Development”
(A/48/935), which the same Secretary-General
submitted shortly afterwards at the request of the
General Assembly, did not receive the same support,
nor was it defended with the same enthusiasm. On the
contrary, the document has been neglected.
The word “underdevelopment” has virtually
disappeared from the United Nations vocabulary, and
other principal organs that have responsibility for
economic and social development issues, such as the
Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly itself, have seen how the Security Council
has usurped many of their functions, with disastrous
results. It is enough to point out that the United
Nations budget devotes only little more than
$965 million to activities in the economic and social
fields.

11

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

That is so, even though more than 1 billion
people worldwide are hungry. Nearly 900 million
cannot read or write, 120 million live in extreme
poverty, and 3 billion suffer water shortages. Among
children, 150 million have a low birth weight,
325 million do not go to school, and every day in
underdeveloped countries 33,000 die from curable
diseases. Food prices significantly rise, and foreign
debt continues to deepen the structural crisis of the
economies of underdeveloped countries.
It is an offence to human sensitivity to know that
infant mortality in poor countries is 12 times higher
than in rich countries. It is simply the consequence of
the unjust international economic order that has been
imposed on us and which must be urgently replaced by
a more just and equitable new international economic
order.
For Third World countries, the neoliberal model
imposed since the late 1980s and early 1990s only
brought about apparent growth, reflected in
macroeconomic figures on paper. However, the
difference between the rich and the poor significantly
grew, just as the vulnerability of States and the
concentration of wealth and privileges increased.
While four decades ago, the first list of least developed
countries included 24 States, today it includes
50 States. Nevertheless, if the commitment undertaken
40 years ago to allocate 0.7 per cent of the gross
domestic product of developed countries to official
development assistance were fulfilled, that assistance
would increase to more than $160 billion — that is,
more than twice its current amount.
The United Nations has put particular emphasis
on its efforts in pursuit of political stability, sometimes
through questionable means that undermine the
principles of the sovereign equality of States and noninterference in their internal affairs, which are crucial
to the proper functioning of the Organization.
However, it has overlooked the fact that to achieve
political stability, economic and social development
needs must be met.
In that context, it is significant that currently,
world military expenditures exceed the astronomical
figure of $1.4 trillion, which is higher than what was
spent during the so-called cold war era, except that in
today’s unipolar world, only one country is responsible
for almost 50 per cent of the expenditure.

12

That astronomical figure is precisely what should
be the source of resources for development, because
what is the point of us talking about peace and security
for the hundreds of millions of hungry and sick people
in the underdeveloped and marginalized countries of
the South? What sense can that have for them when
their lives are limited to the daily struggle for mere
survival?
There is a close link between disarmament and
development, and peace cannot be achieved without
resources for development. As Fidel Castro pointed out
in his message to the eleventh United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, held in the city
of São Paulo in 2004 — in your friendly country,
Madame President — for the first time in history, man
has produced the technical capacity for his complete
self-destruction but, on the other hand, has not been
able to create minimum guarantees for the security and
integrity of all countries equally.
Nuclear weapons are a very serious unresolved
issue. Their possible use would have unimaginable
consequences. The experiences of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki are today a minimum indication of what
could happen, given the infinitely superior destructive
potential of contemporary nuclear weapons. The only
guarantee that nuclear weapons will not be used by
States, or by anyone, would be their destruction, along
with the generation of recently developed conventional
arms that are almost as deadly. The Non-Aligned
Movement proposed a plan to eliminate and ban
nuclear weapons by no later than 2025. Cuba will
redouble its efforts to achieve it.
Barely five months ago, in the General Assembly,
we analysed the state of implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals. Regrettably, it had to
be recognized that only one third of them had been
achieved. With little more than half of what the major
Powers currently allocate to military expenditures, the
Millennium Development Goals could be met and
international peace and security strengthened.
Hence the importance of today’s Security Council
debate, which must contribute to creating awareness of
that reality. Economic and social development must be
at the centre of United Nations priorities and cannot
continue to be neglected. This Organization must
develop urgent measures that redress the inequalities
that persist in international economic relations. To that
end, there is a need for complete and structural reform

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

of the global financial and economic architecture.
Speeches and promises are not enough. Political will is
needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil, and his
delegation for the initiative of organizing this debate,
which seems to us extremely timely.
The change in the nature of conflicts and the
increase in threats to international peace and security
have compelled the Organization, especially the
Security Council, to adapt to those new challenges that
transcend borders and affect the security both of people
and of States.
We are convinced that development, security and
human rights go hand in hand and are mutually
strengthened. While it cannot be stated that lack of
development and the denial of human rights are the
only cause of conflicts and instability, those factors
significantly increase the tendency for violence.
That is why it is important to keep strengthening
the Organization’s capacity not only for establishing
and maintaining peace but also for preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding, in which development
plays a key role. The Security Council should bear in
mind the need to attend to the security of the people,
and not just of the nation, and the importance of
emphasizing security based on human development
rather than on weaponry.
International peace and security must be
approached with a comprehensive focus that addresses
the structural causes of conflicts, such as the lack of
development opportunities. The increasing number of
peacekeeping operations with multidimensional
mandates, which include such diverse areas as
humanitarian assistance, strengthening the rule of law,
security sector reform and promoting development,
confirms the importance that this comprehensive vision
has acquired in Security Council decisions.
As a member of the Security Council in 20022003 and 2009-2010, Mexico sought to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Council’s decisions and
capabilities, with the aim of addressing the structural
causes of conflicts through the growing inclusion of
the link between security, development and human

11-23198

rights in its mandates and resolutions. My delegation is
convinced that the Security Council should continue to
work on the prevention of conflicts and to facilitate
timely responses to emerging crises — areas in which
development plays a determining role. To that end, the
Council should continue to promote measures to tackle
the structural causes of conflicts, which would include
the promotion of development, the protection of human
rights, disarmament and strengthening the rule of law,
as well as encouraging more effective partnerships
among the various relevant actors internationally,
including regional and subregional organizations, civil
society and financial institutions.
Cooperation between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, and the inclusion of their
input into peacekeeping operations mandates are
essential to the success of that strategy, bearing in mind
the fact that development depends fundamentally on
the national decisions of each State. For this reason, we
have stressed the importance of closely tying
peacebuilding to the national priorities of each country.
We have witnessed on many occasions the impact
that a lack of development opportunities can have on
the stability of a country or a region. This confirms
once again the fact that development, respect for
human rights and security are mutually reinforcing.
The Security Council cannot distance itself from that
fact.
The President: I
representative of Uganda.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I thank you, Madame,
for organizing this debate on a theme that is very
important to us. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, and the Special
Representative of the World Bank for their statements
this morning. We also welcome the participation of
several Ministers of Foreign Affairs in this debate.
Uganda welcomes the increasing attention that
the Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole, as well as regional organizations and the wider
international community, are paying to the
interdependence between security and development.
This has, of course, been a gradual process, beginning
with the United Nations agendas for peace and
development in the 1990s, which recognized the need
to address peace, security and development through
integrated approaches.

13

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

As has already been emphasized by many
speakers before me, there is no doubt that security is a
prerequisite
for
development;
without
peace
development is not possible. Without development,
peace and security are not sustainable; the two are
World
therefore
mutually
reinforcing.
The
Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and
Development highlights the fact that conflict and
insecurity are major challenges and impediments to
economic development. The World Bank’s focus on
this theme is pertinent. Evidence abounds that fragile
countries and those in conflict or in post-conflict
situations lag behind in almost all development
indicators, including the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Durable peace, security and development can be
achieved only through a comprehensive approach that
integrates the security, economic, social and
humanitarian dimensions. It is essential to take into
account a people-centred view of security, which is
necessary for national, regional and global stability.
The United Nations and the wider international
community should intensify their efforts towards a
more effective and coherent approach to peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding. In this regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission is already playing a very
important role in supporting countries emerging from
conflict. More emphasis should be placed on delivering
tangible dividends, including the provision of basic
services,
employment
opportunities,
and
the
improvement of the people’s standard of living.
Finally, fundamental reform of the current
international architecture for peace, security and
development is urgent and necessary to ensure greater
representation and participation, especially on the part
of developing countries.
The President: I give
representative of Luxembourg.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Madame, on your
initiative in organizing this open debate, which
usefully complements previous debates on the
conditions necessary to a sustainable end to conflicts
and the genuine rebuilding of the countries on the
Council’s agenda.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union.

14

“There will be no development without security
and no security without development. And both
development and security also depend on respect
for human rights and the rule of law.”
(A/59/2005, annex, para. 2)
That principle, enunciated in the 2005 report “In larger
freedom”, is the cornerstone of Luxembourg’s
commitment to an effective multilateral system with
the United Nations at its heart, and it is with that
fundamental interdependence in mind that Luxembourg
supports the processes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform, as well as
early recovery, socio-economic development and the
establishment of the rule of law.
Since 2000, Luxembourg has been among the
countries that respect the goal of allocating 0.7 per cent
of their gross national income to official development
assistance (ODA), as noted by the representative of
Cuba. Our ODA has exceeded 1 per cent since 2009.
Our engagement is committed to the eradication of
poverty and the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals, including as a long-term
investment for peace and security and with a view to
preventing the outbreak of new conflict.
Luxembourg’s development cooperation also
implements programmes that bring a security
perspective directly to the development approach. For
example in northern Mali, in the region of Kidal, we
support a sustainable development programme aimed at
reducing the local population’s poverty by improving
access to basic social services and job opportunities, and
at reinforcing the leadership of the Mali administration
in the development of the region. In parallel, and in
partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crimes, Luxembourg supports the Government of
Mali’s efforts to fight illicit trafficking and organized
crime in that region, which is heavily affected by the
presence of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.
As you indicated in your concept note
(S/2011/50), Madame President, the Security Council
should not take on the responsibilities of other
principal organs and agencies. But if the Council wants
to define sustainable strategies to end conflict, it is
vital that it consider the analyses and efforts of
development organs and actors and strive to coordinate
well with those actors. The establishment of
sustainable security and stability requires a tangible
development perspective.

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding is the key stage between the
establishment of security and the socio-economic
relaunching of a country. Peacekeepers themselves are
early peacebuilders. Their presence should create a
security environment conducive to the deployment of
reconstruction and development activities. We
encourage the Council to enhance its relationship with
the Peacebuilding Commission so that it can
systematically seek the Commission’s advice when it is
about to renew the mandate of a peacekeeping
operation, including with respect to countries that are
not on the agenda of the Commission. In that regard,
we welcome the recent interactive dialogues with the
Chairs of the Liberia and Burundi configurations and
the active engagement of the Chair of the
Commission’s Organizational Committee and the
Chairs of the five country-specific configurations in
today’s debate.
Convinced of the fundamental importance of an
integrated approach, Luxembourg has been actively
engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding since the
inception of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
The adoption of any type of security approach to
a conflict must be preceded by a thorough analysis of
its root causes. In that way, efforts can be made in
close coordination with all stakeholders, including
women, to enable a country to emerge from crisis and
foster its development. In that context, we must not fail
to include the management of a country’s natural
resources or issues related to land rights. In that regard,
the Council should draw on all expertise available
within the United Nations system. It is essential that
the Council receive reports of the Secretary-General
that take into account the points of view and analyses
of all relevant departments on a given conflict or
theme.
Among the principal organs of the United
Nations, the Economic and Social Council is ideally
positioned to provide a socio-economic development
perspective to the Security Council’s discussions
preceding the definition of a peacekeeping mandate.
Closer cooperation between the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission can in turn
reinforce the coherent action of the United Nations
system so as to foster the sustainable development of
countries emerging from conflict. That is why
Luxembourg, during its Presidency of the Economic
and Social Council in 2009, took the initiative of

11-23198

convening the first joint meeting between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, held on the topic
of food and economic crises in countries emerging
from conflict.
Allow me to conclude with a few comments on
climate security. In our view, the adverse impacts of
climate change have clear repercussions on the security
and development of many States, in particular small
island developing States. At the very least, we should
think of climate change as a threat multiplier, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report on climate change
and its possible security implications (A/64/350),
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/281 of
2009. We therefore encourage the Security Council to
further pursue the discussions it began in 2007 on this
important issue.
The President: I give
representative of Guatemala.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madame President, for convening this open
debate and for your very lucid concept note
(S/2011/50), as circulated by your Mission.
The complex links between security and
development are quite obvious, even at the intuitive or
common-sense level. Over the years, these links have
been codified and clarified in numerous internal and
academic studies, from Secretary-General BoutrosGhali’s 1992 Agenda for Peace (S/24111) to the
forthcoming World Development Report 2011:
Conflict, Security and Development, which was
introduced here this morning by the Special
Representative of the World Bank, in addition to the
various reports mentioned in the concept note.
We nevertheless continue to draw lessons from
every peacekeeping and peacebuilding operation,
precisely because each has its own unique
characteristics, from country to country, from region to
region within the same country, or even within a single
region or country, but at different moments in time. I
will not even attempt to add insights to the conceptual
elements that link security development. I will instead
allude to my own country, which experienced internal
armed conflict for more than three decades that ended
only in 1996.
I would like to make three brief comments. First,
and as stated in the concept note, poverty and injustice
alone do not necessarily lead to violence and conflict. If

15

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

that were the case, conflict would have erupted in my
country much earlier, since poverty and exclusion alike
were the rule, rather than the exception, for decades and
even centuries. What prevailed during most of that
period was a history of poverty and injustice that
created much frustration and resentment — a proverbial
powder keg — that had the potential to explode if mixed
with other factors. In the case of the conflicts in Central
America, including Guatemala, the detonator was
supplied by an external source, subjecting our rather
parochial differences to an East-West confrontation in
the context of the so-called Cold War. That greatly
polarized our society along divisive ideological lines
that were superimposed over the traditional cleavage
that separated the rich from the poor.
The spiral of violence stemming from that
polarization was not the product of poverty and
injustice alone, but their presence most certainly added
fuel to the fire. Attention should therefore really be
paid to both the underlying circumstances and the other
complex factors that can trigger conflict.
As I said before, it is common sense that, where
there are high levels of unemployment, especially
among young people, and a high incidence of poverty
coexisting with first-world standards of living enjoyed
by a minority, at least some of the elements of potential
conflict are present. Those must be addressed, not only
for intrinsic and ethical reasons, but also, in the
broader context, as a conflict prevention measure.
Secondly, almost the same arguments can be
made, at least in the case of Guatemala, for promoting
the rule of law and strengthening democratic
institutions. I do not have the time to expand on the
matter, so I will limit my comments to noting that the
worst-case scenario is one in which accumulated
frustrations are not addressed in any concrete way, and
are not even allowed to be expressed openly to
influence public policy responses. We had a long, sad
record of repression and a culture of impunity, which
we are combating even today with the help of the
United Nations. The main point is that any serious
examination of the links between security and
development has to include the matter of institutionbuilding and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Finally, it is quite clear that one pillar of the
United Nations — the maintenance of peace in
countries emerging from conflict — can be maintained
only if solid foundations are laid for sustainable peace

16

and development. The United Nations cannot approach
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in a
piecemeal manner, so we are pleased to note the
innovations introduced since 2005 in creating what is
now called the peacebuilding architecture. It is our
hope that last year’s review of the peacebuilding
architecture will lead to greater clarity regarding the
role of each of the principal organs and the
Peacebuilding Commission so that sustainable peace
and development can be addressed in an integrated and
coordinated manner system-wide.
The President: I
representative of Egypt.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), our appreciation to Brazil for
convening this debate, emphasizing the relationship
between successful sustainable development and the
preservation of peace as the cornerstone of security and
stability. We thank the Secretary-General, the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and the Special
Representative of the World Bank for their
comprehensive briefings.
In a world of interconnected challenges and
opportunities, it is difficult to dismiss the conceptual
relation between security and development. Both are
concerned with people; both impact and influence one
another. The absence of security makes it difficult for
development to thrive, while the lack of broad-based
development may trigger instability and pose a
challenge in the long run to security and sustainable
peace. Yet on the practical level, the connection
between security and development remains elusive, and
its implications are hard to define and should be
thoroughly examined in the proper forums.
Even though we welcome today’s debate as a
contribution to enhancing the understanding of the
interlinkages between security and development, it is
important to stress that this issue goes beyond the core
competencies of the Security Council. The Security
Council’s primary responsibility, under the Charter of
the United Nations, is for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It has no authority
over United Nations development agencies, funds or
programmes. Issues pertaining to economic and social
development fall within the competence of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. As
Member States, we all must respect this distinction,

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

even as we encourage close coordination and
cooperation among the principal organs of the United
Nations, which is essential to enabling the United
Nations to successfully address the nexus between
peace and security, on the one hand, and development
on the other.
Although recent reports of the Secretary-General
to the Council show that new and emerging issues —
such as intra-State conflicts, organized crime, the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, rapid
urbanization and maritime security — have been
gaining greater weight as challenges to international
peace and security, particularly in Africa, the NonAligned Movement believes that a comprehensive
approach to dealing with the root causes of conflicts
needs to be adopted, in close coordination among the
United Nations principal organs, the United Nations
system, international financial institutions, regional
organizations, national authorities and civil society, in
order to combine and make use of the expertise and
lessons learned by the relevant actors within their areas
of competence and in accordance with their mandates.
Enhancing stability and sustainable development
is key to the success of the international efforts to
promote peace and development worldwide. The fact
that many non-aligned countries, in particular in
Africa, are not on track to meet the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 furthers the case for the
need to implement all commitments related to
supporting development, particularly in Africa,
including the full implementation of the political
declaration on “Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation of various commitments, challenges
and the way forward” (resolution 63/1), adopted at the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
22 September 2008, as well as all other commitments
related to supporting developing countries’ endeavours
to achieve sustainable development.
NAM believes that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are at a crucial juncture as a result of the
increased demand for and the expansion and
complexity of their tasks and mandates, as well as the
Organization’s increasing responsibilities beyond the
nature of its political role and its ability to implement
them. All these factors, along with the absence of
political settlement of many conflicts, increase the
burdens on the capacity of the Organization and troopand police-contributing countries.

11-23198

The Non-Aligned Movement is of the view that
this situation requires the Organization to continue
building on what has been achieved towards
developing a common vision on how to proceed
regarding the development of concepts, and to
strengthen the partnership between the Member States
and the Secretariat in order for United Nations
peacekeeping operations to gain the political, financial
and logistical support needed, in accordance with a
vision that realizes the needs and available capacities
and in a manner that enhances the United Nations role
in maintaining international peace and security.
Accordingly, the Non-Aligned Movement reemphasizes its commitment to supporting all efforts
aimed at achieving the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, and reiterates the following.
First, it is important to achieve consensus among
Member States on the development of peacekeeping
policies, and not to seek to implement ideas and
approaches that have not been approved by Member
States.
Secondly, all necessary support, financial and
human resources, and military and civilian capabilities
must be provided to peacekeeping missions so that they
can fulfil their tasks within a framework of full respect
for the host country, its laws and norms, and achieve
their common goals. In this context, it is necessary to
avoid changing the tasks of peacekeeping missions
without previous consultations with troop-contributing
countries or obtaining their consent for any change.
Thirdly, more attention must be paid to exit
strategies through increased efforts to settle disputes
peacefully as the main goal of the strategy, and with a
view to dealing effectively with the increased demands
of some States for the early exit of peacekeeping
missions, and to paving the way for peacebuilders and
development actors to support and consolidate the
newly established peace through socio-economic
development and efficient institution- and capacitybuilding on the basis of full respect of national
ownership.
In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement is of the
view that post-conflict peacebuilding activities should
be conducted through intense and effective
consultations among the principal organs of the United
Nations, giving due emphasis on their respective areas
of competence.

17

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

The three-tiered nexus of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development merits very careful
comprehensive consideration by the appropriate organs
of the United Nations in order to further sustain the
needed resources for all three processes, and with a
view to strengthening, within a framework of national
ownership, the national capacities of Governments in
post-conflict countries to rise to their duties and
responsibilities,
thus
empowering
national
Governments with the prerequisites for assuming their
responsibilities in the security, defence, political, social
and economic sectors, and engage in a sustainable
development process supported by sufficient financial
resources, technical expertise and institutional skills. In
addition, the provision of adequate and timely
resources will be indispensable.
Furthermore, the PBC must examine integrated
peacebuilding strategies for post-conflict countries to
ensure that they gradually incorporate a comprehensive
sustainable development component that addresses
emerging socio-economic challenges from the early
stages of implementation by national authorities, in
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission and
the relevant United Nations, international and regional
actors.
Consequently, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council must give due
consideration to the overlap between the peacebuilding
process and the launch of a sustainable development
framework in post-conflict countries. Efforts to
establish the foundations for good governance, the rule
of law and the application of the principles of
democracy and justice will not realize their full
potential in communities plagued by poverty, disease,
hunger and a continued lack of basic living standards.
The PBC must be actively involved in the
formulation of early peacebuilding components within
peacekeeping operations on a case-by-case basis,
where the Commission should conduct an appropriate
evaluation of the needs and requirements for such a
component, in full coordination with the country
concerned. The PBC can enrich Security Council
debates on post-conflict situations by sharing its views
and expertise of relevance to peacebuilding and early
development processes. Furthermore, without prejudice
to the functions and powers of the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council must also play a leading role in the

18

formulation and implementation of peacebuilding and
development activities.
The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support all United Nations efforts in all fields,
including peace, security and development, and stands
ready to engage constructively in any further
discussions in the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council on that important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Brazilian presidency for convening this open debate on
the very important subject of the interdependence
between security and development. I would also like to
express my appreciation to Sarah Cliffe of the World
Bank for the Bank’s insightful 2011 World
Development Report, as well as to the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission for his briefing. The
thoughtful statement by the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, indicates that, today, the United Nations
works in a radically different world with new realities.
We know too well that the greatest security
threats facing us today, and in the decades ahead, go
far beyond States waging aggressive war or being
embroiled in their own internal violence. They extend
to political, economic and social exclusion and
unrest — caused by gross poverty, a severe shortage of
food and water, infectious diseases and environmental
degradation — the spread and possible use of weapons
of mass destruction; terrorism; transnational organized
crime and mass flows of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Threats recognize no national
boundaries, are interconnected and must be addressed
at the global, regional and national levels.
The central challenge for us now is to fashion a
broader understanding of security, with its
accompanying responsibilities, strategies, institutions
and systems that not only establish stability and the
rule of law but also foster social and economic
development, with the right of people to selfdetermination. The principles of freedom from want
and fear and the freedom to live with dignity, with
respect for human rights, are fundamental, as they
reinforce each other and are interconnected. They
guide the processes of preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, humanitarian action,
peacebuilding, post-conflict recovery and development,
and especially the achievement of the Millennium

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

Development Goals. We must constantly refine those
tools for each theatre of operation, because each will
have its specific situation, as well as collectively for
the Security Council’s strategy with regard to the rules
of engagement of peacekeeping operations and their
exit strategies, and for the steps taken for disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
through
multidisciplinary and multi-tiered actions. Measures
must be taken for institution- and capacity-building and
the provision of services to promote internal stability.
It is therefore obvious that the Council must pay
attention to the resolutions of the General Assembly
and its six Committees on relevant security issues.
Likewise, the decisions of the Economic and Social
Council, which drives forward the agenda emerging
from global summits, coordinates the activities of
specialized United Nations agencies, consults nongovernmental organizations and networks with regional
commissions, provide early warning signals. The
Human Rights Council provides the indicators for
human rights in specific conflict situations. The
Peacebuilding Commission offers guidance on gaps
that threaten to undermine peace in post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery. The United Nations
humanitarian response system and governance of the
global environment, each with their ever-growing
range and scale of demands, are uniquely positioned to
monitor global security issues and to advise a shift to
stable development, which includes the participation of
women and youth.
The Council must recognize that among the key
contributors to peace and prosperity are strong
leadership, popular legitimacy and policy approaches,
which can successfully integrate security, justice, will
and opportunities for economic advancement. Thus,
short-, medium- and long-term confidence-building in
the political, development and social spheres and the
delivery of concrete results on the ground in
decentralized locations become imperative. My
country’s creation of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia is an excellent
example of regional cooperation, and testifies to how
time-consuming and difficult such a process is, but also
to the fact that strong political will can make
confidence-building possible and, thus, conflict
prevention.
Conflict and fragility, and their nexus with
development, entail more cooperation than hitherto
with financial institutions — such as the World Bank,

11-23198

the International Monetary Fund and regional banks —
as well as with regional structures, such as the African
Union, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
and the European Union, together with a wide variety
of other actors at the global, regional, national and
local levels. Youth are an important segment of such a
multi-stakeholder arrangement of academia, religious
leaders, human rights actors, grassroots organizations
and independent media. Their engagement is critical
for early intervention to avoid radicalization. While the
Council and peacekeeping operations have limited
mandates, they can amply benefit from the United
Nations system, which directly addresses development
issues and interacts with significant players that
perform watchdog functions.
In closing, I would like to affirm Kazakhstan’s
support for the United Nations in promoting peace in
numerous ways, in particular the closure of the
Semipalatinsk nuclear test site in 1991, the
establishment of the Central Asian nuclear weaponfree-zone in 1996 and the generation of collective
thinking by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference on peace, security and sustainable
development issues. My country also assists the
recovery process of countries in the region affected by
war and conflicts. It is essential that the Council
review the constantly evolving international security
environment and its implications for the United
Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez Arnillas (Peru) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation very much welcomes this
debate, for which we thank the presidency. This is an
opportunity to consider a timely and important issue.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission and as
an active participant in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, Peru is committed to lending
its support in connection with this topic. I should also
like to express our gratitude for the concept paper
(S/2011/50), which provides us with the basis for our
discussion today.
Peru associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
On repeated occasions, Peru has highlighted the
importance of complementarity and synergy between

19

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

security, development, human rights and humanitarian
assistance efforts. That entails interlinked and
inseparable elements that should serve to guide the
development of comprehensive peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies. They should also necessarily
be reflected on the ground, if indeed our goal is
international peace and security — which is the
primary responsibility of this main organ of the United
Nations.
Just a few days ago in Munich, the SecretaryGeneral, in referring to the events in the Middle East,
also spoke of the indispensable link between peace and
security, two concepts that cannot exist one without the
other. There is much experience to attest to this,
including many current cases that pose a challenge to
the Council and the Organization. I should also point
out that our experience throughout history also shows
that in such cases there is also the opposing link
between violence, institutional fragility, insecurity and
the re-emergence of conflict.
As the experience of the United Nations has
shown, there is an increasingly urgent need for a
comprehensive approach to security, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. That requires an analysis of the
underlying causes of violence and the socio-economic
situation on the ground. It also requires parting with
hermetic and compartmentalized approaches and
strategies to conflict and post-conflict situations. That
is to say, we need a synergistic and complementary
approach to efforts at preventive diplomacy, the
emergence and re-emergence of conflicts and support
for conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts.
Given that peacekeeping operations constitute
one of the Organization’s most important tools in
preserving peace and security, we must ask the
question of whether such operations can or should be
involved in development efforts, and up to what point.
In his report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/64/573), the SecretaryGeneral points out that peacekeeping operations
typically play three functions.
The first is to coordinate and provide support for
consensus among national actors and the international
community; the second is to act as facilitator with
other actors in carrying out peacebuilding activities
while providing security and supporting socio-

20

economic reconstruction; and the third, which pertains
to peacebuilding functions, entails laying the
groundwork for stability and establishing the capacities
for the development of institutions. As we discussed
here in the Council last month, the latter is essential in
moving towards development and sustainable peace.
Those functions, which are evident in current
peacekeeping efforts, illustrate that peacekeeping
missions can indeed integrate the security and
development dimensions, whether through activities
aimed at peacekeeping, early peacebuilding or
peacebuilding itself.
In developing an integrated strategy, we should
underscore the role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission as an advisory and catalyzing body for an
approach focused on the interdependence between
security and development that is formulated to address
the specific needs of each situation and the national
priorities that serve to establish and strengthen national
capacity. It is essential to strengthen the capacities of
the Peacebuilding Commission, thereby contributing to
the swift and effective implementation of the
recommendations made in connection with its review.
The Commission is one of the principal and most
appropriate bodies for reaffirming the participation of
the United Nations in peace processes in order to
generate the necessary atmosphere of security and trust
for a process of inclusive national ownership.
In conclusion, I should like to return to the theme
of our debate today. It is undoubtedly clear that the
security and development components should guide the
mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations. The strategies and actions of every United
Nations agency should also come directly into play in
the implementation of development efforts. There is
therefore a need for close and effective coordination
with all those agencies, including the involvement of
the entire membership to ensure that coordination. In
other words, this is a shared responsibility. Peru is fully
aware of it and we are committed to meeting it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) represented at the United Nations, namely,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own country,

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

Fiji. I wish to start by thanking Brazil, as President of
the Security Council, for convening this open debate.
The Pacific SIDS have long understood that peace,
security and development go hand in hand. I am
therefore glad for the opportunity to add our voice to
this important discussion.
Small island developing States like those in the
Pacific that have experienced violent conflict know
first hand the interdependence of security and
development. Accelerated sustainable economic
development activities such as focused investment to
create jobs, building and maintaining critical
infrastructure
and
addressing
environmental
degradation help to prevent a relapse into conflict, and
are the only way to guarantee long-term sustainable
peace. Such development, along with security, is
integral to peacebuilding activities.
More generally, development provides countries
with increased resilience to, and greater capacity to
cope with, political, economic and environmental
shocks to the State. The Pacific SIDS cannot
effectively cope with global shocks owing to their
particular vulnerabilities, including unique geographies
and the lack of both technical capacity and large
diversified
economies.
Global
unsustainable
development impacts can also weaken resilience to
external shocks and threaten security. For example,
global unsustainable fishing practices in Pacific waters
severely undermines food security in our region. In that
regard, we welcome the General Assembly’s adoption
of resolution 65/150, on the protection of coral reefs
for sustainable livelihoods — a resolution that all
Pacific countries promoted. We look forward to these
important issues being addressed next year at the
United
Nations
Conference
on
Sustainable
Development in Rio de Janeiro.
For the Pacific SIDS, the adverse impacts of
climate change pose the greatest shock risk and the
most imminent threat to our development and security.
Rising waters, more intense storms, global and local
food shortages and freshwater scarcity endanger many
of our islands. The report of the Secretary-General on
climate change and its possible security implications
(A/64/350) calls climate change a threat-multiplier.
This is true. But climate change is also a threat in and
of itself, creating instability where none before existed.
Based on projections of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, the United Nations High

11-23198

Commissioner for Refugees deems it very likely that
rising sea levels and increasing extreme weather events
will cause low-lying island States like some of the
Pacific SIDS to be entirely uninhabitable long before
their full submersion. The resulting and inevitable
displacement from these island States can lead to
serious security problems for the displaced peoples as
well as the receiving community. For some Pacific
island States, climate impacts, especially sea level rise,
may even threaten and call into question current
conceptions of sovereignty. This issue is unprecedented
and demands the specific attention of the Council.
At the same time, climate change undermines our
economic development by demanding an everincreasing share of our financial resources to adapt to
its negative impacts. There is an urgent need to
increase efforts to improve the development prospects
of vulnerable countries in order to safeguard their
resilience to the impacts of climate change, as well as
the need to fund urgent adaptation projects. This must
go hand in hand with global efforts to rapidly reduce
carbon dioxide emissions. Past emissions have already
committed us to dangerous levels of temperature
increase, and the world is at great risk of non-linear
and destabilizing impacts that threaten global peace
and security.
To mitigate the prospects of conflict and
insecurity, the Security Council must urgently address
the security implications of climate change. In 2009,
the General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution
63/281, which called on all relevant organs of the
United Nations to intensify their efforts in considering
and addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications. As the United Nations body
holding primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
is duty bound to substantively address this issue. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to urgently
begin consideration of the threats to international peace
and security posed by climate change, and to consider
actions it could take to respond to these growing
threats.
As the Secretary-General highlighted this
morning, we must focus more on the climate changesecurity-development nexus and on the fact that
managing climate risks is necessary to achieving
security.

21

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

pleased to be able to actively participate in it with
regard to Burundi.

Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) underscored the importance of
interlinkages between development, peace and security,
and human rights, and of their mutual reinforcement.
The urgent need to do everything possible to carry out
the vision presented in the Millennium Declaration
(General Assembly resolution 55/2) is now more
evident than ever. We therefore welcome the initiative
of the presidency of the Security Council to place this
issue on today’s agenda.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

Given the late hour and the long list of speakers,
my statement will be extremely brief and limited to
two points. For our other substantive arguments, I
invite the Security Council to refer to the statement
made by my colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Belgium, on behalf of the five Chairs of the countryspecific
configurations
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission. We fully associate ourselves with that
statement.
First, lasting peace and development cannot be
achieved in any society without the promotion of
human rights and justice. The reform processes of the
United Nations relating to peace and security,
operational development systems and human rights
must be implemented in a coordinated manner. The
Security Council could function more efficiently if it
were able to benefit from a more comprehensive
analysis of the situations it monitors, in particular of
the root causes of conflicts, taking account of the
socio-economic and environmental dimensions and
other factors that threaten peace and security.
Secondly, strategic cooperation between the
United Nations and the World Bank is essential. In this
regard, the World Bank’s World Development Report
2011: Conflict, Security and Development comes at an
opportune time. Periodic exchanges with development
players and those involved in the peacebuilding
architecture could be more effective if they were
systematized and intensified. I am thinking of
processes such as the preparation of reports of the
Secretary-General, mission planning, continuing
education for personnel and within integrated mission
task forces. For the countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the importance of such
cooperation no longer needs to be proven, and we are

22

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
ongoing and concrete commitment of your country,
Madame President, to peacebuilding and development
underlies the wise choice by your presidency of the
topic of today’s debate. It is a welcome coincidence
that this debate complements that convened by the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina last month,
which we welcome. It allows us to undertake in-depth
consideration and to act together to develop a truly
integrated approach of the Security Council in
addressing conflicts.
The persistence of conflicts, their human and
financial costs, and the imperatives of stability in the
post-conflict phase require early interaction between
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding phases. The
establishment of lasting peace demands judicious
management of the critical transition between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That transitional
phase must be addressed through an approach that
allies security imperatives with development activities
to stabilize a State emerging from conflict. This critical
phase must be approached with a keen awareness of the
high risk of relapse into conflict.
Interlinkages between security and development
are complex, and the transition to peacebuilding must
be managed cautiously in an international environment
characterized by the growing collusion among
transnational criminal gangs, non-State actors and
shadowy terror networks working together to weaken
States, as they do in the Sahel-Sahara region.
The United Nations post-conflict presence must
help to develop national strategies targeting such key
priorities as the promotion of women’s rights, youth
employment, the protection of vulnerable social
groups, the establishment of the rule of law and the
strengthening of State institutions. It is vital in that vast
undertaking that the United Nations efforts be
effectively coordinated so as to mesh the establishment
of
peace,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
development in a coherent manner. The Peacebuilding
Commission has a key role to play in that context.
It is essential that the international community
strengthen the capacities of the host State to reduce

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

poverty, economic recovery and provide basic services.
Practice has amply demonstrated the critical
importance of national ownership of peacebuilding.
The leadership role of the host State faces challenges,
but it is essential in that it allows for a better
articulation of a national recovery strategy that
combines all dimensions of peace, security and
development. In that regard, it is important to promote
the necessary synergy and coordination among national
and international structures and to mobilize sustained
resources.
The United Nations must strengthen its capacities
to define integrated strategies from the outset and to
coordinate the activities of the various stakeholders on
the ground responsible both for security and for
development. This will contribute to making the
international community’s actions more coherent and
coordinated. Moreover, the international economic
assistance provided by bilateral donors and
international financial institutions must target projects
that take account of a given country’s economic, social
and even cultural realities, its particular capacities and
the prospects it offers to foreign investors. In that
respect, our active policy is to support peacebuilding in
many African countries, targeting multiplier sectors
that contribute to human development, such as
education, safe drinking water and electrification in
rural areas.
Above and beyond the efforts of the United
Nations and the international community to establish,
maintain and build peace, their role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention remains
critical and must be developed, strengthened and
adequately endowed with financial and human
resources in the interests of peace and international
security.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Let me start by thanking Brazil for
organizing today’s debate on the interdependence
between security and development. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and Ms.
Sarah Cliffe of the World Bank for her remarks on the
World Development Report, which we look forward to.
I also thank all of the speakers who have addressed the
Council today.

11-23198

The candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates of
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and the
European Free Trade Association country of
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.
I would like to approach the complex
interrelationship between security and development
from three angles: first, security as a precondition for
development; secondly, development as a precondition
for security; and, finally, respect for human rights as a
precondition for both security and development.
In the short run, security is a precondition for
development. In more than half of the post-conflict
countries conflict flares up again within five years after
a peace agreement and destroys any hope of
development. Peacekeeping missions can help keep
violence at bay, especially if they are multidimensional
and join forces with other United Nations actors
through an integrated strategic framework while taking
into account the need to ensure the impartiality,
neutrality and independence of the humanitarian
entities.
The European Union remains committed to
further improving the performance of these missions,
both from New York and in the field. In New York, we
remain a staunch supporter of, and an active
contributor to, the Peacebuilding Commission, which
can provide peacebuilding counsel to the Security
Council — for example, on how to tie the activities of
its missions into the wider peacebuilding effort in a
country. In addition, the European Union looks forward
to a strategy for critical early peacebuilding tasks
undertaken by peacekeepers that features joint United
Nations planning and a clear United Nations division
of labour based on competence, track records and
ability to deliver. Also here in New York, we look
forward to a results-oriented Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations that makes headway with an
effective strategic framework for the protection of
civilians and with the constructive dialogue on a robust
approach to peacekeeping, among other things.
In the field, aside from our own 13 political,
civilian and military missions, we make financial

23

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

resources available for projects to buttress United
Nations peacekeeping missions. This has, for example,
helped the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti with the development of justice and police
manuals; the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants;
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad with the training of police in Chad;
and the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste with capacity-building in the security sector. All
those are crucial steps towards making those countries
safe for development.

The European Union strongly backs the
mainstreaming of human rights, including gender
equality, in the work of the United Nations — for
example,
through
the
recently
established
mainstreaming mechanism of the Development Group.
More
frequent
presentations
by
the
High
Commissioner for Human Rights at the Security
Council would be a good way to further mainstream
human rights in its work. The European Union supports
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in its efforts to integrate human rights into all
components of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

In the long run, development is a precondition for
security. Many of the poorest countries are also the
most fragile ones, and each percentage point more
growth means a percentage point less of a risk of civil
war. We need to work on long-term solutions,
mainstreaming
conflict
prevention
into
our
development policies. We need to work on sustainable
development, food security and on addressing all the
root causes of conflict. That is what the European
Union is doing.

Let me conclude by saluting the adoption of
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/4), which
builds on an already important doctrine on this issue,
including the 2005 World Summit Outcome and the
Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development. The European Union looks forward to
further following up such declarations on the
interdependence between security, development and
human rights, translating them into international
action.

Poverty eradication is at the heart of the Treaty of
Lisbon. More than 50 per cent of the money spent to
help developing countries comes from the European
Union and its member States, making it the world’s
biggest aid donor. The Millennium Development Goals
serve as one beacon of our aid policy, and national
ownership serves as another. Of course, national actors
can only take charge if they have the capacity to
manage the myriad relationships with the international
community. That is why the European Union has
decided to help the Peacebuilding Support Office put
together a special database, which can serve as the
basis for developing national aid-information
management systems.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.

Human rights is the third pillar of our world
Organization. Both in the short and in the long run,
respect for all human rights and for the rule of law,
apart from an end in itself, is also a precondition for
both security and development. Security without
respect for human rights and the rule of law is not
security. There can be no human development without
human rights. As the United Nations Development
Group’s most recent report on human rights
mainstreaming argued, respect for human rights helps
reduce inequality and discrimination, which often
underlie development problems.

24

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Brazil
for its decision to convene this important debate
focused on the interdependence between international
security and development in the search for sustainable
peace in the world. I should also like to express my
thanks to the Secretary-General for his important
briefing this morning; Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana,
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
valuable contribution to this debate; and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe of the World Bank, for her clear and
substantiated statement.
Chile associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Thailand
on behalf of the Human Security Network, to which we
belong.
The long experience of the United Nations in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts shows us that the
issue of development — or, rather, the lack thereof —
is at the source of many of the conflicts that have been
on the agenda of the Security Council. Security
imposed by peacekeeping operations carries no
guarantee that security will be sustained or that conflict

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

will not eventually re-emerge. In order to avoid that
there is a need for several factors to come together:
security, the strengthening of the rule of law, respect
for and promotion of human rights, the empowerment
of women and the establishment of conditions that
foster development. That is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace.
In that regard, the issue of development and a
country’s social conditions — whether with regard to
the levels of unemployment, hunger or poverty — and
the way we address those challenges are issues that
should be taken into account and assessed by the
Council when it authorizes mandates for peacekeeping
operations. We agree with today’s presidential
statement that
“reconstruction, economic revitalization and
capacity-building constitute crucial elements for
the long-term development of post-conflict
societies and in generating sustainable peace”.
(S/PRST/2011/4)
That is especially true in today’s world, where the
vast majority of crises that affect international peace
and security have to do with internal conflicts and civil
wars. In such cases, underdevelopment, poverty,
unemployment and social marginalization pose
underlying challenges to a State’s governance, stability
and unity. The Council cannot ignore those aspects in
adopting informed decisions in the search for
sustainable peace.
In that connection, it seems to us essential to
point
out
that
adequately
addressing
the
interrelationship between security and development
entails an effort in coordination and coherence of the
actions of each United Nations body. This is not about
bringing development issues to the Security Council,
as the Council’s work can take up the perspectives on
development that can be provided by the Economic and
Social Council, the General Assembly, the World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
relevant bodies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations and pertinent regional entities.
In the 2005 Summit Outcome, heads of State and
Government recognized the need to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission in order to help postconflict States by providing a comprehensive
perspective. With regard to the recommendations of the
co-facilitators of the 2010 Peacebuilding Commission
review process, which have been approved in various

11-23198

Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
with a view to establishing and maintaining an
informal and fluid dialogue between the Council and
the Commission, my country believes that one concrete
proposal could be to incorporate that dialogue into the
Council’s Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. We know well that both peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are two sides of the same coin. We are
pleased that the presidential statement recognizes the
need for coordination and dialogue with the
Commission.
Finally, I wish to highlight two emblematic cases.
The first is Africa, which so many times has been
an object of concern for this Council, and of sustained
attention from Brazil. As recognized in the report of
the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development (S/1998/318), this is a region where the
interrelationship between development and security is
undeniable, and the Council must continue and deepen
its efforts to include the factors of economic and social
development that impact peace and security in the
region.
Likewise, the case of Haiti is especially close to
us — a sister nation confronting pressing challenges in
its path to peace, political stability and economic and
social development. In this case, my country also
believes that, without neglecting the tasks of security,
in a gradual and sustained manner, this Council is in an
excellent position to help the United Nations system
create appropriate conditions for the country’s
sustained and sustainable development, with full
independence in the context of democracy and political
stability and with strict adherence to the principle of
national ownership that is suitable to the corresponding
mandates so that, with an integrated focus, the required
national capacities can be generated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to thank the Brazilian presidency of
the Council for convening the debate on this very
pertinent subject regarding the interdependence
between security and development.
My delegation believes that the foundation of
peace and security is the establishment of a deliberate
and sustained socio-economic development framework

25

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

for post-conflict zones. It is equally important to
engender policy dialogue and to implement
development projects and programmes in areas
susceptible to conflict and instability. We also believe
that security should be anchored in a firm foundation
of political, social and economic infrastructure, both in
areas that are both emerging from conflict and those
that offer refuge.
It is pleasing to note that an increasing number of
Member States are purposefully reorienting their
foreign policy objectives and principles with a view to
strengthening the contribution of development
assistance in building relations.
The gradual demilitarization of foreign policy
doctrines by a good number of Member States is also a
welcome development that has a positive bearing on
security and development. We continue to witness
more and more resources being allocated to advancing
the
development
agenda,
establishing
strong
institutions of governance and the rule of law and
promoting and protecting human rights. The elevation
of development priorities to achieve parity with
military spending is a commendable shift in policy and
strategy that demonstrates the willingness of Member
States to offer individual and collective responses to
the global challenge of addressing the development
deficit and threats of insecurity in many parts of the
world.
The
international
community
collectively
possesses abundant resources and capability to lift
humanity up from conditions of deprivation and
underdevelopment. In that way, we would have
avoided a more expensive route in favour of a more
sustainable and effective approach to maintaining
peace and security. Our bold initiatives in the area of
conflict management will be in vain if the same level
of commitment and resource mobilization is not
replicated to meet one of the main goals enshrined in
the Millennium Declaration, namely; the quest to lift
over a billion people from poverty and hunger.
We should not allow the quest for technology and
innovation to impede international cooperation and to
further widen the gap between excesses on one hand
and extreme poverty on the other. The opportunities
presented by liberalized markets should result in their
being accessible, as well as in increased trade and
investment, which has so far only succeeded in giving
some economies the security of development and

26

growth more than others. That is the challenge of
security we need to overcome.
The benefits accruing from globalization should
account
for
our
strongest
partnership
and
interdependence in securing the future of all mankind.
Investing in one another’s sustainable development has
the shared value of increasingly driving nations closer
to each other, as opposed to alienating them from one
another. We have to build a stronger and
interdependent development community. That is the
most sustainable way of eliminating conflict and
insecurity.
At this juncture, let me commend the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations for their hard work in the
area of conflict prevention, monitoring and
management, as well restoration of security and of law
and order and the rebuilding and strengthening of
institutions of governance.
My delegation believes that only the United
Nations has the moral authority and the universal
legitimacy to intervene in situations of instability that
threaten to paralyze States. However, in order to bring
a lasting solution to peace and security challenges,
more emphasis should be given to the economic
strategy that will be followed in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. The art of mediation and conflict
management should therefore always be accompanied
by clear policy guidelines on resource mobilization and
the establishment of long-term development priorities.
We are fully persuaded that development
assistance is by far a much more meaningful and
lasting response to the challenge of insecurity, simply
because it brings results. It sustains countries and helps
prevent their eventual collapse. It is also much more
appreciated than fragmented aid because of its
participatory nature. It generates security and goodwill
even far beyond the domestic spheres of the State
engulfed in conflict, and it is the ultimate in ensuring
that the contagion effect of conflict is limited. The
gains of development will undoubtedly set us on a
good pedestal of achieving a secure and stable political
environment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Madame President,
thank you for organizing this timely open debate on the

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

interdependence between development and security. As
pointed out in Brazil’s concept paper (see S/2011/50), a
series of similar discussions has taken place over the
years. At this juncture, let me thank Brazil for that
concept paper, which provides a number of reference
documents but also poses thought-provoking questions.
A common thread that runs through all past
discussions on the issue before us is the linkage
between development and security. They are the two
sides of the same coin. It is now an established fact
that the Council, in discharging its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, will
need to examine and address the root causes of
conflict. Only by doing so can long-term sustainable
peace be globally achieved. The Council, as advocated
by the concept paper, must take due notice of actors in
the other principal United Nations organs, in particular
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other subsidiary bodies, including the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The linkage between development and security is
best summed up by our 2005 Summit document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) and the report of
the then Secretary-General, Kofi Annan (A/59/2005).
The purpose of multilateralism is to provide our
populations with freedom from want, freedom from
fear and freedom to live in dignity. These populations
include our youth, women and children and our rural
communities.
As we look at the global environment, we see that
the global financial markets have since improved.
However, at environment remains fragile. External
factors, depending on their health, shape and size,
influence the level of instability and conflicts risk
throughout the world.
The situation for Member states operating on the
fringes of the international system is more brutal.
These countries will need to be put on a special watch
list with a dedicated development package. Countries
with low income, low growth and dependence on
natural resources and those vulnerable to climate
change have a high conflict risk. Least developed
countries and some small island developing States fall
into this category. If not confronted decisively and
meaningfully, climate change will determine our
future. It is for these reasons that resolutions of the
General Assembly have requested the Council to look
at the security implications of non-action on global

11-23198

issues, including climate change. We therefore request
the Council to be seized of this subject.
We still have the opportunity to enhance the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
climate change funds promised need to be released in a
transparent manner through a United Nations
multilateral body. The trust and confidence restored in
Cancún remain fragile, and non-delivery threatens
multilateralism. For the least developed countries, the
Fourth United Nations Conference in May this year
must deliver. We must break with business as usual;
three 10-year programmes in the past three decades
have not yielded the results we have been seeking. The
Istanbul programme of action must be responsive to the
development aspiration of least developed countries,
allowing at least half to graduate from the group within
the coming decade.
At all levels, the maintenance of international
peace rests on the quality of development partnership,
which must be balanced and strengthen national
capacities with people-centred investment in the
productive sectors. The Group of Seven Plus group of
fragile countries led by Timor-Leste is seeking
dividends of peace and quality, air-tight partnerships
between partners and post-conflict least developed
countries, and continues to add its support to this
discussion. My delegation, with a watchful eye and
hopeful spirit, looks forward to the outcome of this
discussion, and once again thanks Brazil for its
initiative and all Council’s members for their support at
this gathering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania appreciates your
leadership, Madame, and decision to convene this open
meeting. We welcome the statement of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, and we associate ourselves with
the statement of the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
My delegation believes that the time has come for
the subject of the interdependence of security and
development to be on the regular agenda of the
Security Council, for the world has changed
significantly since 1945, when the Security Council
was established. The nature and causes of conflict and
instability have changed fundamentally. The threats to
international peace and security that the Security

27

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

Council was confronted with at that time were
significantly different from those it has to deal with
today, most of them in Africa.
Today, a disproportionate share of the Security
Council’s time and the United Nations budget is
devoted to peace and security issues in Africa. The
foundations of enduring peace and security in Africa
have to rest on development, good governance,
participation and opportunity, both political and
economic. Today, there is no doubt in our minds that
deprivation, destitution and desperation, especially
among young people, are veritable and imminent
threats to peace and security within countries and
globally. Crimes such as drug trafficking, piracy and
terrorism, as well as illegal migration, have their roots
in poverty.
Security is essential to development, and
development is essential to security. The Security
Council of today cannot ignore this nexus. Giving hope
to the young people of Africa for a brighter future will
help to reduce pressure on them to engage in activities
that can lead to insecurity, instability, crime and
conflict. For post-conflict societies, development and
the peace dividend it provides are the best way to
prevent relapse into conflict. People need to have a
stake in peace, and shared development and prosperity
are the best way to give them a stake in peace that will
stabilize societies and create an environment conducive
to good governance, respect for human rights and
accountability.
Peacekeeping and protection measures, robust or
otherwise, mandated by the Security Council can help
to ensure peace between conflicting parties for limited
periods of time. But we need to deal with the causes of
conflicts, not only their manifestations; we need to
develop capacities to prevent fires from breaking out,
not only capacities to put out fires. This cannot happen
without addressing development issues as an integral
component of the architecture of peace and security in
today’s world. The Security Council needs to develop a
strategy to embed development in this architecture. We
are not asking the Security Council to exceed its
mandate or to encroach on the territories of other
agencies and programmes; we are only asking it to
develop a strategy to be helpful to and supportive of
the development work done by others.
Peacekeeping must not only end conflicts; it has
to create space for sustainable development. It has to

28

provide guarantees for the kind of peace and stability
that are necessary for development to occur and
economic opportunity to emerge. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be not an end, but part of a
continuum of interventions needed to guarantee peace
and security. Whereas the Peacebuilding Commission
serves to bridge the gaps between security and
development, the Security Council should ensure the
interdependence of security and development by
encouraging all actors and all countries to promote
sustainable human development.
But each conflict is different in its genesis and
evolution. We must not have a one-size-fits-all
solution. The capacity of the United Nations to
understand better the causes of each conflict in each
context and to design a strategy geared to each needs to
be improved. And certainly, in resource-rich conflict
and post-conflict countries, the United Nations has to
assist in ensuring that such resources provide a
foundation and catalyst for development, not one for
the self-enrichment of the few or for fuelling current or
future conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me to join
previous speakers in thanking the Brazilian Minister of
External Relations for presiding over this important
debate, and other Ministers for participating in our
discussions. I would also like to express our gratitude
to Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the Special
Representative of the World Bank for their
contributions.
As has been noted before, there can be no
development without security and no security without
development. We believe that this debate will help to
further galvanize and push forward two of our most
critical common objectives — the achievement of
lasting security and the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals, which are so closely interlinked.
We also believe that this is another important
opportunity to bring together all international actors
with development mandates in order for all of us to
examine the progress made and the challenges ahead,
to reflect on the evolution of our cooperation in the
recent past, and to share our experiences for the benefit
of our concerted efforts towards those goals.
As we take stock of the progress made in
exploring the security-development nexus and related

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

policies, we welcome the positive initiatives that have
been implemented in this arena. However, many
challenges, conceptual and practical alike, remain.
While we all agree that security and development are
interdependent, we must recognize that in many ways
each is also a very distinct goal with its own unique
challenges and policy implications. Security and
development are already very broad concepts that
encompass a number of elements. The range of factors
that can influence the interplay between security and
development is vast. As such, context is important and
narrowing our focus is critical to enabling us to come
up with effective policies and solutions on a practical
level.
The experience of international organizations
dealing with conflict situations has demonstrated that
lasting and sustainable peace will require a
comprehensive package of solutions and an approach
to security that takes into consideration both the root
causes and the economic situation on the ground.
Today, the South Caucasus region continues to
suffer from multiple challenges, and as a whole
encounters great difficulties in making sufficient
progress towards achieving regional security and
development targets. Most important, the region is
negatively impacted by the lack of full cooperation.
Yet, we have not fully employed an essential resource
that could bring us closer to peace, that is, sustainable
development. One might question the value of
embarking on such an effort in post-conflict situations
where negotiations among the parties are ongoing.
However, international experience has shown that
economic cooperation and interaction can be a valuable
confidence-building measure, often leading to political
adhesion. Examples can be found in Western and
Eastern Europe and, increasingly, in Asia.
The experience of the past two decades in the
South Caucasus shows that the rejection of regional
economic cooperation and the imposition of closed
borders and blockades do not create political solutions;
to the contrary, they alienate peoples in the
surrounding region and destroy their trust and hope for
lasting peace.
In order to achieve greater coherence in the
region and expand the geographic area of cooperation,
the South Caucasus needs to implement various
initiatives and programmes sponsored by donor
countries and organizations. In addition, international

11-23198

financial institutions, as well as private sector
contributions, should to play a decisive role towards
that end.
In that respect, Armenia shares the common
responsibility to support the Council as the centrestage of dialogue and collective action to address the
multiple challenges of security and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madame
President, on presiding over this important meeting.
We in Latin American and the Caribbean are very
pleased with the veritable political success achieved by
the Mission of Brazil in convening us for this debate.
The issue of the interdependence between security and
development is not only essential to the life of the
Organization. Brazil’s demonstrated ability to bring us
together, as evidenced by the number of Ministers and
Deputy Foreign Ministers who are participating today,
clearly attests to the importance of Brazil’s initiative.
As we have heard today, the maintenance of
international peace and security is an indispensable
condition for the social and economic development of
peoples, as well as a crucial goal that must guide the
action of the United Nations. It is therefore essential to
develop a transparent and democratic collective
security system, with consolidated multilateral
institutions that provide for the respect of international
law and stimulate development.
Under certain conditions, the low level of
development in a country or countries can lead to, or
have a negative influence on, a domestic or
international conflict, or even create an environment
that fosters non-traditional threats to international
peace and security such as terrorism, the illicit arms
trade, the illicit drug trade, transnational organized
crime, cybercrime and piracy, among others.
Of course, the idea of a delicate interdependence
between security and development is not new. It is thus
clear that the Security Council should not take over the
responsibilities of other bodies of the United Nations
system, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission or
the World Bank.
It is also clear that peacekeeping operations
cannot become development operations, fulfilling the

29

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

responsibilities of the United Nations Development
Programme or other agencies. The key lies instead in
thinking about how the Council can take into account
the issue of development in making decisions related to
international peace and security so as to make these
decisions more effective. In that respect, a task still to
be completed is improving the working methods of the
Security Council and its relationship with the General
Assembly in order to allow for more fluid and
transparent interaction with other United Nations
agencies whose mandates are related to development.
In that regard, the role of the Security Council
should be to listen to those bodies and consider their
points of view, rather than to impose its own priorities.
This would allow the Security Council to have more
elements available when making decisions on the
continuation, withdrawal or reconfiguration of a given
peacekeeping mission, in particular with regard to the
degree of stability achieved on the ground.
In that connection, it is clear that in cases such as
Haiti the fact that basic peace and stability conditions
have been met, but without corresponding institutional,
social and economic development, is a necessary but in
sufficient condition for the withdrawal of the mission.
As has happened in similar situations in the past, a
precipitous withdrawal can cause the deterioration of a
security situation that was achieved at great cost.
In that regard, allow me to recall a concept that
has been developed over some time now, namely, that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts should be
carried out in parallel, not in sequence. This concept,
along with integral planning for peacekeeping
missions, can help both to reduce the time during
which troops need to be on the ground and to mitigate
the risk of relapse into conflict due to factors
specifically related to a lack of development.
As has been indicated in several presidential
statements by the Council, peacebuilding is the
mediator between the maintenance of peace and
sustainable development in the aftermath of a conflict.
That is why sustainable peacebuilding requires an
integrated approach that strengthens coherence
between security and development activities by
promoting human rights and the rule of law. It is
therefore important to highlight the need for better
coordination in the work of bilateral and multilateral
donors, which, in any case, needs to be undertaken by

30

the United Nations in keeping with the priorities
established by local authorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to start by echoing the very
kind words Argentina expressed for the Mission of
Brazil. The Dominican Republic thanks the Brazilian
presidency for convening this debate on security and
development, an issue on which the Brazilian
delegation has shown a sustained and coherent
commitment in all forums.
The Dominican Republic aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement.
The international community has considered
security and development for quite some time.
However, addressing it effectively has continued to
elude our best efforts. Since 1998, we have considered
the issue of creating lasting peace based on the seminal
report of the Secretary-General on sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318). And since 2001
we have been aware of the need to create a strategy to
strengthen peace based on the interdependence among
sustainable peace, security and development in all of
its dimensions.
The promotion of development is the common
thread running through the continuum that exists
between the maintenance and strengthening of peace.
While the promotion of development is clearly not part
of the Security Council’s mandate, the Council’s
consideration of it has become inevitable for the
effective operation of the missions that it authorizes
and oversees. It is, after all, sustainable human
development that creates the conditions for sustainable
peace. It also provides equal opportunity for all in a
legally secure framework within a context of political
stability and harmony with the natural environment,
including generating decent jobs. Equal opportunity
also ensures access to basic health and education
services, as well as to energy, drinking water and
sanitation, all without distinction to race, class or
geographical location. Legally assured security,
anchored in a constitutional framework, guarantees
both political democracy, human rights and equality for
all before the law. But it also provides for economic
democracy and guarantees the right to property and

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

promotes free market competition for all as both
producers and consumers.
It also provides political stability rooted in a
pluralistic system of representative parties that allows
for a change in power among the various forces and a
new leadership within each of them. It produces
harmony with the natural environment, protected in a
non-polluting energy matrix, a properly rewarded and
distributed use of non-renewable resources and forest
conservation for the enjoyment of future generations. It
provides decent jobs that enable entrepreneurs and
workers to live in dignity during and after their
productive lives.
When we look at the Haitian case in the light of
those considerations, we can understand the absence of
sustainable development or sustainable peace in that
country, in spite of the committed work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for more than
seven years. That is because unequal opportunities are
the main source of social injustice in rural areas and
the marginalized neighbourhoods of cities, leading to
discontent, protests and crime.
That is exactly what we find in Haiti, where 90
per cent of classrooms are in private schools and the
existing schools barely have the capacity for 50 per
cent of the school-age population. Legal insecurity,
which is the source of unfair privileges and the cancer
of corruption, gives rise to a lack of trust in the future
and drives away the human and financial capital
needed for development.
In a country without a land registry, as in Haiti,
the right of land ownership is weak, hence the
continuing migration from the country to the city and
the exodus of emigrants abroad. Political instability
discourages the hopes of new generations for a better
tomorrow. That leads to the absence in Haiti of new
leaders supported by sound parties, which makes the
return of former dictators of both extremes of the
political spectrum irrelevant.
Environmental degradation prevents the longterm survival of human settlements, increasing their
food insecurity and lack of nutrition and putting them
at greater risk in the face of inevitable natural disasters
that increasingly strike the world more intensely. That
has led to the deforestation of 98 per cent of Haitian
territory owing to the use of charcoal as the main
source of energy and ancestral slash-and-burn farming
practices. The lack of decent jobs at all levels of the

11-23198

production system also prevents an overall increase in
prosperity and exacerbates inequality and social
injustice.
There is thus 70 per cent unemployment in Haiti,
including an uncontrollable mass of refugees from the
tragic earthquake of 12 January 2010. This situation
seems unlikely to change in the short term given the
absence of better conditions for sustainable
development to ensure sustainable peace.
Except for admirable exceptions, in today’s
debate most interventions have proposed defining the
responsibilities of the institutional actors that must
necessarily cooperate in building sustainable peace,
security and development. For the Dominican
Republic, defining responsibilities could be endlessly
discussed without reaching a peacebuilding strategy on
the basis of the interdependence among sustainable
peace, security and development in all their
dimensions, as called for by the Security Council for
10 years.
The Dominican Republic therefore believes that
such a strategy must be based on a clear definition of
what the representative of France referred to as the
transition and exit scenario in the Council’s
presidential
statement
of
February
2010
(S/PRST/2010/2). That scenario, I wish to reiterate,
must create the legal and institutional conditions for
equal opportunities in a context of legal security,
political stability, harmony with the natural
environment and the creation of decent jobs.
If that scenario is defined in the light of a
sustainable development strategy that enjoys the full
commitment of local actors, it could well make it
possible for us to exit from peacekeeping operations;
for we would have laid the foundations of
peacebuilding in order to leave sustainable peace on
the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking the Federative
Republic of Brazil for having organized this open
debate on the item “Maintenance of international peace
and security: the interdependence between security and
development”. This timely initiative demonstrates the
remarkable work that your country, Madame President,
is doing within the Security Council.

31

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

Senegal aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the NonAligned Movement.
The severity and the number of armed conflicts
across the world, in particular in Africa, despite the
tireless efforts that we have made to date, remain a
source of great concern and raise increasing questions
about the long-term effectiveness of the strategies to
resolve crises. Indeed, given the growing complexity of
conflict situations, it seems essential to rethink our
strategies to prevent and manage crises in the light of
the new demands and challenges by promoting
comprehensive and integrated approaches based on
lessons learned.
In his report entitled “In larger freedom”, former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated that “we will not
enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy
security without development”. (A/59/2005, para. 17)
That statement is all the more true given the experience
gained in peacekeeping and peacebuilding in several
areas of the world, especially in the African continent,
which amply demonstrates that security and
development are two mutually reinforcing goals.
Moreover, in the absence of peace and security, it
proves difficult to create the conditions conducive to
establishing good economic and political governance,
likely to put an end to the causes of underdevelopment,
which inevitably leads to political and social
instability.
Such
vulnerability
linked
to
underdevelopment is even greater given the economic
and financial crises affecting the world and the adverse
effects of climate change increasing tensions related to
access to vital resources. The food riots that we have
witnessed these past years are sufficient proof in that
regard. Therefore, if we wish to establish viable and
lasting peace, more consistent global strategies must be
considered in which activities to promote security are
accompanied by development efforts.
As you rightly recalled in your concept paper
(S/2011/50), Madame President, the purpose of this
debate is not to establish scenarios that could lead to
the Security Council infringing on the powers of other
organs of the Organization, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council in particular. Rather,
I believe, it involves, beyond defining an integrated
comprehensive response, promoting synergies and
close interaction between the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility for maintaining

32

international peace and security, and the other United
Nations organs, funds and programmes, so that
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
can lead to viable and lasting peace. That requires us to
reorient our approach in order to better take into
account of the dual need to integrate into our strategies
to maintain international peace and security the
dimension of development and striving to strengthen
cooperation among the various United Nations bodies.
In that regard, it could be timely to underscore
certain priority actions in order to comprehensively
address the deep-seated causes of conflict. Those
include the following. We must ensure that prevention
efforts also cover development activities, in addition to
political decisions and humanitarian action. We must
take into account the priorities laid out by the countries
in question with respect to programmes to strengthen
and build peace. We must create the conditions for
effective cooperation between all stakeholders and
establish strategic frameworks for reconstruction and
development after conflicts. We must combat all
threats to international peace and security that could
undermine the foundations of the State, such as drug
trafficking, the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons and, of course, terrorism.
And we must strengthen the cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission so
that the latter can fulfill its role as a consultative entity.
In short, these combined measures would serve a
double purpose: they would better prevent and contain
crises by finding lasting solutions to them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I thank you, Madame
President, for giving me this opportunity to address the
Council on this very important topic. We also thank the
Secretary-General, the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Rwanda,
and the representative of the World Bank for their
statements earlier.
We would also like to associate ourselves with
the
statement
delivered
by
the
Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The most pressing challenge to peace and
development in Africa is the attainment of accelerated
economic development based on the bedrock of human

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

development, equity and security. The specific
underlying causes of the strife, conflict or civil
intimidation that are the primary obstacles to peace and
security on our continent are many, varied and well
documented.
African leaders and, indeed, the people of Africa
have devoted considerable effort to countering failed
governance and the absence of peace, security and
development. Thankfully, those efforts have not gone
unrewarded. Inn recent years the continent has
witnessed, despite some persistent and glaring failures,
an impressive revival and reconstruction of countries
amid the abandonment of violence and the acquisition
of new freedoms and liberation.
But even as we sit here today, the failures and
glaring exceptions and the real and imminent threat of
reversals in some countries must surely be cause for
concern and pause for introspection, and there is no
better place to undertake this introspection than here in
the United Nations Security Council.
While there can be little debate that development
and security are intertwined and interdependent, the
very fact that we are discussing the issue suggests that
there is some discomfort as to the manner in which the
interface is collectively understood and collectively
managed — here in the United Nations, but equally
importantly in continental institutions and even
national bodies.
In our reality in Kenya, security is indeed the
precursor for peace and development. But it does not
necessarily follow that any price must be paid for
security, because in and of itself, security does not
guarantee peace or development. Thus, a balance has to
be struck by those who may wish to exercise collective
management over matters of security.
Most of our countries are either in economic
transition or are fledgling democracies or young
nation-States. For the most part, all these countries are
still in the natural process of solidifying homogeneity,
establishing their national identity and/or extending
constitutional and civil liberties to their populations.
These characteristics of our countries make for a
complex, highly sensitive and potentially explosive
national political and social environment. This fact,
however, we feel is sometimes lost on this Council and
other global bodies that are dominated by countries
that are politically and economically stable and

11-23198

historically privileged. This is particularly so when the
apparent rush to enforce security overruns the need for
considered and deep appreciation of the situational and
historical conditions that characterize fractured
societies, fledgling democracies or transitional
economies.
At times, sadly, the converse is also true: the
threat of insecurity is downplayed in efforts to play up
a global value such as good governance. These
affirmations on our part must not be construed as
suggesting that we do not believe that democracy, civil
liberties and sustainable security and development go
hand in glove, because they do. But attaining these
core values is a delicate process fraught with reversals
and disappointments. What is important is the clear
understanding that, at times, reversals and
disappointments are inherent to the nature of free
democracies and, moreover, that the rush to suppress or
contain those developments by external means,
international institutions or coercive force may in fact
lead to the abortion of the democratic process and a
lapse into insecurity, or even worse.
For Kenya, our future security and our
development lie in our domestication of our new
Constitution and the concomitant building of the
institutions that are the means of domesticating it. But
we are also painfully aware that without political
harmony and commensurate rapid economic growth
and equitable prosperity, our Constitution will not be
worth the paper it is written on.
Let me conclude by making a small plea: that
those who may wish to assign themselves the noble
task of managing collective global peace and security
do so by focusing on the direction of progress,
prosperity, peace and human development, rather than
on the character or familiarity of the progress. Every
nation will have to find its own path. That is a truism
that holds fast for every nation — a fact that we hope
the Security Council will uphold in carrying out its
most important mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): The Philippines
congratulates Brazil on the outstanding leadership of
the Security Council this month. My delegation also
commends His Excellency Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Minister for External Relations of Brazil, for his
initiative in spearheading this open debate on the

33

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

maintenance of international peace and security and the
interdependence between security and development.
Security is a precondition for development, and
without sustained development, security cannot be
achieved. It may seem a play on words, but the reality
is that these two issues are intertwined and symbiotic.
The founding fathers of the United Nations
realized this when they established this Organization.
The Security Council itself recognized this through its
1997 presidential statement (S/PRST/1997/46), which
resulted in the Secretary-General’s 1998 landmark
report (S/1998/318) on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.
Peace and security cannot be maintained and
sustained without socio-economic development being
pursued in parallel. This idea provided the rationale for
creating the Economic and Social Council as one of the
main pillars of the United Nations and other
specialized agencies to precisely address the issue of
poverty and underdevelopment. We now call this the
soft power approach to promoting peace and security.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of this
soft power approach in our collective efforts to prevent
the surge of violence, lawlessness and armed conflict
in certain parts of the globe. In our interdependent and
highly networked world, any tension and conflict in a
country or region can easily spill over to others,
negatively affecting not just the peace and stability of
distant countries but also their economy and livelihood.
The presence of security in a country or region
does not necessarily spawn development, but pursuing
development without security is virtually impossible.
In extreme cases, underdevelopment and the lack of
security is a recipe for chaos and disaster.
This assertion is clearly supported by the World
Bank’s report on conflict, security and development,
which has a direct bearing on our discussions here
today. The World Bank’s annual World Development
Report always provides valuable insights into key
issues of global importance, and this year’s edition will
undoubtedly fuel much discussion and, hopefully,
result in better international policymaking, including
within the Security Council. From my initial
understanding of the report, it appears that the World
Bank has tackled the issue of security in a slightly
broader sense than is the custom in the Security

34

Council. The prism of analysis looks at conflict,
fragility, terrorism and organized and transnational
crime as the sources of violence that gravely affect
development.
Just to cite a concrete example of transnational
crime as it relates to development, the current state of
affairs in Somalia is now a major concern for the
international community and the Philippines. The
breakdown in peace and order and the inability of the
Somali Government to manage security and foster
socio-economic development in that strategic and
resource-rich country triggered the intensification of
maritime piracy, not just in the country’s coastal waters
but also in the Gulf of Aden and the wider Indian
Ocean. Pirate attacks on cargo ships have increased in
volume and violence in recent months. As we speak,
138 Filipino seafarers on board 12 ships are being held
captive by Somali pirates. We pray for their early and
safe release so that they can return to their beloved
families and resume normal lives.
The Somali case clearly demonstrates that
security and development go hand in hand. The failure
to address that country’s security and development
needs will have a negative impact on East Africa and
the wider world. In our region of the world, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
whose members are all developing countries, has long
recognized the detrimental impact of transnational
crime on development. Consequently, an ASEAN Plan
of Action to Combat Transnational Crime was
developed on the basis of discussions that began in the
early 1970s.
The challenges that lie ahead of us are many and
daunting. The world expects the Security Council to
lead the way and to take the necessary steps to tackle
and resolve the major root causes of unrest and conflict
in our times. Preventive diplomacy and the soft-power
approach are in most instances more effective than
military engagement. But that will require a totally
different perspective and innovative approaches to
peace and security, such as the ongoing peacebuilding
architecture review that we all support.
Once again, the Philippines commends you,
Madame President, and the Security Council. Our open
debate today has planted the seeds for a greater
understanding of the subject and has laid the
foundation for a more comprehensive and synergistic
approach to the interdependence between security and

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

development — the twin issues that will continue to
dictate the agenda of the United Nations in the years to
come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): On behalf of the Nordic
countries, let me start by thanking the delegation of
Brazil for convening today’s important debate.
The Millennium Declaration (General Assembly
resolution 55/2) and World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) specifically
address the interlinkages between peace and security,
human rights and development. One pillar is not
sustainable without the two others. We need an
approach that places the security of people before
institutions and mandates.
Human rights violations are at the root of many
conflicts. The protection and promotion of all human
rights must remain at the core of our responses. The
Council itself has recognized the importance of human
rights to peace and security. As efforts are made to
strengthen the linkages between security and
development, it is crucial to ensure that all actors
integrate human rights into their efforts.
National ownership needs to be emphasized.
Lasting peace and long-term development cannot be
imposed. National capacities for setting development
priorities following an armed conflict are often weak.
War-torn societies need assistance in restoring trust and
in addressing key concerns, such as building credible
security, strengthening the rule of law and facilitating
economic recovery.
Engaging women in all efforts is essential.
Despite women’s involvement in peace initiatives, they
are too often excluded from peace negotiations. That
undermines efforts to achieve long-term peace. The
empowerment of women is a precondition for longterm development and peace.
The peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations was set up to address the gap between
stabilization and long-term development. Too often,
however, the lack of synchronization between
peacekeeping operations and development programmes
leads to a failure to deliver. I would like to point out
three challenges in that respect.

11-23198

First, as the mandates of United Nations bodies
are not likely to change significantly, we should ask
ourselves how the United Nations can work better
using the existing tools and deal with the shortcomings.
In that regard, we look forward to the
recommendations of the review of civilian capacities
and their swift implementation. For the United Nations
system as a whole, we must do more to advance
integration, coordination and delivering as one. The
current structure is often a disincentive to coordination.
Human resources management policies, financial
regulations and audit and investigation rules are some
of the issues that we need to address. We must engage
the Bretton Woods institutions more closely and
strategically. We believe that the 2011 World
Development Report will provide good insight in our
ongoing discussions. Coherence can be achieved only
if we, as donors and Member States, practice what we
preach. We must ensure that mandated tasks are
properly funded to allow for their full implementation.
Secondly, Council mandates should not be
overloaded. That includes an honest assessment of the
role of the mission and of which tasks would be better
undertaken by other United Nations entities or
partners. Mandates must be matched by resources.
Peacekeeping missions have become integrated and
multifunctional. They have broader mandates and last
longer than in the past. A telling example in that regard
are elections, which were an exit point in the earliest
missions and have now become a benchmark for most.
Peacekeeping today includes peacebuilding. There is a
limit to what peacekeepers can and should do, and to
the role of other actors. Nevertheless, it is in the
interest of the Council that a mission be sufficiently
equipped to support efforts for achieving the level of
stability necessary for a handover to peacebuilding and
development actors.
Thirdly, there should be room for closer
interaction between the Council and development
partners. The Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration should be invited to the
Council when a country on the Council’s agenda is also
on the agenda of the Commission. One should also
consider other options for engaging non-members of
the Council beyond consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries.
We need an approach that is centred on the
security and safety of individuals. Our success or
failure is measured by how much we manage to reduce

35

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

vulnerabilities and increase the opportunities for
people affected by conflict. The conflict in South
Sudan will serve as an important test case. We hope
that the United Nations can deliver a coordinated,
cohesive and efficient response in support of a people
that has suffered from decades of armed violence and
poverty.
The President: I give
representative of Burkina Faso.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate you, Madame
President, on your country’s assumption of the Security
Council presidency for the month of February. I also
wish to thank you for organizing today’s important
debate on the interdependence between security and
development.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Egypt on the behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The debates of the Security Council on
peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies and postconflict reconstruction reflect the importance of linking
security and development.
It has been well established that no development
can occur in an unsafe and unstable environment. The
Secretary-General rightly mentioned that fact in his
1998 report on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318).
The Security Council should therefore place
considerable emphasis on development issues in its
approach and its deliberations. Today’s conflicts and
threats to peace are highly complex, as evidenced by
socio-political crises, including in Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, and
can undermine and even decimate development efforts.
Similarly, the hunger riots sparked by the
multifaceted crises that we have experienced in recent
years; the specific acts of violence and even terrorism
fuelled by despair and misery; and other current events,
to name but a few, prove today more than ever that
peace, security and development form a whole. For that
reason, together they contribute to putting and keeping
the issue of human security at the heart of the debate.
Security can no longer be viewed only through a
politico-military lens. We must henceforth take into

36

consideration the new dimensions of security that lead
to the full development of the individual. And, because
they can be a source a conflict, it falls to the Security
Council to fully understand what they represent and, in
coordination with the Secretary-General and the other
relevant bodies of the United Nations, to detect the
early signs of tension and crisis. In other words,
prevention must take its proper place among the
strategies we use to ensure peace and security by
promoting sustainable development and equitable
access to the benefits of growth, including youth
employment and women’s full enjoyment of their
rights.
In countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict — where everything must be rebuilt,
particularly in matters of security, basic social services,
State justice institutions and economic activity — a
timely, effective and appropriate response of the
international community is critical to avoiding a
resurgence of violence and a return to chaos.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding must take a central
place in the actions of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole. To that end, the
role of the Security Council is to interact with the other
relevant organs of the United Nations and, as
necessary, to establish and strengthen its existing
complementary and interactive relations with them,
especially the Peacebuilding Commission, so as to
ensure that greater account is taken of peacebuilding in
the peacekeeping phase.
In this context, we reiterate the recommendation
of the Security Council in its presidential statement of
12 February 2010 (S/PRST/2010/2), concerning the
establishment of peacebuilding plans with clear
objectives to allow each mission to achieve its goals
and move beyond peacekeeping into peacebuilding.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the Security
Council stressed the importance of ensuring that
mandated peacebuilding activities are undertaken as
soon as possible in every peacekeeping operation, in
coordination with the United Nations country team and
taking due account of security questions and the
priorities of the host country. We must take greater
advantage of successful transitions to ensure that these
recommendations be implemented.
In this interaction, we welcome the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and other organs, agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations, as well
as the strategic partnerships and arrangements with

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

certain institutions, such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. It is also important that
cooperation continue with regional and subregional
organizations, which can bring added value to the
search for solutions to the threats to the domestic
security and stability of States.
There is no doubt that particular attention should
be given to activities and programmes dealing with the
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, and security sector
reform in order to create the conditions conducive to
relaunching economic activity. The success of such
programmes requires greater inclusion of all sectors of
society, particularly the most vulnerable groups
represented by women and young people. Furthermore,
efforts should be pursued to improve coordination and
coherence among all actors.
In conclusion, we express the hope that the
recommendations emanating from this debate will
ensure that the interdependence between security and
development will be duly taken into account in the
deliberations of the Security Council. We are confident
that the involvement and efforts of the United Nations
system and the entire international community will
increasingly contribute to identifying the relevant
answers to the need to establish a framework of peace
and security that promotes development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we would like to
express our gratitude to the delegation of the
Federative Republic of Brazil in its capacity as
President of the Security Council for the month of
February. As a friend of that delegation, we wish it
every success in its conduct of the Council’s business.
Our delegation associates itself with the statement of
the Non-Aligned Movement, which largely reflects
Venezuela’s concerns on this subject.
The concept note before us on interdependence
between security and development states that
“social, political and economic exclusion can
contribute to the eruption or protraction of or
relapse into violence and conflict” (S/2011/50,
annex, p. 2),

11-23198

and that therefore they are
“relevant to the Council in discharging its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security” (ibid., p. 3).
The note adds that
“[i]n some conflict and post-conflict situations,
the Security Council may determine that certain
socio-economic issues constitute a threat to
international peace and security in their own
right” (ibid., p. 4).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela agrees that
overcoming poverty, inequality and oppression is
essential to maintaining peace among and within
nations. However, there are elements in this note of
concern to my country. We are concerned, for example,
about the possibility that the language of this note
could be used by serial interventionists to argue that
countries with poor, socially or politically excluded
populations pose threats to international peace and
security that should be addressed through outside
intervention.
Our delegation believes that such an
interpretation must absolutely be questioned by those
of us who defend dignity, the richness of cultural and
religious diversity, the right of all peoples of the world
to self-determination, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-intervention in internal affairs, as steadfast
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
which must be respected scrupulously.
For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
security and development should remain separate
issues. The United Nations development agenda falls to
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the relevant agencies, and depends and
must depend primarily on Member States. The Security
Council has already held debates on such issues as
climate change, migration, maritime transport and
access to potable water, among others, in order to
imbue them with a discourse of fear and security.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela calls on
the Security Council to limit itself to exercising the
powers entrusted to it by the United Nations Charter.
Inclusive and fully representative multilateralism is not
only the approach to addressing these issues, but also
the appropriate way to ensure that the Security Council
respects the competencies that have been defined by
the States Members of the United Nations. We

37

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

therefore regret that the Security Council intends to
securitize the entire multilateral agenda within the
concept of selective multilateralism.
If it is proposed that we address the structural
causes of poverty, we should consider what has been
called “structural violence” — inter alia, those policies
emanating from the world power centres that have a
decisive influence on creating poverty and on reducing
the quality of the lives of the peoples of developing
countries. Poverty is not a historical inevitability, but a
consequence of historical asymmetries between
developed and developing countries and the
concentration of wealth in the hands of a few. If the
Security Council is interested in attacking the root
causes of poverty by eliminating unequal power
relations between developed and developing countries,
it will enjoy the full support of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Security and
development, in the context of nation-building and the
maintenance of international peace and security, are
two sides of the same coin. Nations cannot prosper
without internal security and stability. A nation facing
the collapse of its national security, and subsequently
its economy, becomes a threat not only to its people,
but to the region as a whole. The world has seen such
tragedies in the past. We should not allow these
tragedies to recur.
In addressing the need for development, with
security being the utmost prerequisite, the Security
Council can play a vital role. Peacekeeping missions
mandated by the Security Council, in tandem with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the other
development agencies of the United Nations system,
should be equipped with development components.
While peacekeepers carry out their mandated
peacekeeping tasks, the Peacebuilding Commission,
together with the other development agencies of the
United Nations system, can work on projects and
activities that generate employment and income. Such
efforts, when successfully implemented, can help to
sustain the peace and stability of the State.
The world today is witness to internal strife faced
by member nations, which is caused mainly by the
rising price of food, the high rate of unemployment
among young people, and poverty. The spectre of high

38

oil prices and the sudden rise in the price of
commodities that we witnessed in the summer of 2008
are back. The price of wheat has shot up by almost 80
per cent in the past six months, while the price of rice
has increased by almost 50 per cent in the same period.
These increases have resulted in high inflation rates in
many countries. The developing world is again facing
the brunt of this jump in staple food prices. This rising
cost of living impacts heavily on the internal stability
of the most vulnerable least developed and developing
countries.
We are of the view that the Security Council can
play a role through its horizon-scanning consultations.
In tandem with the PBC, the Economic and Social
Council, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and other relevant agencies of the
United Nations system, the Council can examine and
analyse the prevailing scenarios, and come up with
suggestions and proposals on ways for affected
Member States to tackle those sources of instability.
Recent events in the Middle East show how a sudden
rise in the price of food, combined with widespread
unemployment, can destabilize nations.
To conclude, Malaysia strongly believes that
political stability is sine qua non to achieving
economic development and prosperity. Stable and
prosperous nations can bring about regional and global
peace. The Security Council can play a major role in
this regard.
The President: I give
representative of Uruguay.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Through
you, Madame, I wish to congratulate Brazil on having
convened this Security Council debate on the
interdependence between security and development. As
proposed in the concept note before the Council
(S/2011/50, annex), this concept is being addressed as
a complex relationship. That is due to a number of
reasons, including the existence of numerous actors
and activities that are interrelated and often overlap, as
well as to the specificities of each case, making it very
difficult to offer uniform responses.
One additional difficulty in addressing this issue
in the Security Council is related to the Council’s
instinctive tendency to prioritize security issues when
addressing the eruption or seeking a way out of an
armed conflict, while neglecting issues connected to

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

economic and social development in the affected
country or region. Certainly, without security there can
be no development, because the former is a sine qua
non for the latter. Certainly, too, underdevelopment and
poverty are not necessarily decisive causes in
generating conflict, while a number of actors within the
United Nations system have more responsibility for the
issue of development than does the Security Council.
Yet, it is also true that, without adequate and
early recourse to all instruments available within the
system to promote the sustainable economic
development of the country or region affected by
conflict, there is a serious risk of a relapse into
violence that may undo years and sometimes decades
of great human and material effort and cost devoted to
the maintenance of peace, and result in the sustained
maintenance of the security component on the ground
without envisioning a safe exit strategy.
We have seen that in the two missions to which
Uruguay has contributed a considerable number of
personnel. These are the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — which until recently was the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — in which we have
participated for 12 consecutive years, and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in which we are
entering our seventh year, although the United Nations
military presence in Haiti dates back to 1994.
It is on the basis of that experience that Uruguay,
along with a number of other countries, promotes at
every possible opportunity — be it in consultations on
peace mission mandates within the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations or other forums — the strengthening of
support for peace missions and peacebuilding in the
receiving State. We also focus on efforts to promote
sustainable economic and social development.
It is difficult for a peacekeeping operation to
resolve all causes of conflict, and we do not believe
that that should be its goal or its indicator for
determining an end to a mission. However, it is
essential for the mission to begin working from the
outset to strengthen national institutions and capacities
so that they can peacefully resolve problems on their
own. Strengthening institutional capacities in the
security and rule of law sectors is crucial, and we

11-23198

therefore encourage the Council to continue to include
this aspect in peace mission mandates.
That, however, is not the only area in which
peace operations have the capacity to have a positive
influence. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants are also
fundamental, not only because of the likelihood of a
resurgence of conflict, but also because a large number
of individuals may turn to crime in the future. We
therefore need to ensure a positive economic
environment with prospects for growth.
Unemployment among the young has been
identified by the PBC review panel as a potential threat
to any peacebuilding process. That is why the
Commission has taken up the recommendation to focus
on generating employment in this sector of society, and
considers its implementation a priority. In part, this can
be carried out through immediate-impact projects
managed by peacekeeping operations, which generate
tangible peace dividends and have been successful in
countries such as Haiti.
Finally, another crucial area where peacekeeping
operations where can make a major difference is in
rebuilding infrastructure, which is a key multiplier of
development in countries affected by conflict.
Sufficient
material
capacity
and
appropriate
deployment conditions are essential to carrying out this
task. In all of these activities, developing countries
possess great potential for cooperation. To that end, we
have significantly increased our bilateral contribution
to countries in the aforementioned situation. We also
believe it essential to strengthen mechanisms for
South-South cooperation through so-called triangular
cooperation, in which the countries with the greatest
financial capacities participate in an effort to meet
these challenges most effectively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate the delegation of Brazil
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also thank Brazil for
organizing this important open debate on the
interlinkage between security and development.
Security and development are two sides of the
same coin. Conflicts, wars and security threats can
easily erase economic opportunities and prospects for

39

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

growth. Decades of economic achievement can quickly
vanish when insecurity and instability move in. At the
same time, development is the solid base of peace and
security. There is a common belief that if poverty is not
uprooted and economic prosperity provided, the world
will become susceptible to conflict and insecurity.
Sustainable economic development and peace are
therefore inextricably interlinked. It is disappointing to
note, however, that development per se has remained
aloof from the top priorities of the United Nations.
Most of the time, the relevant deliberations have
been tainted by rhetoric, hot-air promises on aid and
tough conditions for transfer of know-how and
technology. It is therefore unsurprising that 1 billion
people of the world still live with hunger and poverty
and that, consequently, the world is not a safer or more
secure place than it was in prior decades.
The root causes of many conflicts in recent
history have been nothing but extreme poverty,
exclusion and marginalization, foreign interventions
and military excursions and occupation. Unfortunately,
in addressing the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Council has in many instances failed
to take these causes into account. This is not because
the Council has been unaware of these grounds; rather,
the political considerations of some powerful members
have always been the main driving force in preventing
the Council from taking meaningful action to uproot
the causes of insecurity and thus pave the way for the
promotion of sustainable development and economic
prosperity.
Even these powerful members have not felt
obliged to respond to or be accountable to the greater
international community, as represented by the General
Assembly, for the impacts of their performance. The
saddening reality is that, due to the influence exercised
by these members, decisions made by the Council have
contributed to prolonging, if not exacerbating conflicts,
with severe impacts on the economic development and
well-being of the concerned populations and overall
global economic development and progress. Perhaps it
is time for those responsible for such situations to
recognize the need to improve accountability and
transparency in their conduct. Particularly, they should
bear the responsibility of their actions and positions on
development at both the national and international
levels. Their currently unchecked rights should be
commensurate with balanced responsibilities.

40

As a matter of fact, resort by the Council to the
provisions of Chapter VII, in particular the imposition
of economic sanctions in the interests of the economic
and political purposes of some big Powers, has always
hindered economic opportunities and the basic human
rights of ordinary people in the affected countries.
There is ample evidence that sanctions first and
foremost put the economic growth and prosperity of
people in peril, as well as their rights to food,
medication, clean water, education, decent job and
shelter. Briefly, their right to development is being
targeted unjustifiably by the wholly antagonistic will of
the hegemonic Powers, as reflected in some of the
Council’s resolutions. Indeed, the main feature of
sanctions turns out to be a tool to impose the
hegemonic intentions of some big Powers on other
nations and populations, under the pretext of spurring
international peace and security. Therefore, economic
sanctions, whosoever imposes them and under any
pretext or disguise whatsoever, remain illegitimate,
futile and misguidedly punitive.
The Council’s adoption of a new and constructive
approach to the issue of development will very much
depend on a reform of its structure and modus operandi
in order to balance to the rights and responsibilities of
its permanent members.
I would like to add in conclusion that there are, of
course, valuable lessons that need to be learned from
the causes of conflict in order to promote durable peace
and sustainable development. However, there is no
straightjacket formula. The causes of conflict and
underdevelopment in the Middle East, for instance,
may not necessarily share features with those in Africa.
Thus, the measures to be taken to prevent conflict and
advance on the road to development should accord
with the peculiarities and specificities of each and
every situation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): Georgia commends
Brazil’s timely initiative in organizing this open debate,
which is aimed at addressing one of the most
challenging matters before the United Nations. We are
also grateful for the incisive concept paper prepared by
the presidency of the Council (S/2011/50).
While Georgia has aligned itself with the
statement made by the Acting Head of the delegation

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

of the European Union, I would like to take this
opportunity to stress some additional points.

subsequent action plan, which envisage development
and improvement in all fields of social life.

My delegation shares the view of the entire
United Nations family that security and development,
along with human rights, are inseparable and mutually
reinforcing notions. It is obvious that no development
agenda can be fully realized in the presence of security
restrictions and that, vice versa, genuine security will
never be achieved without a development.
Interdependence is evident; development contributes to
greater security and security creates an environment
conducive to development.

We believe these decisions and commitments will
inevitably contribute to the process of securing peace
and stability in Georgia and will peacefully challenge
the existing status quo established by the use of force.
Obviously, these efforts should advance in concert with
the international community’s strong engagement.

In this context, many speakers today have
comprehensively described examples of how
development issues impact the core aspects of peace
and security. Georgia could not add more, but
subscribes to the positions expressed by the other
delegations. At the same time, we are convinced that
special attention has to be paid in our deliberations to
the impact of an insecure environment on the
development agenda. It is crystal clear that instability
and volatility have harmful effects on all aspects of
national development agendas.
My country is a vivid example of this. Lack of
security, a general atmosphere of chaos and
lawlessness, ethnically-based and other gross human
rights violations, as well as thriving organized crime in
the occupied territories of Georgia, have an overall
harmful effect on all major aspects of the national
development agenda, especially within the occupied
territories
themselves.
Economic
and
social
development, general healthcare, natural resource
management, environment protection and other areas
are challenged. The ongoing occupation and continuing
violation of the ceasefire agreement by the occupying
Power make it enormously difficult to bring these
disturbing developments to an end.
Nevertheless, these dire conditions can in no way
serve as an excuse for Georgia to just settle with
blame-shifting and to give up efforts to move forward.
To this end, Georgia has undertaken the unilateral
obligation not to use force and thus contribute to
facilitating the establishment of secure conditions in
the occupied territories. Moreover, in order to assist
human development in those regions of Georgia, the
Government adopted the State Strategy on Occupied
Territories: Engagement through Cooperation and a

11-23198

My delegation hopes that all the views, proposals
and individual experiences expressed during today’s
debate will be adequately followed up and translated
into concrete action, which can strengthen peace,
security and development worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to express my delegation’s
satisfaction with your timely initiative, Madame
President, to convene today’s open debate in the
Security Council on the maintenance of peace and
international security and the interdependence between
security and development. This initiative under the
presidency of Brazil in the Security Council and the
leadership of its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, clearly reflects the concern of the
international community to tackle in greater depth the
existing links between security and development and
their relationship with successful peacebuilding
strategies in post-conflict situations.
El Salvador, as a post-conflict country that has
gone through a peacebuilding process with the support
of the international community, recognizes the
importance of considering this issue, primarily because
we see that the root of conflicts can most often be
found in the inability of States and their political
classes to offer a timely and appropriate response to the
basic needs of the population while at the same time
taking into account criteria for inclusion and social
justice.
In this context, I recall the recognition by our
heads of State and Government, at the Millennium
Summit and at the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals, that peace and
security, development and human rights are the pillars
of the United Nations system and the foundations for
collective security and well-being. They also

41

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

recognized that development, peace and security and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
El Salvador has taken note of the debates held by
the Security Council in the past with regard to the
interrelations among the maintenance of peace,
peacebuilding and the need to adopt a broad and
comprehensive approach to the issue of peace and
security.
We agree with other delegations that the
convening of today’s debate, in particular, can help
further clarify Member States’ vision of how better to
provide a climate for cooperation and complementarity
among the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. El Salvador
welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in that regard and centres its hopes on the
concrete contributions of the PBC in its countryspecific configurations showing the potential for
continually strengthening synergies among the various
main bodies of the Organization.
The complexity and depth of the challenges
facing many developing countries — particularly with
regard to the insecurity of citizens, drug-trafficking,
transnational organized crime and gangs — mean that
we need to reflect on the urgent need to promote
strategies that provide effective security for all with
freedom for all and equity among all. The security of
citizens is therefore essential for human development.
As was quite rightly pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral, Ban Ki-moon, “Without development, we will
not have security, and without security, we will not
achieve development.”
The way in which this issue is tackled in the
international
sphere
primarily
involves
the
complementary efforts of dialogue and coordination
among the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council on the one hand, and
the active role of Member States themselves, civil
society and international organizations, as strategic
allies, on the other.
Finally, El Salvador trusts that the Security
Council will continue to pay attention to these
considerations, which surely will contribute to the
future success of its work in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.

42

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to first congratulate you,
Madame President, your country and your delegation
for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We know that the
experience and leadership of Brazil, a sister country in
our region and an important partner in the sustainable
development of Nicaragua, predicts the success of the
work of the Council this month. We also welcome the
noble determination and energy of Brazil in this
initiative to convene this open debate on the
maintenance of international peace and security,
interdependence between security and development.
At the outset, I wish to align myself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
In this debate, during which we are called on to
reflect on the interdependence between security and
development, we should, as a starting point, take into
account the functions, powers and responsibilities of
each of the United Nations bodies and their respective
agendas in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.
Issues related to development fall within the
purview of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. The primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
matter for the Security Council. The interdependence
between the issues of security and development
continues to be an open debate in which the entire
United Nations has a responsibility.
The complexity of peacekeeping operations
requires a slightly different approach than the current
one, an approach which takes into account the needs of
each situation for which such operations are being
mobilized. The full agreement and involvement of the
States affected are imperative.
We must continue to work to strengthen the
Peacebuilding Commission and ensure the efficient and
effective coordination with the States involved, the
General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the United Nations agencies.
Central America offers a clear example of the
options for resolving conflicts, and our experience —
both the good and the bad — should be taken into
account. The conflict that we experienced was the

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

result of foreign interference and wars of aggression,
but was resolved thanks to the determination of our
own peoples and the assistance of sister countries in
our region. In the end, without the presence of
foreigners in our region, we were able to reach peace
agreements that prioritized an approach based on the
need for sustainable development in order to begin the
demobilization process, which led to stability, peace
and security.
However, and with regard to the issue before us,
we should like to point out that, after the signing of the
peace accords, the development funds earmarked for
our region were not channelled to us as quickly or in
the amounts reserved as had been the funds provided
for the war against our people. Unfortunately, today we
see history repeating itself in other regions of the
world. The lack of security in Central America was
mentioned earlier today. Part of the problem is that we
do not have sufficient funding for development
projects.
Our commitment to security includes a
commitment to promoting human development,
defined as sustainable development with the human
being at its centre and carried out in an environment of
good governance and with direct civic participation in
conditions of social equity. All of these elements are
required for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and beyond. That includes, as a
priority of my Government, development in the most
underserved areas of Nicaragua with the goal of putting
an end to their historical exclusion. We refer here
specifically to the Río San Juan de Nicaragua area. Our
army’s ongoing presence in that area has been a
constant factor there for many years now. It guarantees
security in the context of the fight against drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. It is the
responsibility of our Government to ensure security for
our citizens throughout our national territory. We will
continue to exercise our sovereign right in this regard.
Moreover, and in order to guarantee sustainable
development for our people, our Government has
assumed its responsibilities by undertaking to dredge
and clean up the San Juan de Nicaragua River and to
open our historical access to the sea. This is being
carried out to enhance one of our most important
natural resources, which will secure the development
of that area and serve the well-being of our people.

11-23198

The interdependence between security and
development must take into account the balance
between the socio-economic realities of conflict and
post-conflict situations. This balance is necessary to
drawing up strategies in which development
programmes are the first weapons we must consider
and wield before we resort to weapons of war. At
times, that order has been reversed. Sustainable
development will ensure security, stability and,
ultimately, peace in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express our thanks and appreciation to you,
Madame President, for your constructive initiative to
organize this open debate to consider the
interdependence between security and development —
an issue of priority and a very significant question for
developing countries. I would also like to express my
thanks and appreciation for the concept paper prepared
in this connection (S/2011/50), particularly since the
Council, in accordance with its mandate, as enshrined
in the Charter, is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Security, as we understand it, hinges on the
consistent fulfilment of several goals, chief among
which is development. Development is the sum of
efforts to meet the basic needs of human beings for
food, health care, education, livelihood and other
requirements of a decent life. All of these are enshrined
in the Holy Quran, which says that God “has fed them,
[saving them] from hunger and made them safe,
[saving them] from fear” (The Holy Koran, CIV:4).
International awareness of the relationship
between security and development has been increasing
over the past decade, especially as a result of the
United Nations experience in peacekeeping missions in
many regions of the world. That experience has shown
that a purely military approach to the deployment of
peacekeeping operations will not achieve the desired
results. Development must be taken into consideration
in order to achieve peace.
Addressing the root causes of conflict is the most
important step that the Council can take, and should
enjoy special priority. As the Council is aware, there is
no conflict, civil war or internal strife in which the
development dimension does not somehow come into
play. There is no conflict, civil war or internal strife

43

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

that cannot be attributed to a lack of development,
which is the main reason for that conflict or civil war.
Certain natural factors have been compounded by
climate change and its impact on the livelihoods of all
human beings, whose requirements and means of
sustenance vary greatly. For instance, they may be
farmers or nomads, and that difference can lead to
conflict or feuding between them, negatively affecting
their economic and social development. Such a
situation can then deteriorate into conflict, as seen in
Darfur in my country and in other regions, adversely
affecting the lives and security of our citizens.
The Government of the Sudan has long been
aware of the relationship between security and
development. It has adopted a comprehensive strategy
to address the conflict in Darfur, the main pillars of
which are development, rehabilitation and recovery.
Our deliberations undoubtedly complement the
conclusions reached by the Council in its previous
debates, in particular that organized by France in
February 2010 to address transition and exit strategies
and the transition from conflict to stability and Statebuilding (see S/PV.6270). Those deliberations came to
the conclusion that the lack of development was the
main reason for the setbacks witnessed by many postconflict States that relapse into war.
In the open debates organized by the presidencies
of Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council
discussed comprehensive peacebuilding strategies with
a view to preventing the outbreak of conflict. In those
debates, all Council members emphasized the close
relationship between security and development.
All aspects of security, be they social, political or
economic, are important in efforts to enhance peace.
Peace is vital as a springboard for development. We in
the Sudan have learned our lessons. The civil war that
persisted in the southern part of the Sudan for more
than four decades, which we ended by signing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in January 2005,
hindered the development of our country and was the
main cause of the deterioration of our economy over
that period. Thus, more than any other nation, we are
aware of the destructive impact of conflict and its
negative repercussions on development.
I wish to stress the importance of the Security
Council’s adoption of a comprehensive strategy
combining peacekeeping activities and initiatives to
promote the political path and address the root causes

44

of conflict. In order to resolve issues remaining in the
aftermath of conflict, activities should be undertaken at
the outset of the transition from conflict settlement to
peacebuilding. Activating the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission will help to settle conflicts and ensure
reconciliation in a manner consistent with the
traditions of each country. That is the best way to
achieve peace, especially sustainable peace, and not
through mechanisms whose legal role can be called
into question, thereby entrenching conflict.
Beyond activating the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in seeking to achieve reconciliation the
Security Council should coordinate with United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Development Programme, in
implementing short-term, quick-impact projects to
meet the needs of all those affected by conflict, be they
combatants or internally displaced persons. The
Council should also assist in medium- and long-term
development projects in post-conflict regions, thereby
enabling those affected by conflict to regain their
livelihoods and establishing the main conditions for
stability.
In that connection, the Security Council should
play a coordinating role among the various organs. It
should not encourage the imposition of unilateral or
multilateral economic sanctions that would only fuel
and further complicate conflict at a time when our
priorities should be to address and resolve conflict and
achieve development.
I hope that the Security Council will address the
root causes of conflict, which are mainly developmentrelated. We call on the Council not to focus on the
symptoms of conflict and to waste no time or effort in
expressing its concern about those symptoms. We hope
that the Council will focus on coordination with other
bodies, the specialized agencies and the General
Assembly in addressing development issues in
countries in conflict or in post-conflict circumstances.
I would like to close by saying, Madame
President, that we appreciate your initiative. We wish
to stress the important responsibility of the United
Nations in general, the Security Council, international
partners, donors and the principal stakeholders in
providing all required financial and logistical support
to developing countries in the aftermath of conflict. We
believe that donors often organize conferences and
make generous pledges. But once peace agreements are

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

signed, they rarely honour those pledges. That paves
the way for the vicious cycle of poverty and recurring
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Madame President, for having organized this
meaningful open debate on the maintenance of
international
peace
and
security
and
the
interdependence between security and development.
This is the second open debate on this topic
following the fruitful meeting in September last year,
at which the Council highlighted the need to address
the underlying causes of conflict and noted that peace
and security, development and human rights are
intrinsically interlinked. Indeed, as we have witnessed
in the past few years with the convergence of the
global financial crisis, the food crisis and the energy
crisis, insecurity and conflict are often present in areas
that are lacking in development. Ways to address the
interdependence between security and development
should be faithfully pursued in a more comprehensive
and synergistic manner. This must include not only
problems that stem from the environment and food and
energy crises, but the overall issues of development as
well.
My delegation believes that underdevelopment is
the root cause of insecurity and conflict and that it
must continue to be engaged by a variety of
stakeholders including the Council, the General
Assembly , the United Nations Development
Programme, international financial institutions and
civil society. By harnessing our collective efforts on
elevating sustained, long-lasting development today,
we can, in effect, tackle the root causes of the security
conflicts of tomorrow. In this regard, the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) should continue to be the
centre of United Nations efforts, and United Nations
leadership should be further strengthened in ensuring
sustained political support and mobilizing collective
efforts towards the MDGs.
One tangible way that this could be pursued is to
actively focus on promoting employment opportunities
for youth. This would give many young people in
regions of insecurity another option beyond joining
armed groups, who are often the only providers of
immediate wages and sustenance. As such,

11-23198

development, and especially economic development,
must be pursued in a sustained, inclusive and equitable
manner. This is the best way to ensure that the world is
both more secure and peaceful for both current and
future generations.
In this connection, the Republic of Korea
believes that the Seoul Development Consensus for
Shared Growth, an integral part of the recent Group of
Twenty (G-20) Summit in Seoul, could be a helpful
guiding force as we strive to create a more secure
world. In this regard, we look forward to concrete
follow-up measures to the Seoul Consensus being
taken under the French leadership of the G-20 this
year.
In May, another important international forum
focusing on development issues will be held, namely,
the fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries in Istanbul. We hope that steps
will be taken in the right direction with the preparatory
process of Conference, focusing on the overwhelming
vulnerabilities and situations of insecurity affecting the
development of least developed countries — those
living with extreme poverty, hunger and inequality.
Only in a stable security environment is sustained
development possible. In this regard, not only
peacekeeping but also preventative diplomacy and
peacebuilding activities can play an integral role in
buttressing the security environment in various
situations, with a view towards ensuring sustained
development.
Likewise, an essential goal of peacebuilding is to
provide a blueprint for the political and socio-economic
development of the recipient country in a post-conflict
situation. Each situation is different, however, and any
peacekeeping and/or peacebuilding activity must be
undertaken with early engagement, clear mandates and
tangible exit strategies. Economic and social
opportunities are also possible through various
peacebuilding initiatives, including the establishment of
good governance and the rule of law, and also through
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes and security sector reform activities. Such
integrated strategies in post-conflict situations can be
useful tools in bridging the gap from insecurity to
development.
The Republic of Korea has learned from its own
experience about the interlinked challenges of
development and security. During a period of extreme

45

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

insecurity, we suffered from crippling and
interconnected underdevelopment. However, with the
support of the United Nations and the international
community, Korea, once one of the world’s poorest
countries, with a lower gross domestic product per
capita than many sub-Saharan African nations in the
early 1960s, was able to recover from the ashes of war
and successfully rebuild itself into a flourishing
democracy with a vibrant market-based economy
within just one generation. I sincerely hope that the
United Nations and Member States will work closely
together to turn the various ideas we have proposed
today into concrete action. For its part, the Republic of
the Korea will devote its utmost efforts to this end.
The President: I now give the floor to
representative of the Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations.
Mrs. Mungwa: On behalf of His Excellency
Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, who is away
from New York this week, I would like to begin by
joining previous speakers in commending you,
Madame President, for having organized this debate on
the
interdependence
between
security
and
development, a theme of paramount importance to
Africa as a developing region. The organization of this
open debate is not only a mark of strong political
support for this theme by the Council; it also illustrates
the role the Council plays in generating new ideas to
boost related efforts being made by Member States,
bilateral and multilateral donors, United Nations
agencies and regional organizations such as the African
Union in its overall work for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We are grateful for the leadership of His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Minister of
External Relations of Brazil, who travelled to New
York to preside over this meeting in person, and for the
participation of the Secretary-General, the Ministers
from Germany, Colombia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Portugal, India, Gabon, Costa Rica and Slovenia and
the various other participants who made statements
during this debate.
As the Security Council is aware, several
countries in Africa have been the theatre of conflict
linked to factors such as the illegal exploitation of
resources, poverty and a lack of economic
empowerment opportunities, unconstitutional changes

46

of Government, often conducted with backing from
illegal criminal networks, and a lack of opportunity,
overall in particular for young people.
A new dawn has emerged in Africa, however,
following intense efforts deployed by the continent to
assume its share of responsibility for its own security
and development. This new vision of renaissance and
growth is set out in the Constitutive Act of the African
Union and other instruments of the organization, which
clearly assert the interdependence between security and
development. One is not possible without the other, as
has been affirmed by a number of speakers during this
debate.
The African Union therefore, right from its
launch, explicitly recognized that the persistence of
conflict would undermine its broad democracy and
development agenda, and therefore adopted a proactive
approach to resolving conflicts in the continent. This
approach emphasizes early response to potential
conflict situations and active mediation on the
continent in order to avert potential conflict situations.
Furthermore, the policy shift from non-interference, as
practiced by the former Organization of African Unity,
to one of non-indifference in the African Union is a
clear mark of Africa’s commitment to eliminating the
phenomenon
of
unconstitutional
changes
of
Government that often lead to instability and
insecurity, thus undermining democratic governance
and development on the continent.
The
African
Union
approach
on
the
interdependence of security and development also
underscores the core imperative of addressing the root
causes of conflict in order to ensure social justice and
thus attain sustainable development. Furthermore, the
objectives of the Union’s principles, as set out in
articles 3 and 4 of its Constitutive Act, include clear
provisions for the promotion of democratic institutions
and respect for human rights, the rule of law and
gender equality in order to strengthen popular
participation and democracy. This is also vividly
captured in the human security and development
approach embraced by the African Union, which
establishes the linkage between the financial and
political stability of the State and the physical and
psychological security of its people.
Though much remains to be done, Africa, with
the support of the international community, has made
significant progress in the ardent pursuit of this vision

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

for security and development, both through
thematically-focused
initiatives
and
integrated
programmes and projects. These include the
multilayered and synergized continent-wide peace and
security architecture of the African Union, which
comprises the Peace and Security Council supported by
the Continental Early Warning System, the African
Peer Review Mechanism, the Panel of the Wise and the
African Standby Force, to name just a few.
The experience of Africa in its peace support
operations in contexts including Burundi, Chad, and
currently Somalia, has illustrated that military and
security services can indeed work in conjunction with
civilian stakeholders to achieve socio-economic
stability and recovery through the implementation of
quick-impact projects incorporated within peace
support missions, which should therefore be supported.
These provide early peace dividends to local people
and help in confidence-building and reconciliation,
which are prerequisites for attaining sustainable peace
and development in such situations.
The Continental Early Warning System of the
African Union in particular is designed to ensure that
development trends that could undermine or trigger
insecurity are detected and addressed in a timely and
preventive manner. This also emphasizes the
importance of communications capability to the nexus
between security and development.
The Panel of the Wise was established to draw on
the wisdom and experiences of Africans with track
records in addressing peace and security issues in order
to provide early engagement with emerging situations
of concern to prevent conflict from erupting and
sapping already limited resources from development.
However, it has also been well established that
predictable and sustainable funding is crucial both for
timely and effective conflict prevention and for the
long-term consolidation of peace in order to sustain an
environment conducive to development.
Ongoing processes of security sector reform
should also help to enhance professionalization of the
security sector, for instance to enable engineering and
service corps to increase their contributions to national
efforts to address the social and development needs of
their peoples.
The African Union Border Programme, which has
been mentioned by a number of speakers, is also
seeking to address the challenges of secure movement

11-23198

around the continent and to help curb the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as well as
other illicit transborder activities that fuel conflict and
undermine development in a number of areas around
the continent.
As has been underscored by several speakers, the
African Union fully shares the view that post-conflict
reconstruction and development constitute a key track
for promoting integrated security and development
objectives in countries emerging from conflict. It is
within this context that the African Post-Conflict
Reconstruction Policy Framework was adopted within
just three years of the launch of the African Union.
Related efforts, such as those of the African Ministerial
Committee on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development in the Sudan, clearly demonstrate both
the feasibility and the benefits of linking security and
development in such contexts.
In the same vein, we continue to express the
appreciation of the African Union to the Peacebuilding
Commission for its efforts on the five African countries
on its agenda, and in particular for the leadership of
Brazil, which has been crucial to the advances we have
seen in a number of situations.
Having said that, we are also aware that the
Millennium
Declaration
and
the
Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) process have revealed the
extent to which Africa remains vulnerable due to the
persistent socio-economic and development challenges
it faces — a situation that has been exacerbated by the
financial and economic crisis. Current trends indicate
that several African countries are unlikely to attain the
MDGs by the target date of 2015. The African Union
therefore seizes this opportunity to underscore the
importance of ensuring that all possible steps are taken
to help the African States to meet the MDGs in order
eliminate some of the socio-economic and root causes
of instability and insecurity in a number of countries
on the continent.
On its part, the African Union launched the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development to implement its
vision of renaissance and growth, and we seize this
opportunity to underscore the importance of stronger
support from the United Nations and international
community for its implementation. In this context, the
African Union also continues to develop partnerships
with various bilateral and multilateral actors and with
the African diaspora, civil society and expert

47

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

organizations, through which development and security
are increasingly considered in an interlinked and
integrated approach.
Furthermore, in its efforts to address some of the
factors impeding the mobilization of resources for the
continent’s financial security and development, the
African Union is currently conducting preparatory
processes towards establishment of pan-African
financial institutions, as provided for in article 19 of
the Constitutive Act of the Union. These include three
key institutions — the African Central Bank; the
African Monetary Fund, to be based in Yaoundé,
Cameroon; the African Investment Bank to be based in
Abuja, Nigeria — and a pan-African stock exchange.
The African Union is counting on the support of the
international community for the successful launch of
these institutions in order to harness the nexus between
security and development.
In conclusion, we wish to note that, in its
observance of 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security
in Africa, the African Union launched various peace
and security initiatives that brought together
Government, private sector and civil society actors.
This experience confirmed the view that opportunities
abound for promoting linkages between security and
development on the continent. Therefore, enhanced
assistance is essential for regional organizations such
as the African Union so that they may fully develop the
capacity to leverage such opportunities in order to
promote development on the continent. The African
Union thus re-iterates its readiness to continue to
participate in policy debates such as that today in the
Council, and to implement in the field related
opportunities arising within the continent and in
partnership of the United Nations and international
partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me at the outset
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely
debate on security and development.
We endorse the statement made my Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
These deliberations will no doubt further inform
our thinking on this crucial area and in our view are
key to addressing security issues. Today’s discussions
will help us to expand our focus beyond the Security

48

Council’s primary responsibility
international peace and security.

of

maintaining

Sri Lanka’s Government recognized very early
that security and development went together. As the
Secretary-General has said, without development,
security will soon become untenable, and security is an
essential element of development. In fact, successive
Governments acknowledged that development was a
key element in countering the security threat posed to
my country by the terrorist group, the LTTE.
Accordingly, over the years significant attention was
given to a complex range of economic development
initiatives.
Recognizing the importance of education in this
approach, successive Governments, while maintaining
funding for education elsewhere in the country, never
reduced the funding and support provided to schools in
areas then dominated by the LTTE, despite the
consistent threat of children being recruited as child
combatants by the terrorist group. As we know,
UNICEF records indicate that over 5,700 children were
recruited as child combatants by the LTTE. The
number may have been much higher.
Similarly, conscious of the need to maintain
health standards throughout the country, the
Government continued to pump significant resources
into areas dominated by the LTTE to maintain
hospitals, clinics and medical staff.
Once the conflict ended, the Government became
even more conscious of the need to expedite
development and paid special attention to rehabilitation
and reconstruction. Hundreds of miles of paved roads
linking villages to towns were constructed. The
national electricity grid was extended to many remote
areas of the country, and bridges were built. Foreign
direct investors were encouraged to locate their
businesses away from the capital. Special attention is
being paid to reviving agriculture, fisheries and
tourism in the formerly conflict-affected areas. These
efforts are bearing significant results.
The economic policies of the Government have
borne fruit. Despite the fact that the 27 years of
conflict cost the country $200 billion in lost
opportunities, the per capita income doubled between
2005 and 2010 as Sri Lanka became a middle income
country. Ninety-seven per cent of our children attend
primary schools. Maternal mortality and child
mortality have dropped to an all-time low level.

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

Inflation and unemployment are at a record low, and
absolute poverty has decreased to 8.7 per cent.
Those indicators are clear evidence of
Government policies that recognize economic
development as a vital precondition to achieving
security and normalcy. In fact, stability and economic
development were used as incentives to encourage the
Tamil civilians to leave the grip of the LTTE during the
conflict. In 2007 and 2008, over 60,000 Tamil civilians
fled the LTTE-dominated areas to live in the south of
the country.
The same economic focus has been maintained by
the Government since the end of the conflict in May
2009. Since then, despite dire predictions of the longterm concentration of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in camps and of hunger, malnutrition and
disease, the Government, convinced of the need to
restore economic activity in the formerly conflictaffected areas, has successfully returned 95 per cent of
the IDPs to their own villages and towns within a very
short period. The Government recognized early that
keeping the IDPs in camps was a costly proposition,
both in dollars and public relations, and that it would
be much better to make them economically active in
their own villages as early as possible. The
Government will continue to provide assistance to
those people so that they may resume normal economic
activities.
There have been no instances of diseases.
Malnutrition is no higher among the people who
returned to their villages from the IDP camps than in
certain other areas of the country, and it is currently the
subject of a broad study.
The Government recognizes that problems still
remain. While many irrigation canals have been
repaired, hundreds of miles of roads have been
reconstructed and electricity supplies have been
restored or connected, much more needs to be done to
restore the lives and livelihoods of the displaced to a
reasonable level, including by clearing mines from
villages. The unprecedented floods that have inundated
the lands of the same unfortunate people have put the
clock back on our targets. But Sri Lanka has clearly
recognized that economic development is a key to
ensuring security, restoring stability and rekindling
hope for the future among the conflict-affected people.
My delegation is of the view that better
education, social advancement and economic

11-23198

development are key to addressing the root causes of
violence. Our focus on those areas needs to be
maintained. The multilateral system, led by the United
Nations, must enhance coordination, cooperation and
effective action with the goal of supporting
development as a key element of ensuring security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
initiative to hold this open debate on the
interdependence between security and development.
This debate indeed offers an opportunity to advance the
already intense international dialogue on the issue,
taking into consideration the conclusions reached by
relevant recent discussions in the Security Council.
A number of key issues in conflict and postconflict situations need to be dealt with from the
perspectives of both security and development.
Acknowledging the interdependence between security
and development, we are determined to contribute to
the realization of the development goals and objectives
agreed within the United Nations. The Government of
Azerbaijan is committed to fostering global
cooperation in all spheres, paying particular attention
to addressing the special needs of those suffering
protracted conflicts and recovering from natural
disasters.
Despite the scourge of war and the devastating
consequences of military aggression, Azerbaijan is
fully committed to, and making sustained efforts for,
maintaining international peace, security, stability and
development. My Government has successfully
launched and is implementing a number of important
regional development and infrastructure projects,
which regional stakeholders benefit from and lay the
foundation for long-term peace, stability and
prosperity.
As the concept paper on the subject (see
S/2011/50) points out, not all peoples facing
development challenges and suffering from poverty
resort to violence. Indeed, certain political and
ideological concepts, as well as historical stereotypes,
can contribute to the eruption or protraction of, or
relapse into, conflict, thus inevitably affecting in the
first place development interests and imposing
unnecessary burdens. We need to work on addressing
all the root causes of conflict, taking into account that

49

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

development, peace, security, human rights and the rule
of law are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
The major aggravating factor and the main source
of instability in the South Caucasus are obviously
protracted armed conflicts, which represent a
permanent and direct threat to the security,
independence and development of the States of the
region. It is obvious that ensuring security, stability
and development in the region will be possible once we
are able to achieve a resolution of the conflicts in a
committed manner.
As the joint declaration of the Republic of
Armenia, the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Russian
Federation signed on 2 November 2008 clearly states, a
political settlement will create favourable conditions
for economic development and comprehensive
cooperation in the region. Indeed, the resolution of the
conflict, resulting in putting an end to the occupation
of the territories of Azerbaijan and ensuring the return
of the forcibly displaced population to its places of
origin, is an essential precondition to mutually
beneficial cooperation and the implementation of
development agendas. It is obvious that there can be no
development without peace, which, at the same time, is
unrealistic without justice and respect for sovereignty,
human rights and the rule of law.
The Government of Azerbaijan has repeatedly
stated, in the context of the conflict settlement process,
that it is ready to assist with the rebuilding of
infrastructure and economic development in all
possible ways, including the attraction of investment at
the local level. The earlier wisdom prevails over
illusion, the sooner the peoples of the region will be
able to benefit from peace, stability and development.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Brazil on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on organizing this debate on such an
important issue as the interdependence between
security and development.
During this debate, many very interesting
statements on the topic have been made. Unfortunately,
I must point out that this discussion also included a

50

statement from the representative of Georgia. It is not
difficult to understand that, in a Security Council
debate, factual and legal clarity on that statement is
needed. There was mention of the occupied territories
of Georgia. If we say that, logically there is reference
to Abkhazia and South Ossetia, that is, those countries
and peoples that suffered the aggression of Georgia in
the early 1990s and in August 2008.
If we talk about that from the legal standpoint, of
course, it cannot involve occupation. Indeed,
recognizing the sovereignty of those States, Russia
reached agreement with them on mutual assistance and
took responsibility for the security of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia and for the safety of their peoples.
However, there is no occupying regime there. Their
Government is being ensured by the authorities of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, in accordance with the
democratic will of their peoples.
The representative of Georgia referred to
Georgia’s pledge not to use force against Abkhazia and
South Ossetia. Of course, Mr. Saakashvili made such a
statement and, furthermore, he sent a letter on the issue
to the Secretary-General. Most important, there was
also letter by the authorities of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia to the Secretary-General. They were circulated
as official documents of the Security Council. I hope
that members of the Council and all members of our
Organization have read them. They provided an
opportunity to read about what Russia has said for
many years, that is, that before the August 2008
conflict, and after it, a regime of mutual legal
obligations between Georgia and Abkhazia and South
Ossetia on the non-use of force had been established.
Mr. Saakashvili also said publicly — he spoke on
the radio — that he invited the inhabitants of Georgia
to celebrate the next new year in Sukhumi, the capital
of Abkhazia. Of course, that could only give rise to
serious doubt about the intentions of that politician,
who, as is known, had already often broken his
promises.
Recently, we have said much about the fact that
politicians sometimes must work in the interests of
their people. Mr. Saakashvili committed a criminal act
with regard to the invasion of South Ossetia and, thus,
infringed that. The authorities of Georgia have
unpredictable policies and the Georgian people are
suffering with regard to their prospects for
development.

11-23198

S/PV.6479 (Resumption 1)

The President: The representative of Georgia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tsiskarashvili
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): The Russian
Federation attempts to downplay the importance of the
pledge of non-use of force made by the President of
Georgia on 23 November in the European Parliament,
and later reinforced in the letters to the heads of
various international organizations, including the
Secretary-General.
The pledge of Georgia not to use force against the
Russian occupying forces and the proxy regimes in the
name of restoring Georgia’s territorial integrity
remains an international legal obligation of Georgia no
matter how Russia tries to downplay its significance.
Georgia is seriously committed to pursuing a peaceful
agenda towards its occupied regions, as exemplified by
the calls to engage in dialogue with Russian
authorities, as well as with the populations of the
occupied regions.
Russia needs to start living up to its obligations
under international law. By continuing the policy of
violating Georgia’s territorial integrity, by breaching
the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement, by further

11-23198

militarizing the occupied regions, by rejecting all
offers of dialogue and by pursuing aggressive military
rhetoric against Georgia, Russia will hardly manage to
change the perception of my country that Russia is a
hostile State.
I would like here to remind representatives that
Russia committed military aggression against Georgia
in 2008. It continues to occupy 20 per cent of
Georgia’s territory. Russia committed ethnic cleansing
of ethnic Georgians in 2008. All those violations are
duly reflected in the findings of the International
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in
Georgia, led by the Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini.
Moreover, the Russian Federation’s decision to
recognize the so-called independence of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia was considered a serious breach of
international law by the international Fact-Finding
Mission.
Finally, the illegal military presence of Russia
and its effective control of the occupied territories of
Georgia make the Russian Federation an occupying
Power, and all the responsibility for the situation in the
occupied territories lies with Russia.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

51
