S/PV.9114

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9114th meeting

Tuesday, 23 August 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Geng Shuang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Ms. Muigai
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Alkaabi
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-46918 (E)
*2246918*

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The United Nations remains gravely
concerned about the dangerous situation in and around
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in southern
Ukraine. The plant continues to be operated by
Ukrainian technical personnel but has been under the
control of the military forces of the Russian Federation
since early March. In early August, disturbing reports
of an escalation of shelling around the plant began to
emerge. The Secretary-General has appealed to all
concerned to exercise common sense and reason and
to refrain from undertaking any actions that might
endanger the physical integrity, safety or security of the
nuclear plant — Europe’s largest.
On 15 August, the Secretary-General discussed the
issue of the plant’s safety during a call with Russian
Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu. On 18 August,
during his visit to Lviv, he discussed the situation
with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. In
all his statements and meetings, the Secretary-General
has continued to call for all military activities in the
immediate vicinity of the plant to cease immediately
and for all sides to refrain from targeting its facilities
or surroundings. All military personnel and equipment
must be withdrawn from the plant. There should be no
further deployment of forces or equipment to the site.
The facility must not be used as part of any military
operation, and an agreement on a safe perimeter of
demilitarization to ensure the safety of the area should
be reached.
2/15

23/08/2022

Regrettably, despite numerous calls and appeals,
instead of de-escalation, we continue to see the almost
daily reports of alarming incidents involving the plant.
Today the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) renewed his request to send an
Agency mission to carry out essential safety, security
and safeguard activities at the site. Preparations for
the mission are proceeding, and the IAEA is in active
consultations with all parties concerning its efforts to
send such a mission as soon as possible. We welcome
Ukraine and Russia’s recent statements indicating
support for the IAEA’s aim to send a mission to the
plant, which would be its first to that site since the start
of the war.
Common sense must prevail to avoid any actions
that might endanger the physical integrity, safety or
security of the plant. As the Secretary-General stressed
in his briefing before the Security Council yesterday
(see S/PV.9112), the commitment to dialogue and results
must be applied to the critical situation at the plant. If
such incidents continue or escalate, we could face a
disaster. The United Nations continues to fully support
the critical work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and its efforts to ensure the safe operation of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and other nuclear
facilities in Ukraine.
In close contact with the IAEA, the United
Nations has assessed that we have the logistics and
security capacity in Ukraine to support any IAEA
mission to the plant from Kyiv, provided that Ukraine
and Russia agree. We once again urge the parties to
provide the IAEA mission with immediate, secure and
unfettered access to the site. Agreement is urgently
needed to re-establish Zaporizhzhya as purely civilian
infrastructure and to ensure the safety of the area. We
must be clear that any potential damage to the plant
or any other nuclear facilities in Ukraine leading to
a possible nuclear incident would have catastrophic
consequences not only for the immediate vicinity, but
for the region and beyond.
Similarly, any damage leading to the plant being cut
from the Ukrainian power grid would have catastrophic
humanitarian implications, particularly with winter
approaching. As the Secretary-General has made clear,
the electricity produced at the Zaporizhzhya plant
belongs to Ukraine. At this moment, it is imperative
that we receive the express commitment of the parties
to stop any military activities around the plant to enable
its continued safe and secure operations. To paraphrase
22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the Secretary-General’s blunt warning, any potential
damage to Zaporizhzhya is suicidal.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing. In the context of that briefing,
I would like to point out that we heard her say that the
electricity of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
belongs to Ukraine. Nevertheless, we would like to
draw the Council’s attention to the fact that we have
not heard such words from the Secretariat regarding the
frozen Russian assets in the West or the Syrian oil that
is being stolen by the American authorities illegally
occupying Syria.
About two weeks have passed since the most recent
meeting of the Security Council on the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant (see S/PV.9109). In the course
of that time, nuclear safety has further deteriorated.
The Armed Forces of Ukraine continue shelling the
territory of the nuclear power plant and the town of
Enerhodar practically every day. That creates a real
risk of a radiation accident in the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, with catastrophic consequences for the
entire European continent.
According to information available to the Russian
Ministry of Defence and the civil-military administration
of the Zaporizhzhya oblast, on 11 August, the fortyfourth artillery brigade of the Armed Forces of Ukraine
shelled the station with 152-millimetre guns, damaging
the equipment of the spray pools of the nuclear reactor’s
cooling system.
On 14 August, the Armed Forces of Ukraine fired
10 shells at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
with 155-millimetre shells from American-made M777
howitzers, and launched two guided munitions. As a
result of the shelling of the city of Enerhodar, one person
died and another was wounded. On 15 August, 30 shells
were fired from 152-millimetre guns. On 17 August,
11 shells were launched, in addition to a Polish-made
kamikaze unmanned aerial vehicle. Three strikes were
made by loitering munitions on Enerhodar.
On 18 August, Enerhodar was shelled seven times
with heavy artillery. On 20 August, strikes on the
station were made from Ukrainian positions using

S/PV.9114

heavy artillery and American-made 155-millimetre
shells using American-made M379 fuses. An artillery
strike was carried out in the area of special buildings 1
and 2, as well as the laboratory and amenities building.
As a result, the building of the laboratory and amenities
building 2 were damaged, as was the hydraulics-unit
building and the station lighting. Immediately after the
shelling, fire was opened on the suburbs of Enerhodar.
On 22 August, an unmanned aerial vehicle attacked
the area of laboratory building 2. Furthermore,
American long-range artillery was used to shell the
thermal tower station in Enerhodar. According to our
information, one civilian died and one was wounded.
I want to show the Council a photograph of the
destruction of the territory of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant as a result of shelling by the Armed
Forces of Ukraine. We have a whole collection of
such photographic evidence, and we distributed it this
morning as official documents of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.
The fact that the Kyiv regime is not stopping its
attacks on the station is a direct consequence of the
criminal acquiescence of its Western patrons. At the
most recent meeting, not a single Western delegation
had the courage to condemn the shelling of the plant
by the Ukrainian armed forces and to call on the Kyiv
regime to stop it. Neither was such courage found in the
European capitals, only absurd appeals to Russia to stop
some “recent actions around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant” It seems that our colleagues exist in some
parallel reality, in which the Russian military itself is
shelling the station that it is protecting, using American
systems. The pinnacle of that absurdity was the recent
statements by British parliamentarian Tobias Ellwood
and United States House of Representatives member
Adam Kinzinger that the shelling of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant could be a reason to invoke article
5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.
At the same time, the Western mass media is using
the conclusions of the United States Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency that the shelling of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant is not dangerous
for the population of Western Europe and that, even
in the case of a hypothetical accident, there would be
no large-scale catastrophe because the station should
withstand the rocket strike, and even if it fails, the
radioactive plume would not reach Western Europe.
The fact that, even in the least destructive scenario,

22-469183/15

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

the population of the Zaporizhzhya oblast will suffer,
our Western colleagues are apparently ready, as usual,
to consider it collateral damage. That shows their
concern for human rights and people-centred security,
that the Western delegations told us so much about at
yesterday’s Council meeting (see S/PV.9112).
That cynical attitude towards the population of
Ukraine is further evidence that the Western handlers
in Kyiv are not at all concerned about their fate and are
ready to fight to the last Ukrainian.
We have thus far been able to avoid catastrophes
resulting from the shelling of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant by the Armed Forces of Ukraine
thanks to the joint and well-coordinated work of the
plant’s personnel, firefighters, emergency crews and
Russian military personnel, who are helping them in
any way they can. That confirms that there is a healthy
working atmosphere at the plant and that no one is
harassing anyone.
Contrary to the false statements of the Kyiv regime
and its handlers, Russia is not placing heavy weapons
on the premises of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and is not using the plant for military purposes.
The Russian Ministry of Defence is ready to provide
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) highresolution images that show that no weapons, let alone
heavy weapons, have been placed there.
Recently, Secretary-General Guterres visited
Ukraine. We pinned certain hopes on his visit. We
expected that the United Nations would firmly demand
that Kyiv stop shelling the station. But we have not
heard any condemnation of what is going on from
Mr. Guterres, other than appeals for military actions to
bypass the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
I would like to ask Ms. DiCarlo whether the
Secretary-General managed to obtain a promise from
Volodymyr Zelensky to stop shelling the plant. What
does the Secretariat make of the fact that the shelling
of the plant by Ukraine is continuing in the light
of the grave concern expressed by the IAEA about
the situation?
From day one, we have supported the efforts of
the IAEA and its Director General, Rafael Grossi, to
organize a mission to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. We did all we could to ensure that the visit of
the IAEA experts to the plant could take place as early
as June, and we had already agreed to that mission by
4/15

23/08/2022

3 June. The trip was then cancelled through no fault
of our own. Today we hear absurd speculation in the
foreign press that Western countries almost forced
Russia’s to consent to the mission. We expect that the
IAEA mission will nevertheless take place in the near
future and that Agency experts will be able to confirm
the real situation at the plant. We stand ready to extend
maximum assistance to resolve all organizational issues.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the tragedy that took
place near Moscow on 20 August — a vehicle driven
by Daria Dugina, a well-known independent journalist,
war correspondent and political scientist, was blown
up. Our competent authorities are conducting an
investigation. Preliminarily, they have established that
the Ukrainian secret services are behind that monstrous
crime. The direct perpetrator, who is affiliated with the
nationalist Azov Battalion, has been identified. She
managed to evade justice and escape to Estonia.
Daria Dugina was 29 years old. Her life was cut
short in its prime. Due to her professional activities,
the journalist had long been in the sights of Ukrainian
nationalists. Here is a photo from the infamous
“Peacemaker” website, which we have repeatedly
referenced. They are openly boasting about her
murder. As you can see, her photo is crossed out, with
the caption “liquidated”. We note that this crime was
condemned by an official representative of the United
States Department of State.
We call on the Council and the United Nations
leadership to strongly condemn this latest crime by the
Kyiv regime. Not only are they using nuclear blackmail
by shelling the nuclear power plant and holding people
in Europe hostage, but they also crossed all of the lines
and are now physically eliminating the civilians they do
not like, who are foreign citizens. And in this case the
victim was an independent journalist, killed because of
her professional activity. The official representatives of
the Kyiv regime are calling openly for the murder of
Russians. Pyotr Vrublevsky, Ukraine’s Ambassador to
Kazakhstan, stated publicly not long ago that Ukraine’s
goal is to kill as many Russians as possible. According
to him, the more Russians who are killed now, the fewer
there will be left for future generations of Ukrainians
to have to kill.
We are shocked that not only do the Western
countries not condemn this, but they are helping the
Ukrainian special services train subversive saboteurs
22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

to exterminate so-called undesirables. A clear example
of that is that of Yevgeniy Karpenko, a Ukrainian
citizen who was recruited by the Ukrainian special
services in the Czech Republic and trained to lay mines
at a military base in the Czech city of Český Krumlov.
He was taught to plant explosives in buildings and cars
and then sent to the Donetsk people’s republic to carry
out a terrorist act in a Volodarsk district administrative
building. Fortunately, Karpenko turned himself in,
but if he had done what he had planned, the scale of
the potential civilian casualties is frightening even
to imagine.
In that context, it is no longer surprising that the
Czech authorities have crossed the bounds of every
moral standard and have been openly gloating about the
death of Darya Dugina. Jana Černochová, the Czech
Minister of Defence, said that she did not feel sorry
for Darya or her father and that the night of 21 August
will long be remembered in Russia. She has since
confirmed that she stands behind every word. But even
putting aside morality, which has long been eclipsed
by Russophobia among our Western colleagues,
Ms. Černochová’s statement essentially amounts to
open support and propaganda for acts of terror against
civilians. I would like to remind the Council that a
Czech citizen named Čermák who publicly supported a
terrorist act in the city of Christchurch in New Zealand
was sentenced to six years’ imprisonment in the Czech
Republic. We expect the competent Czech authorities to
treat their Minister of Defence’s statements with equal
seriousness and assess them accordingly.

S/PV.9114

responsibility for the attacks and other bombardments
targeting the Zaporizhzhya power plant.
In the meantime, it is crucial that the belligerents
respect the nuclear security rules in force and cooperate
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
with a view to securing the sites. We welcome the
intention expressed by the parties to facilitate the
conduct of an IAEA expert mission in Ukraine, and we
urge them to find common ground on the operational
modalities of the mission, which we all wish to see
as soon as possible. It is not acceptable to wait and
speculate about the potential risk of adding devastating
environmental and human health effects to the economic
and humanitarian impact.
After six months of war, suffering and destruction
in Ukraine, we think it is time to restore peace to the
heart of our priority agenda. My country encourages all
initiatives aimed at bringing the parties to the negotiating
table in order to achieve peaceful coexistence. As long
as the fighting continues, the situation in Ukraine will
surely continue to worsen. The surest way to ward off
a multifaceted security threat is to end the hostilities.
We encourage all political and diplomatic efforts
to stop the escalation, silence the guns and reach an
agreement on a lasting peace between the parties.
The recently concluded grain agreement is a source of
hope regarding the possibility of convening a ceasefire
agreement to pave the way for good-faith negotiations
on a return to sustainable peace. My country supports
all international and regional efforts aimed at restoring
peace in Ukraine.

Mr. Biang (Gabon): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her insightful briefing.

Mr. Alkaabi (United Arab Emirates): I would like
to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her timely briefing.

In recent weeks, the reports of the risk of a
possible nuclear accident in Ukraine have multiplied.
The intensification of military activity in the vicinity
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and the
allegations that the plant is being used for military
purposes raise the spectre of a nuclear disaster with
potentially incalculable consequences. A couple of
weeks ago, we gathered in this Chamber to express
our collective indignation at the possibility that such
an outcome could happen (see S/PV.9109). All military
activity at nuclear sites must cease. The parties to the
conflict must refrain from any attacks on nuclear sites,
including cyberattacks, and from any rhetoric that tends
to invoke nuclear risk as a weapon of war. We call for
an independent and impartial investigation to establish

Since our last meeting, on 11 August (see S/PV.9109),
the situation around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant has continued to be deeply alarming. Despite
urgent calls for de-escalation, we are still receiving
news of shelling in the proximity of the power plant. We
underline once more that shelling around the nuclear
facility puts Ukraine, the wider region and the whole
world at grave risk of a catastrophic nuclear accident.
The example of Chornobyl has been frequently invoked
in this Chamber and elsewhere, and with reason. We
remember the horrendous consequences all too well.
The world cannot afford a scenario where another such
calamity is even a possibility. When it comes to nuclear
matters, our collective security is truly intertwined.
That is a message that has been reinforced in the

22-469185/15

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

past few weeks here in New York during the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Nuclear safety is a critical issue for the United Arab
Emirates and a matter of priority. We remain committed
to supporting all efforts ensuring the safety and security
of nuclear facilities globally, including through our
work with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and our participation in the IAEA’s Board of
Governors. In that regard, we want to emphasize once
again the importance of refraining from any action
that could further endanger the facility, particularly
considering the volatile and fraught situation, and we
echo IAEA Director General Grossi’s recent statement
calling urgently for the lowering of tensions near the
plant. We further stress again the particular protection
accorded to nuclear plants under international law. The
United Arab Emirates also reiterates how important it
is to ensure that the IAEA has full, unimpeded access
to the site in order to assess the damage and ascertain
the safety of the facility. We welcome that both
parties support such a mission, and we urge that it be
conducted expeditiously.
We are one day from the six-month mark since
the beginning of the conflict. It remains crucial to
advocate for constructive dialogue that will bring
the conflict to a peaceful, sustainable resolution in a
way that is consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. The only way to truly
stop the suffering created by the conflict and mitigate
its consequences, including the risk of a catastrophic
nuclear accident, is by achieving a cessation of
hostilities throughout Ukraine. We, the members of the
Security Council, must work to fulfil its mandate and
take incremental and pragmatic steps to support efforts
aimed at a diplomatic end to the conflict.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her timely briefing.

23/08/2022

catastrophic consequences for human health and
the environment.
The Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has outlined seven
indispensable pillars for nuclear safety and security,
which we fully endorse. We note with great distress
that virtually all seem to have been violated as a
consequence of Russian aggression.
We call for maximum military restraint in the area
of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, and we
emphasize the importance of facilitating a mission from
the IAEA to carry out essential safety, security and
safeguards activities while fully respecting Ukrainian
sovereignty. In this regard, we note recent statements
indicating that both Ukraine and Russia could support
the IAEA aim of sending a mission to Zaporizhzhya.
We remain concerned that Russia’s seizure of
a nuclear power plant in Ukraine is also a means of
taking hostage a central source of an electricity supply
essential to the civilian population of Ukraine. We
call on Russia to return full control of the plant to its
Ukrainian operator, and we commend Ukraine for its
commitment and dedication to ensuring continuous
nuclear safety and security under severe circumstances.
Russia’s illegal war and unprovoked aggression has
caused terrible suffering for the people of Ukraine and
beyond, including aggravating global food insecurity.
Let me end by again reiterating that the Russian
Federation must immediately withdraw its forces from
Ukraine and its internationally recognized borders
and cease all threats and military actions. This would
also restore Ukraine’s ability to ensure safe and secure
operations of all of its nuclear facilities.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.

Russia’s ongoing war of aggression against Ukraine
has endangered nuclear safety and security in Ukraine,
the Russian Federation, Europe and beyond. And we
reject the Russian Federation’s use of the Security
Council as a platform for disinformation.

We commend the Secretary-General for his recent
visit to Ukraine, and we greatly appreciate the continued
efforts of the United Nations aimed at addressing the
increasingly dangerous situation at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant.

There is no doubt that the safety and security in
and around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
has deteriorated because of the presence of an armed
aggressor. Russia’s continued illegal war has increased
the risk of a nuclear accident, with potentially

The issue at hand today is not some abstract
political debate, and this is not some far-off problem.
As we speak Ukraine, neighbouring States and the
entire international community are living under the
threat of a nuclear catastrophe.

6/15

22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9114

People are understandably terrified. This
includes people like Tamara Korolkowa, a 70-year-old
grandmother who can see the plant from her apartment
building. She has nightmares about the plant blowing
up. As she told a reporter for National Public Radio:
“All of us are just scared all the time”.

ongoing nuclear plant operations. We also call on Russia
to agree to an IAEA visit to the facility in a way that
will respect Ukrainian sovereignty. And we echo the
words of the Secretary-General when we say that the
electricity from Zaporizhzhya is Ukrainian electricity
and that this principle must be fully respected.

And for what? Why on Earth is a nuclear facility
being used as a staging ground for war by Russian
forces? These questions can only be answered by
President Putin.

Finally, let me close by reminding my Russian
colleagues that as we approach Ukraine’s Independence
Day, the world is watching. This should not need saying,
but I ask the Russian Federation not to bomb schools,
hospitals, orphanages or homes. We will continue
to pursue accountability for any and all violations
of international law. Today, on the eve of the sixmonth anniversary of Russia’s invasion, we reiterate
the message that we have shared with the Russian
delegation throughout their country’s war of choice:
end the suffering, end the bloodshed, end this war.

They could also have been answered by members of
the Russian delegation who sit in this Chamber today.
Only they can explain why Russia thinks it can redraw
international borders by force, in contravention of the
United Nations Charter. Only they can account for the
atrocities they have carried out against the Ukrainian
people: bombings of schools and hospitals, the killing of
aid workers and journalists in execution-style murders,
and the forced deportations of Ukrainian civilians
through so-called filtration operations. And only they
can explain why their troops recklessly attacked and
seized control of this plant, pushing us to the brink of
nuclear disaster.
I will recall again Ukraine’s impeccable record
of nuclear energy safety and security prior to Russia’s
seizure of this facility. But we did not hear answers
from the Russian delegation. Instead, what we heard
were references to a hodgepodge of websites and
tweets. And of course, that is a double-edged sword.
As I would remind the Russian delegation, it was the
Russian Ambassador in Vienna who just a few days
ago tweeted: “No mercy for the Ukrainian people.”
Nevertheless, a nuclear disaster at the plant is
avoidable. Russia created this risk, and only Russia can
defuse it. The solution is not complicated. Russia must end
its unprovoked, unjustified war and withdraw its troops.
And given the urgency of this situation, Russia must
immediately follow the recommendation of SecretaryGeneral Guterres and establish a demilitarized zone in
the area surrounding the plant. This would allow for
the Ukrainian personnel who are currently being held
under duress to operate the facility complete a damage
assessment and restore the facility’s impeccable safety,
security and safeguards performance.
A demilitarized zone would enable the team from
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
travel to the facility, conduct an inspection and assess
the safety, security and application of safeguards to

Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Ireland continues to be deeply concerned by the
situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and
the serious risk of a radiological accident or incident
arising from military activity at the site. We are also
very concerned by the ongoing shelling at and around
the power plant, which must stop immediately. The
devastating consequences for the people of Ukraine
and the wider region of an accident or incident at
Zaporizhzhya should be the overriding concern for all
of us. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s call
for the demilitarization of the plant and its environs.
It is essential that basic principles of nuclear safety
and security are fully respected. We call on Russia, and
indeed all States, to commit themselves to the seven
pillars of nuclear safety and security set out by the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in relation to peaceful nuclear facilities
and materials in all circumstances, including situations
of armed conflict.
We commend the bravery and professionalism of
the Ukrainian personnel at the plant who have sought
to maintain its safe operation despite being subjected to
intolerable circumstances by Russian military forces.
We strongly support an IAEA mission to the power
plant to address safety, security and safeguards at the
plant, respecting Ukraine’s sovereignty over its full
territory and infrastructure.

22-469187/15

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

We
welcome
Secretary-General
Guterres’s
reaffirmation, as expressed by Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo, that the United Nations has the
logistical and security capacity to support the mission
from Kyiv to the nuclear power plant. It is vital that this
mission is given full access with no restrictions. We
hope to see that mission take place as soon as possible.
We are also deeply worried by possible efforts
to disconnect the power plant from the Ukrainian
electrical grid. Under the current circumstances, this
presents significant dangers for nuclear safety, as well
as for the humanitarian needs of the people of Ukraine
who are relying on the plant for their energy needs.
Let us call a spade a spade. The issues at
Zaporizhzhya arise solely from Russia’s illegal war
against Ukraine. The Russian military has created
this crisis through its illegal seizure and occupation
of the Zaporizhzhya facility and its reckless actions
in Ukraine, which have clearly demonstrated its utter
disregard for nuclear safety and security. We would
like to point out that armed attacks against nuclear
facilities devoted to peaceful purposes are violations
of international law, including the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
As we have said before, if Russia is genuine in
its concern regarding nuclear safety at Zaporizhzhya,
it must assume its responsibilities and end its illegal
occupation of the site, withdrawing its troops and
munitions. That would see control of the plant restored
to the competent Ukrainian authorities, supported by
the IAEA. Ireland once again calls on Russia to end its
brutal war on the Ukrainian people, withdraw its troops
from the entire internationally recognized territory of
Ukraine and respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its neighbours.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
updates on the growing international concerns about
the safety of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in
Ukraine. When the Council met on the same subject a
little over a week ago (see S/PV.9109), the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), through its Director
General, warned of potentially tragic consequences
for human lives and the environment in the event of
the accidental leakage of radioactive material from
the facility.
Ghana deplores the fact that despite the warnings
and urgent appeals from the international community for
8/15

23/08/2022

all military action around the nuclear facility to cease,
the indiscriminate shelling, attacks and militarization
of the facility and its surroundings have continued.
We feel compelled to once again reiterate our deep
alarm and our condemnation of those unacceptable
developments. We want to remind the armed parties
that international law, including the 1977 Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, prohibits the
conduct of military conflict around nuclear sites. We
also call for immediate and full respect by all the armed
parties for the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and its 2005 Amendment. We call for
the demilitarization of all the zones around Ukraine’s
nuclear facilities.
In that respect, Ghana fully supports an independent
assessment of the nuclear safety standards and
safeguards at the Zaporizhzhya facility to ensure that
no breach has occurred. For that to happen, however, it
is crucial for the Russian Federation, which is currently
controlling the facility, to grant immediate access to
the IAEA so that the Agency can conduct the requisite
assessment. We also stress how urgent it is that the
IAEA authorities act quickly to assess the danger and
respond appropriately.
Ghana continues to hold the principled position
that there can be no military solution to the ongoing
hostilities. We therefore urge for intensifying
diplomacy and dialogue to comprehensively address
the underlying security concerns and mistrust between
the warring parties. Furthermore, while prioritizing the
pursuit of diplomacy and dialogue, we also strongly
believe that an unconditional withdrawal of the Russian
Federation’s invading troops from the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine is a prerequisite for the
restoration of peace and security in Ukraine.
In conclusion, we reiterate our previous assertions
that the plight of civilians, particularly women and
children, as well as the growing humanitarian threat,
should override all other considerations as we seek to
stop this needless war.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her update
focusing on the safety and security of nuclear facilities
in Ukraine.
We continue to carefully follow the developments
regarding the safety and security of Ukraine’s nuclear
facilities. India attaches high importance to ensuring
their safety and security, as any accident involving
22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

nuclear facilities could potentially have disastrous
consequences for public health and the environment.
We also accord high priority to the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) ability to conduct
its safeguards and monitoring activities in accordance
with its statute in an effective, objective and efficient
manner, and we value its efforts in that regard.
India remains concerned about the situation at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We support
the ongoing efforts, including those of the IAEA, to
reduce tensions and take steps to ensure nuclear safety
and security at the facility. We have noted the latest
information available on nuclear power plants and
facilities in Ukraine, including the updates published
on 19 August by the IAEA. We hope that the proposed
visit by a team from the IAEA to the power plant and its
surrounding areas will be agreed to by the two sides, as
indicated in their recent statements.
We continue to reiterate that the global order should
be anchored in international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of States.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): We thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
The United Kingdom remains gravely concerned
about the implications of Russia’s illegal invasion of
Ukraine for nuclear safety, security and safeguards. The
invasion has disrupted the operation of nuclear facilities
across Ukraine, seriously threatened operational safety
and prevented the Ukrainian authorities from carrying
out routine safeguarding tasks. Instead of calling
yet another meeting on the crisis at Zaporizhzhya,
Russia could resolve it immediately by withdrawing
its forces from the nuclear power plant — and all of
Ukraine — and ceasing its senseless aggression. As
well as causing untold suffering to the Ukrainian
people, the simple fact is that Russia’s invasion and its
efforts to seize Ukraine’s nuclear plants by force have
jeopardized the safety of the millions in the region who
would be affected by a nuclear incident in Ukraine.
Meanwhile, important nuclear safety and safeguards
activities at the site are needed more than ever. We
welcome the progress towards an International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) technical visit. Any visit
should take place in a manner that respects Ukraine’s
sovereignty over its territory. The Secretary-General
has been clear that the United Nations can facilitate
a visit from the Ukrainian side, and we welcome his

S/PV.9114

engagement and that of the United Nations. We also
welcome the efforts of the Ukrainian Administration
and the IAEA staff to plan and support a mission. We call
on Russia to provide appropriate security guarantees.
We also commend the heroic efforts of the Ukrainian
staff operating the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
despite the great pressure they are under. They must be
able to carry out their duties without threats or further
disruption. Cutting off a major supply of electricity to
the people of Ukraine would cause immense further
suffering, as Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo said
today. The electricity at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant belongs to Ukraine.
Russia’s war is reckless and irresponsible. A
nuclear disaster should be unthinkable. No member of
the United Nations — let alone a permanent member
of the Council — should create that threat by seeking
to take another country’s nuclear facilities by force.
Russia’s actions are contrary to the principles of the
Convention on Nuclear Safety and other international
nuclear safety conventions. We therefore call once more
on Russia to return full control of all Ukraine’s nuclear
facilities to their rightful sovereign owner to ensure
their safe and secure operation.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing on the critical situation at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, avoiding
any action that would jeopardize the integrity or
safety of Europe’s largest nuclear power plant would
simply be common sense. However, common sense is
unfortunately often the least common of senses. As the
Secretary-General also said, at the opening of the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the world has
avoided the use of nuclear weapons merely by luck. But
luck is not a strategy, the Secretary-General stressed.
Attacks on the Zaporizhzhya power plant jeopardize
its security and could have catastrophic short-,
medium- and long-term humanitarian consequences for
the civilian population, including far beyond Ukraine
and neighbouring countries. We also agree with the
Secretary-General that damaging the nuclear plant is
tantamount to collective suicide.
I would like to highlight three points.

22-469189/15

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

First, all attacks on the plant and its surroundings
must cease immediately. Any attack against civilian
nuclear facilities is a flagrant violation of international
law and the Statute of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We reiterate what we stated
on 11 August: such attacks violate international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and Protocol Additional I of 1977 thereto (see
S/PV.9109).
Secondly, the plant’s facilities must not be used
for military operations under any circumstances. The
Zaporizhzhya plant must be kept out of this conflict.
Priority should be given to respecting the civilian status
of the plant and immediately removing all military
personnel and equipment. The Ukrainian regulatory
authorities need to have free access and effective
control over the operation of the plant in order to ensure
compliance with the seven indispensable pillars of
nuclear safety.
Thirdly, we support the Secretary-General’s call
for the establishment of a demilitarized zone that would
enable the International Atomic Energy Agency to carry
out the necessary inspections in order to for us to have
objective, truthful and independent information on the
current conditions at the plant. Today the International
Atomic Energy Agency reiterated its request for a
technical inspection. The United Nations has also
stated that it has the logistics and security capacity
to support any International Atomic Energy Agency
mission to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant from
Kyiv, should both Russia and Ukraine agree. It is vital
for an inspection to take place, without any hindrance
or pretext.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Mexico’s
call for an end to the war in Ukraine and a return to
the path of dialogue. The impact of the conflict on
the civilian population over the past months has been
enormous, with irreversible consequences, and that
is why a ceasefire needs to be agreed without further
delay. The food grain agreements that have been
reached clearly demonstrate what can be achieved when
there is political will and reason prevails. We hope that
the same approach will be taken in order to reach an
agreement on Zaporizhzhya, where what is at stake is
none another than the right to life.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for
her briefing.
10/15

23/08/2022

France has been deeply concerned since the
beginning of this war about the threat that Russia’s
aggression in Ukraine poses to the safety and security
of Ukrainian nuclear facilities. Russia has forcibly
seized the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which
is in Ukraine’s territory. The presence and actions
of Russia’s armed forces in the vicinity of the plant
significantly increase the risk of an accident, and
Russia bears responsibility for that situation. France,
for its part, would like to make three points.
First, Russia must give Ukraine back full control
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, as well as
all nuclear facilities in Ukraine. Russia must urgently
remove all of its military personnel and equipment
from the plant. The Ukrainian personnel operating the
plant must be allowed to carry out their duties without
threat or pressure.
Secondly, France welcomes and supports the
continued efforts of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). His
seven pillars of nuclear safety and security must be
complied with. There is also a need restore the IAEA’s
ability to monitor peaceful nuclear activities throughout
Ukraine in order to ensure compliance with safeguards,
an ability that Russia’s actions have compromised.
Thirdly, it is essential to facilitate an IAEA expert
mission to the Zaporizhzhya plant as soon as possible.
That mission needs to be conducted with respect for
Ukraine’s full sovereignty over its territory and the
entirety of its infrastructure. France commends the
role of the United Nations in that regard, and for its
willingness to provide the necessary logistical support
to deploy such a mission from Kyiv. We also welcome
the agreement in principle reached by Ukraine and
Russia to conduct such a mission, which has been
confirmed at the highest level. What we need now are
sufficient security guarantees and a commitment from
all parties so that the mission can be conducted within
the next few days. France will continue to unwaveringly
support the IAEA’s efforts to that end, as demonstrated
by our President’s meetings with President Putin on
19 August and with President Zelenskyy on 16 August,
as well as the phone call that took place this morning
between our Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
and Sergey Lavrov.
Ms. Muigai (Kenya): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

on the situation concerning the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
It is unfortunate that we are having this discussion
for the second time in just more than a week, at the tail
end of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The objective of the Treaty is to prevent the spread of
nuclear weapons and weapons technology, promote
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament and
general and complete disarmament.
The deployment of nuclear weapons can have a longterm apocalyptic effect on humankind, biodiversity and
the environment. Indeed, a stray or deliberate targeting
of any nuclear facility, even if the facility is intended
for peaceful uses, will turn it into a nuclear weapon
with equally devastating capabilities. We therefore
remain deeply concerned about the continuous shelling
in the vicinity of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, which is exposing thousands of civilians to grave
security risks and power cut-offs.
In that regard, Kenya welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recent visit to Lviv and fully supports his plea
for the withdrawal of military equipment and personnel
and an immediate end to all military activity around
what is in fact Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, in
order to guarantee its safety. We also urge immediate
and unconditional access to the site for experts and
officials from the IAEA to conduct the critically needed
safety, security and safeguards verification activities.
We welcome the cooperation expressed by the parties
in that regard.
Kenya continues to call for the parties to refrain
from any action that may further escalate the situation.
We continue to reiterate, as we have time and again,
the need to shift gears to an immediate cessation
of hostilities and for the deployment of available
diplomatic tools to end the conflict. A cessation of
hostilities would lay the groundwork for the negotiation
of a lasting peace settlement that guarantees the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, for
which Kenya continues to advocate.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
Two weeks ago, we met in this very Chamber
to discuss this very topic (see S/PV.9109). We

S/PV.9114

all expressed our concerns about the potentially
catastrophic and lasting consequences for human
health and the environment that substantial damage
to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant would entail.
We reaffirmed that any armed attack on, or threat
against, nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes
constitutes a violation of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and the Statute
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
as unanimously recognized by the Agency’s General
Conference. We reiterated the responsibility of States
to ensure compliance with applicable instruments on
nuclear safety and security, such as the Convention
on Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel and the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and its amendment.
We agreed that it was high time the IAEA deployed an
expert mission to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
without delay. Yet the situation remains unchanged.
Shelling around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
continues, and we meet once again.
Our inability to translate words into actions is
pushing us to the brink of reason. Two weeks ago, the
IAEA assessed that the situation posed no immediate
threat to nuclear safety, but as the situation drags on, the
threat that was once limited becomes an increasingly
concrete risk. We reiterate our call on all parties to
refrain from any measure that could jeopardize the
safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, as well as its safe operation.
Brazil recognizes the indispensable role that the
International Atomic Energy Agency can play in taking
the necessary steps to help ensure nuclear safety and
security and prevent any radiological consequences
for the population and the environment, in the region
and beyond. We therefore welcome the news that
negotiations for the deployment of an IAEA expert
mission to Zaporizhzhya are progressing, and we urge
the parties to allow its immediate dispatch.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We thank
Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.

Under-

We held a meeting on this very issue less than two
weeks ago (see S/ PV.9109). Our position has not changed
and, although we are fully aware of the importance of
the matter, there is one simple issue that stands above
all else. We are here only because of this senseless,
unjustified, unprovoked and illegal war. Everything
we have discussed here concerning Ukraine during

22-4691811/15

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

this long six-month period flows from the unjustified
actions of Russia and its war of choice — and now also
from the continuous danger of a nuclear catastrophe.
Albania condemns the militarization of nuclear
power plants in Ukraine. We condemn any act of
violence inside or near the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant or against its personnel. Ukrainian personnel
operating the plant during the Russian invasion must
be able to carry out their important tasks without
restriction, threats or pressure.
Albania reiterates its full and continued support for
the International Atomic Energy Agency and its staff
to have immediate, safe and unimpeded access to all
nuclear facilities in Ukraine and to engage directly
with the Ukrainian staff responsible for those facilities.
We support the deployment of an expert mission to the
scene as soon as possible to help stabilize the nuclear
safety and security situation at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant and conduct safety, security and
safeguards protocols.
We remain very worried about reports that the
very reason for the presence of the Russian military
personnel at the Ukrainian nuclear plant is to disconnect
the power plant from the Ukrainian energy network and
divert its energy for Russian interests. We welcome the
clear position of Secretary-General Guterres on the
matter and reiterate our position. The Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant is Ukrainian. Its electricity is
Ukrainian. Russia and its troops have no place there
and no part in it.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full solidarity with
Ukraine and its people and again call on the Russian
Federation to put an end to this war and immediately
withdraw all its armed forces from Ukraine, including
from Ukrainian nuclear facilities, if it is truly interested
in preventing incidents with catastrophic consequences
for all of us. There is no reason for Russian troops to be
in Ukraine. There is no need for Russian troops to be at
a nuclear power plant.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
When the Council last considered the issue of the
safety of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities (see S/PV.9109),
members expressed concern about the safety of the
12/15

23/08/2022

Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. It is disconcerting
that the nuclear power plant continues to be the target
of shelling. Although the shelling has not posed an
immediate threat to the safety of the nuclear power
plant, as Director General Grossi of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) stated, that could
change at any moment.
There is no room for trial and error as it pertains to
the safety and security of nuclear facilities. Any single
incident could lead to a serious nuclear accident, with
irreversible consequences for the environment and the
public health of Ukraine and neighbouring countries.
China again calls on the parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint, strictly abide by the provisions
of relevant international law, earnestly implement the
seven pillars proposed by Director General Grossi,
avoid actions that could endanger nuclear safety and
security and minimize the risk of an accident.
China has always supported the IAEA in fulfilling
its safeguards responsibilities, in strict accordance with
its mandate, and in playing an active role in promoting
nuclear safety and security. Under the current
circumstances, the IAEA must conduct a site visit to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant as soon as possible
to carry out a professional and technical assessment of
the safety and security situation at the nuclear facility.
We have taken note of the fact that both Russia and
Ukraine have made positive statements about the visit.
We hope that all the parties concerned will overcome
political obstacles, strengthen communication and
collaboration, adhere to an issues-oriented approach
and reach an agreement on the timing and details of the
visit as soon as possible so that the IAEA mission can
be conducted in a timely manner.
To address the safety and security of nuclear
facilities, we must adhere to science and rationality,
follow the spirit of humanity, engage in communication
and cooperation and move beyond political positions,
hostile differences and military considerations. We
must not allow the tragedies caused by the Chornobyl
and Fukushima nuclear accidents to be repeated.
To eliminate the nuclear safety risk at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, the international
community must responsibly promote the de-escalation
of the situation, step up diplomatic efforts, seek political
solutions, guide the parties back to dialogue and
negotiations and achieve a ceasefire and the cessation
of hostilities as soon as possible.
22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

China once again calls upon all the parties
concerned to pay attention to each other’s legitimate
security concerns, build a balanced, effective and
sustainable security architecture and make unremitting
efforts to resolve the crisis in Ukraine and achieve
lasting peace and stability in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are meeting today because the reasons that
have compelled us to request this meeting have not gone
away. Despite the fact that there are no Russian heavy
weapons located at or firing from the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, shelling by the Ukrainian armed
forces of both the plant and Enerhodar continues.
We have said that on many occasions, which can be
confirmed by impartial monitoring data, including
satellite imagery.
Once again, as with a broken record, we have heard
that everything is Russia’s fault. The real root causes of
the events at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant are
being brazenly distorted, and obvious facts are being
hushed up or denied. All that is being done with the
sole purpose of whitewashing the reputation of their
Kyiv protégés regardless of the latter’s actions, thereby
giving them carte blanche to carry out their most
reckless actions, since they can count on them being
justified unconditionally by their sponsors.
We have once again been called upon to agree
to a visit by a mission from the International Atomic
Energy Agency, which we agreed to in June and have
repeatedly done so, including today. Some Western
colleagues seem to be of the view that the only and
simplest way of resolving the situation is to withdraw
Russian troops and create a demilitarized zone around
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. That is an
irresponsible proposal, as it completely ignores the
need to maintain the conditions necessary for the safe
operation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
We once again urge them to stop covering up
the actions of their Kyiv proxies and to encourage
them to stop their reckless attacks against the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which could lead to
a nuclear incident and the radioactive contamination of
European countries.

S/PV.9114

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
informative briefing.
I wish we had been gathered here by Russia to hear
the only thing that the entire world wants to hear, and
that would be a statement that Russia is demilitarizing
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, withdrawing
its troops and handing it over to the Government of
Ukraine. Instead, we have wasted more than one hour
in listening to a slew of fictitious soundbites. The
terrorist State has not stopped playing around with the
international community. Once again, it has the audacity
to convene a Security Council meeting to discuss its
own provocations and terror at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant.
Let me reiterate that the current situation makes it
clear that the only thing that will ultimately eliminate
the nuclear threat emanating from the illegal Russian
presence at the nuclear power plant is the withdrawal
of Russian weapons and troops and the return of the
station to the legitimate control of Ukraine. Ukraine
greatly appreciates the efforts of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the United Nations
to ensure the safety and security of all Ukrainian nuclear
facilities against the backdrop of the Russian invasion.
We have always underlined the importance of the
full and consistent implementation by the Agency of its
mandate. In that regard, since the beginning of Russia’s
occupation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
Ukraine has insisted on the need to send a mission to the
site and has negotiated its modalities with the IAEA. We
welcome the readiness of the IAEA Director General to
send a mission to the occupied Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. The visit should be conducted in strict
compliance with the national legislation of Ukraine in
full compliance with its international obligations.
Earlier today, Foreign Minister Kuleba of
Ukraine responded to the Director General’s letter
dated 17 August, concerning the mission that I just
mentioned. As per the letter, the IAEA proposal for the
itinerary is in compliance with the national legislation
of Ukraine and, in general, might be accepted. Further
arrangements are to be made based on the security
conditions and require the communication of detailed
routes and other logistical aspects, as soon as possible.

22-4691813/15

S/PV.9114

Threats to international peace and security

We continue to believe that the mission’s
effectiveness can be bolstered by incorporating
military and political components supported by United
Nations expertise. Considering the scale of the current
challenges and threats, we also urge the IAEA to
consider the permanent presence of its experts at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant until the competent
Ukrainian authorities regain full control over the
nuclear facility.
Russia’s wish to organize the mission to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant has only one purpose.
Let us proceed from the basic facts. The Zaporizhzhya
power plant is a Ukrainian facility located on Ukrainian
territory. The occupiers have trained some of the
hostages as to what they should say and should not
show to the IAEA. That is why it is really important
to conduct the mission in a way that would allow the
international community to see the real situation, not a
Russian theatrical show.
It is imperative that the mission take place: first,
at the request of Ukraine; secondly, at the Ukrainian
nuclear facility; and, thirdly, be covered by the
implementation of the Safeguards Agreement between
Ukraine and the IAEA. Russia’s role is to ensure the
physical security of the mission. Russia is turning the
issue of nuclear safety at the facility into a farce — a
circus. It is downplaying the significance of the threats
it has created and diverting attention from the urgent
issue of the militarization and the occupation of
the station.
The entire international community has been
demanding that for almost six months. That is what
the IAEA says. Russia pretends not to hear that and
continues to increasingly invent new ways of using the
peaceful station for military purposes. It is obvious that
any mission to the station, be it led by either the IAEA
or the United Nations, will record flagrant violations
of norms and requirements concerning nuclear safety.
Therefore, Russia is trying to avoid responsibility, but
it will not succeed.
Russia needs the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
as a means of waging war. But there is another aspect:
Russia is trying at all costs to cover the electricity
needs of the temporarily occupied Crimea and other
temporarily occupied territories — perhaps the Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya regions — because the publicized
illegal electric bridge has never covered those needs
and will not cover them. Moreover, Russia needs the

14/15

23/08/2022

Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant for propaganda
purposes, because ending the occupation of the plant
will mean the failure of Putin’s campaign in the south
of Ukraine.
With regard to the shelling, Russian narratives
about Ukrainian shelling of the station do not stand
up to scrutiny. Nobody who is at least conscious can
imagine that Ukraine would target a nuclear power plant
at the tremendous risk of creating a nuclear catastrophe
on its own territory. Such a catastrophe would lead
to numerous deaths and pollution for many years to
come. We already lost thousands of human lives and
thousands of square kilometres of our territory in the
exclusion zone around Chornobyl after 1986. We are
mourning thousands of lives of Ukrainians killed by
Russians in their war against Ukraine. We are suffering
from the genocide conducted by Russians on the
occupied territories, where they kidnapped thousands
of children left orphaned after their parents were killed
by the Russian army.
We will never forget it, and we will do all we can
to save the lives of Ukrainians. What we can do here
in the United Nations format is to call things what they
are. Russians forget that we live in a century of modern
technology. Just as their crimes in Bucha and Mariupol
were clearly seen by satellite, the shelling under the
false flag will again be clearly filmed.
Turning back to the international mission to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, let me stress that
the need to send such a mission is primarily due to
violations of all seven pillars of nuclear security,
which are multiplying as a result of the illegal presence
there of the Russian army and Rosatom. The constant
presence of the IAEA and other experts at the station
could become a determining factor in the context of its
demilitarization and de-occupation.
The international community, for its part, must
continue to apply political pressure on the aggressor
State of Russia and demand full demilitarization and
unconditional de-occupation. Let me stress that nuclear
security and safety is an absolute priority for everyone
in the world, and Russia must immediately and without
any conditions withdraw its troops.
Russia must also stop all provocations and all
shelling. It is unacceptable that Russia is deliberately
putting all of us on the brink of a global nuclear
disaster. As soon as Russia withdraws the troops from

22-46918

23/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the facility, in which they simply have no right to be,
the threat of a nuclear disaster will disappear — just as
a similar threat disappeared as soon as Russian troops
withdrew from the Chornobyl nuclear power plant and
the exclusion zone. Only then will this threat not exist,

S/PV.9114

just as it does not exist at three other Ukrainian nuclear
power plants — the Khmelnytskyi nuclear power plant,
the Rivne nuclear power plant and the South Ukraine
nuclear power plant.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

22-4691815/15
