S/PV.8570

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8570th meeting

Wednesday, 10 July 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Sithole
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Strengthening triangular cooperation
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/538)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-21140 (E)
*1921140*

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

countries and the Secretariat “to foster a spirit of
partnership, cooperation, confidence and mutual trust”
(S/PRST/2011/17).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Strengthening triangular cooperation
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/538)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Pakistan, Rwanda and Uruguay to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations; Lieutenant General Dennis
Gyllensporre, Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali; and Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff, Senior Fellow at
the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations of the
International Peace Institute.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/538, which contains the text of a letter
dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Peru addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank members of the Security
Council for providing me this opportunity to discuss
ways to strengthen, sharpen and re-energize our approach
to the triangular dialogue and cooperation among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) and the Secretariat.
We have come a long way since 2001, when the
Security Council, in the wake of the Brahimi report
of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see
S/2000/809), called for improving the relationship
among the Security Council, troop-contributing
2/29

10/07/2019

Strong triangular cooperation is crucial to
enhancing peacekeeping operations. It is particularly
relevant today, as the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative is aimed at fostering
collective solutions to deal with the challenges that
peacekeepers face. The common work of the Security
Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat, along with other stakeholders, will
be key to ensuring continued progress.
That applies to many areas of peacekeeping.
Improving the safety and security of our peacekeepers
is one of them. As we are continuously working to
implement the action plan on the security of United
Nations peacekeepers, such strong cooperation enables
us to better identify gaps and define solutions to the
challenges our peacekeepers face on the ground.
Those benefits apply as well to our efforts on
performance, for which the mobilization of Council
members has been significant. As we are working as a
priority to implement resolution 2436 (2018), adopted
last September under the United States presidency,
continuous engagement from Council members, as
well as TCCs and PCCs, will be crucial to achieve
lasting progress. That is, for instance, the case with the
comprehensive performance assessment system. As we
continue to roll it out and implement it in an increasing
number of our missions, we need the feedback, support
and engagement of the Security Council and the troopand police-contributing countries, so that it can best
respond to the needs and be most efficient and useful
to all. In many areas critical to performance, such as
training, mindset and equipment, a triangular approach
can yield strong results. Mechanisms such as the light
coordination mechanism and the Triangular Partnership
Project are, to some extent, concrete manifestations of
the spirit of triangular cooperation.
Mandates can also strongly benefit from the
perspectives and experiences of troop and police
contributors present on the ground in order to make them
more focused, adapted and achievable. Those are only a
few areas among many where triangular cooperation is
essential to the effectiveness of peacekeeping.
A number of mechanisms exist today to facilitate
consultations among the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat. They
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

include the formal and informal consultations of the
Council with troop- and police-contributing countries,
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Military Staff Committee. Outside
of the Council, the General Assembly’s Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is of course
an important forum of discussion involving Council
members and troop- and police-contributing countries.
The A4P Declaration of Shared Commitments, which
has been endorsed by every Security Council member,
calls on us all to implement existing intergovernmental
commitments on triangular cooperation. As Member
States decide to take up the role of A4P champions,
their diversity and common work will provide further
illustration of the relevance of triangular cooperation in
each of the thematic areas of A4P.
Today’s meeting is therefore timely, not least
because the third Chiefs of Defence Conference, which
is being held at the United Nations tomorrow, represents
a further critical opportunity to realize triangular
cooperation, involving TCCs and PCCs at the most
senior levels of their uniformed forces to consult with
each other and with the Secretariat.
(spoke in French)
Given the relevance of triangular cooperation to
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, as I have
just described, I would like to share some thoughts on
how we can work together collaboratively to strengthen
triangular cooperation. By building on each other’s
assets, strengths and contributions, we can work
together to ensure that cooperation can realize its
full potential.
In the first place, the Secretariat remains ready to
give its full support to a more institutionalized system
of formal and informal exchanges among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, of course in accordance with the mandate of
each. Such exchanges can be useful throughout the life
cycle of the mission: at the time of mandate renewals, of
course, but also at any time that the mission encounters
particular challenges or problems or following strategic
reviews. Such meetings should encourage frank, open
and interactive dialogue among the partners of this
triangular dialogue. The dialogue is most effective
when it combines both formal and informal encounters.
I am referring in that regard to the practice developed
by New Zealand during its tenure on the Security
Council, where a member of the Council organized

S/PV. 8570

informal and interactive consultations with the troopand police-contributing countries, which proved useful
and appreciated. In order to contribute to the success
of such meetings, my Department will continue to
participate actively in those consultations, to work with
all interlocutors and to share its substantive expertise in
the preparation and conduct of the consultations.
I would also like to encourage Member States to
continue strengthening triangular cooperation through
the holding of Council meetings on cross-cutting
peacekeeping issues, such as this meeting. Such
meetings are useful because they help to refine our
common approach and understanding of the current
challenges and priority actions to be taken, thereby
helping to strengthen peacekeeping. I am referring, for
example, to the debate held last May by the Indonesian
presidency of the Security Council on training and
capacity-building (see S/PV.8521), which has deepened
our common analysis of this crucial issue for our
operations. I am also thinking of the Security Council
visits to our missions, which provide significant
opportunities for exchanges with our peacekeepers
and our troop and police contributors. Such visits also
provide an opportunity to review and report on progress
in the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its concrete impact on the ground.
I am also referring to the activities of the Council’s
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, and I
would like to pay tribute to the work of Côte d’Ivoire,
which has been at the head of the Working Group
for the past year and a half. Under that country’s
leadership, the Working Group organized very useful
exchanges on such central issues as the place of women
in peacekeeping, the protection of civilians, and the
relationship with host States, to name just a few. As
a former host State itself, as a troop contributor and
as member of the Security Council, Côte d’Ivoire
brings a unique perspective to the Security Council.
More generally, I would like to emphasize the pivotal
role of Council members that are also troop and police
contributors. There are many here, including the
country you represent, Mr. President. Those Member
States are naturally at the crossroads and at the heart of
triangular cooperation. They can therefore play a vital
role in its organization through such meetings or visits.
(spoke in English)
I also encourage representatives to consider
expanding triangular cooperation on occasion, as

19-211403/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

required, to ensure successful mandate implementation.
The А4Р Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations includes
commitments to
“enhance collaboration and planning between the
United Nations and relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements”,
as well as
“to consider options for further direct
engagement between host Governments and the
Security Council”.
In many contexts, peacekeeping missions are likely to
benefit from more consistent and closer engagement
between the Security Council and the host Government.
And, as the Council is very aware, partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations are increasingly
key for the efficiency of peacekeeping.
For African Union (AU) operations authorized by
the Security Council, we are in fact already seeing
a form of quadrilateral cooperation — among the
Security Council, TCCs, the Secretariat and the African
Union, including its Peace and Security Council and
its Commission. Security Council meetings on the
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
are of particular value by fostering common analysis of
situations and joint thinking on initiatives or actions to
be undertaken. The open debates organized recently on
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union — for instance, most recently in February 2019
by Equatorial Guinea on the AU Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative (see S/PV.8456) — have been
very useful to bring to light how this partnership can
help tackle current challenges.
Finally, on the Secretariat’s part, we welcome
the substantive engagement from troop- and
police-contributing countries during our meetings, and
the value of more meaningful dialogue between the
Security Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries. We commit to continuing our efforts to
regularly brief TCCs and PCCs and provide information
in a timely manner, related to developments on the
ground and critical security incidents, for instance.
My Department also stands ready to provide useful
information, including on ongoing challenges, conflict
analyses and risk assessments, and to discuss mandate
options before an operation is authorized or renewed.
4/29

10/07/2019

I look forward to hearing today from our Member
State partners about other ways that this cooperation,
including on the Secretariat’s side, can be strengthened
further. We remain committed to working together
with everyone here, both Security Council members
and troop- and police-contributing countries, to ensure
that mechanisms for triangular cooperation are robust
and dynamic. In the spirit of Action for Peacekeeping,
we look forward to a strengthened triangular
cooperation that will contribute to the renewal of our
collective engagement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I
now
give
the
General Gyllensporre.

floor

to

Lieutenant

Lieutenant General Gyllensporre: It is a great
honour for me to have this opportunity to address the
Security Council today and give a Force Commander’s
perspective on the interaction among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs).
Let me initially anchor my arguments with some
words on the situation on the ground. Mindful of
course that the Council recently deliberated on Mali
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) (see
S/PV.8568), I will be very brief.
Our forces are deployed to support the signatory
parties in the implementation in northern Mali of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including supervising the ceasefire agreement. As
a secondary priority we are to improve the security
situation in the central region, where we have dedicated
efforts to protect civilians against a mélange of threats
that manifest themselves in frequent and brutal attacks
against women and children. That challenging situation
is perpetuated by threats against our personnel. Indeed,
we are targeted and exposed to frequent direct and
complex attacks on our bases, as well as improvised
explosive device attacks against our logistical convoys.
Sadly, the lives of too many peacekeepers have been
lost in this effort.
Indeed, it is a very complex and challenging
situation that goes beyond my earlier experiences
in Afghanistan, for instance, and far from what is
envisaged in traditional peacekeeping. Yet here we are,
and we have to find different and new ways to operate
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and deliver on the mandate. The force must be more
agile and more unpredictable, react faster, be more
mobile and use the rules of engagement to their fullest
extent. Steps have been taken in that direction. Over
the last reporting period the operational tempo was
increased by more than 100 per cent. More important,
we are changing the mindset of the peacekeepers to
become more proactive, flexible and robust.
Against that backdrop of demanding peacekeeping,
it is reasonable to assume that all actors affiliated
with United Nations efforts will be challenged
and that cooperation arrangements will become
increasingly important. In my opinion, that calls for
strengthened cooperation and consultation mechanisms
between the field and Headquarters. I understand
that sentiment is also reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations.
In reference to triangular cooperation, let me
elaborate on the TCCs. It is important for the mission
that the Secretariat and Member States continue to
support TCCs from the very beginning, including
predeployment and subsequent in-mission training,
with equipment and associated training efforts. That
is of particular relevance for TCCs going to high-risk
missions like in Mali. It is key to have clearly defined
goals and standards for our traditional troop- and
police-contributing countries on what the expectations
of the United Nations are, and increased support for
training during predeployment in addition to in-mission
training requirements. Those requirements must be
adapted to reflect the changes in security situations on
the ground and also the changes in operational profiles.
As the Council knows, there are some TCCs that
pay a higher price in casualties than others. Those
nations must be prioritized for training, equipment and
support measures of other kinds. Force protection is
also about giving the commanders freedom of action
to the extent possible by, for example, minimizing the
number of caveats and giving them unfettered ability
to deploy and employ all forces within the mission
to advance the mandate, without any — or at least
minimal — national constraints.
Let me now shed some light on what we do in the
Mission and within the force in that regard. As Force
Commander, I have close interaction and dialogue with
the TCCs through their senior national representatives

S/PV. 8570

in order to provide information, get their opinions
and create and guide confidence among the troopcontributing nations. For me, it is an important forum
to exchange views and convey my priorities.
Secondly, I value arrangements and dialogue with
the representatives of nations when they visit us in Mali
or when they have an opportunity to engage with the
Chiefs of Defence, as they will when they participate
at this week’s conference here in New York. It provides
an opportunity to reach out and maintain dialogue
and for us and the capitals to provide and receive
candid feedback.
Thirdly, I report to the Secretariat on the
deficiencies and challenges for TCCs. I also illustrate
the good examples, great leadership and robustness
that some TCCs demonstrate, so as to ensure that the
Secretariat has the best possible picture of what we
experience on the ground.
Allow me to offer some final recommendations. To
me, strategy is a balanced and carefully considered mix
of ends, ways and means. The mandate provided by the
Security Council defines the ends and objectives for us.
The way we operate is codified and issued in a military
concept provided by the Secretariat. The resources
and means are, of course, provided by the TCCs.
Those are the units that will complete the mission at
the end of the day. Clearly, close cooperation within
the triangle is key in order to set the conditions for an
effective implementation of our mandate, in particular
in demanding missions with security challenges.
As a Force Commander, I can contribute to
ensuring — and rely on the fact — that the triangle has
as good an understanding as possible of the situation
within the Mission and that the TCCs get candid and
relevant information directly to their capitals. I welcome
the continued possibilities for further dialogue and
encourage capitals to plan field visits in order to further
understand what their units face in the environment in
which they operate.
In order for us to meet the high expectations that
exist, TCCs must deliver on their mandate, rules of
engagement, the body of United Nations policies and
manuals, as well as the statements of unit requirements,
memorandums of understanding and so on. That is
our planning assumption when we receive units on
the ground. The United Nations should continue to
increase and revise its mechanisms for evaluating units
and ensuring accountability.

19-211405/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Let me conclude by expressing my gratitude to the
Member States that have participated or are currently
participating in MINUSMA with troops or staff
officers. It is honour and privilege to serve at the helm
of the military force of MINUSMA.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Lieutenant General Gyllensporre for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Novosseloff.
Ms. Novosseloff (spoke in French): First of all,
allow me to sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council today, as it has
been the subject of my research in international relations
for more than 20 years. The Council has invited me to
address the issue of triangular cooperation, which may
at first seem technical but is obviously not.
Triangular cooperation is at the crossroads of
the Security Council’s work when it takes a decision;
creates a peacekeeping operation, calls for a number
of reforms from the Secretariat, assesses the work of
peacekeepers on the ground or when it considers a
mission drawdown or closure. At each of those stages,
the Security Council must engage in some form of
dialogue with the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries. And that dialogue, I
believe, must be strengthened. It should even be a basic
principle in an Organization where those who mandate,
pay and contribute personnel are not the same.
Resolution 1353 (2001), of 13 June 2001, lays the
foundation for triangular cooperation by adopting
a declaration of principles and proposing a number
of options for organizing such cooperation. It also
tasked the then recently established Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to work
in that area. In resolution 1353 (2001), the Council
underlined that its consultations with the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries should enhance
its ability to make appropriate, effective and timely
decisions in fulfilling its responsibilities. At the heart
of that resolution is the debate on the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations in terms of adequate
capacity and support, adequate human and financial
resources, support for the training of various personnel,
information development and analysis to assist with
regular planning — all of which are at the core of the
debate the Council has had over the past year concerning
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
6/29

10/07/2019

Since the adoption of resolution 1353 (2001),
all reference documents calling for the improved
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations — from
the Capstone Doctrine to the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see
S/2015/446) to the New Horizon initiative — have
mentioned the need to strengthen triangular cooperation.
Various initiatives have been taken but none of them
has resulted in a regular and systematic process to
institutionalize the practice, establish a framework,
as called for in the HIPPO report, or begin interactive
consultations that would have a real impact on the
implementation of mandates. That framework must
now be specifically defined so that such interaction
becomes a regular practice of the Council and no longer
depends on the initiatives of one or the other. I would
like to make some concrete proposals to help achieve
that objective by striking a balance between the formal
and informal dimensions of those meetings, where each
actor — the Security Council, the contributors and the
Secretariat — can gain the confidence to talk about
issues of concern to them.
(spoke in English)
Triangular consultations should take the form of
regular private meetings among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the major contributors. They should
involve the primary troop- and police-contributors
specific to the mission under consideration, since they
are taking the main risks in the field. Ten troop- and
police-contributors could be considered a good number
to allow for a focused discussion. Some flexibility
would of course be required when adjusting the exact
number of attendees, but the meetings should not be
transformed into yet another forum where no one
is willing to talk openly and informally about the
real issues.
The meetings should be informal in order to
facilitate constructive dialogue. No readout of the
meetings should therefore be issued. The idea would
be that views and concerns expressed by troop- and
police-contributing countries would be taken into
account by the penholder and would therefore shape the
way a mandate is conceived. But that would not encroach
upon the decision-making prerogatives of the Council.
The consultations should be held before the renewal
of the mandate of a mission, before and after a major
strategic review has been conducted by the Secretariat
and when a major mission-related crisis occurs. They
could be held at the start of the process initiated by the
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

penholder to renew a mandate and immediately after
the advance copy of the Secretary-General’s report is
sent and shared with the main contributors. Sufficient
time should be afforded to all stakeholders to come to
those meetings with appropriate feedback and input.
Those triangular consultations should be held at
the expert level and attended by political and military
experts, as such discussions are fundamentally political
and military. That does not mean that, at times, when
stakes are higher, those meetings could not be held at a
more senior level in order to enable effective decisions.
And, as already suggested by resolution 1353 (2001),
such meetings could be strengthened by holding a
parallel discussion of a purely military nature within
the informal setting of the Military Staff Committee,
to which key contributors not serving in the Council
could be invited.
To summarize, what is needed is to have one type
of triangular meeting that is informal in nature but
mentioned in the programme of work of the Council,
restricted in its format, called for by the penholder and
organized in coordination with the presidency of the
Council for that month.
As the Security Council decides on operations in
increasingly challenging and dangerous contexts and
pushes major contributors to take more and more risks in
a context of financial cuts, it is only legitimate that those
contributors demand a greater say in how the Security
Council shapes peacekeeping mandates and how the
missions are designed. In such a challenging context,
the United Nations can no longer postpone triangular
discussions and let the gap between the Council and
contributing countries widen and tensions increase.
The objective of triangular cooperation must be
to achieve a shared understanding of the challenges
and a shared responsibility to make those operations
more efficient, as well as better supported politically,
militarily and financially. Each endpoint of the
triangle has an important role to play in that common
endeavour through engagement that must be early,
meaningful and timely. As I wrote in 2015, triangular
cooperation is a reform that is free of charge and,
instead of costing money, increases the cost efficiency
of peacekeeping operations.

S/PV. 8570

yet another meeting whereby words would replace
taking action. The idea would be to systematize
what is currently informal and make such exchanges
into an obligatory and useful part of the negotiations
concerning a given mandate. To that end, such meetings
must also be taken seriously by all so that everyone
participates in a constructive spirit, with the relevant
information available for them to consider. That will of
course require a number of adjustments in terms of the
flow of information to and from the contingents on the
ground, their capitals and subsequently their Permanent
Missions in New York. That may also require the
establishment of strategic dialogues among capitals in
which issues related to peacekeeping operations must
be better addressed.
The challenge today is to reverse the trend and to
take advantage of the new momentum offered by today’s
meeting to implement a mechanism for triangular
consultations that is in everyone’s interest for three
crucial reasons.
First, meaningful triangular cooperation would
allow the Security Council to consider matters on
the ground from a closer perspective. It is obviously
not in the Council’s interest to develop mandates that
ultimately would not be implemented on the ground,
or that contributors would implement only reluctantly.
That would only open the door to all types of
non-compliance, restrictions on the use of resources and
other forms of inaction that damage the reputation of
the Blue Helmets. The Council’s negotiating processes
must be better informed by the realities on the ground,
and triangular cooperation must be a means to that end.
Secondly, such dialogue is also part and parcel
of the unity of the Council, which is vital to those
operations. The political battles pitched here and there
only weaken those operations. Conversely, better
mutual understanding increases the sense of sharing
the same goals.

(spoke in French)

Lastly, by providing improved information for
all concerned, such dialogue must help build a better
consensus on how to carry out peacekeeping operations
and better identify a realistic and achievable operational
framework for them. In brief, we must move beyond
words and develop an operational doctrine adapted to
the specificity of those operations as well as to their
changing environments.

Against that backdrop, the idea is not to further
burden the agenda of the Security Council and add

In conclusion, while peacekeeping is a partnership,
triangular cooperation must be one of its preferred

19-211407/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

tools. It would be even more robust if the burden of
peacekeeping were better shared. It will hardly solve
every problem, but it will, I am convinced, help
improve a collective and multilateral management
of the challenges that those operations entail. I
hope that today’s debate will help set in motion the
flexible and informal institutionalization of such
triangular cooperation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Novosseloff for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of South Africa, Equatorial Guinea and Côte
d’Ivoire — the three African members of the Security
Council — I thank the Republic of Peru for convening
this debate on strengthening cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs). On their
behalf, I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations; Mr. Dennis
Gyllensporre, Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali; and Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff, Senior Fellow at
the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations of the
International Peace Institute.
(spoke in English)
United Nations peacekeeping operations are one
of the most recognizable symbols of global solidarity
in pursuit of the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security. TCCs and PCCs
play a vital role in contributing the services of women
and men who are dedicated to serving in dangerous
environments to provide security to some of the world’s
most vulnerable people.
Our discussion today allows us to reflect on the
coordination, collaboration and cooperation of those
responsible for mandating, planning, managing and
implementing United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Promoting effective triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, as the body responsible for
mandating peace missions, the Secretariat, as the body
responsible for planning and managing those missions,
and, importantly, the TCCs and PCCs, as the countries
implementing those mandates, remains one of the
priorities for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
8/29

10/07/2019

The General Assembly’s Special Committee for
Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) and the Security
Council have been seized with the issue for several
years, as evidenced by numerous decisions and/or
recommendations that have been made in pursuit of
efficient cooperation. Chief among those are resolution
1353 (2001), reports of the substantive sessions of the
C-34, which have dedicated sessions on triangular
cooperation, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and, recently, the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
(spoke in French)
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals also call for the
development of triangular cooperation policies, whereby
it is recognized that global challenges must be addressed
through a regional and comprehensive approach, based
on the concepts of effective partnership, joint initiatives
and collective implementation. However, despite those
positive developments, challenges remain that must be
met in order to make triangular cooperation best suited
and effective.
Interest in strengthening triangular cooperation
has increased in recent years, given the complex nature
of conflicts and the challenges faced by peacekeepers,
including unconventional weapons, asymmetrical
attacks and the transnationalization and transregional
dimension of conflicts.
As our briefers mentioned, in particular the Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the situation
in Mali and the Sahel is symptomatic of the complexity
of peacekeeping operations today. That new conflict
dynamic increasingly exposes peacekeepers to
attacks, thereby forcing them to step up aspects
such as command and control, the use of weapons,
the acquisition of appropriate equipment, improved
capabilities and training, the security of peacekeeping
forces and the generation of strategic forces. The nature
of the mandates that we adopt is therefore of paramount
importance to all actors in peacekeeping.
In that regard, it is important that we recognize
the importance of consultation with, and the full
involvement of, troop-contributing countries and peace
coordination committees throughout the duration of
peacekeeping operations, including in the development
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of peacekeeping mission mandates. The meaningful
participation of troop-contributing countries will ensure
that the views of those serving in the field are essential
in decision-making on peacekeeping operations
(spoke in English)
Subsequent to what I have mentioned, the three
African members of the Council propose the following
in response to the questions posed in the concept note
(S/2019/538, annex).
First, resolution 1353 (2001) remains relevant,
and all the decisions that were taken therein should be
implemented accordingly.
Secondly, the measures outlined on enhancing
triangular cooperation in the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on its
2018 substantive session (see A/72/19) should be
considered favourably.
Thirdly, triangular cooperation requires working
procedures and decision-making processes that are
transparent, predictable and inclusive. That will
enhance trust among the Secretariat, the Security
Council and the TCCs and PCCs in terms of improving
mandate implementation and contributing to the more
efficient and effective functioning of peacekeeping
missions in the achievement of our respective goals.
Fourthly, more substantive and regular triangular
meetings among the three players are imperative.
In that regard, the existing TCC and PCC meetings
should be made more meaningful by allowing all
three stakeholders an opportunity to contribute to the
effectiveness of peacekeeping missions. The views of
the TCCs and PCCs should therefore be respected and
taken into account.
Fifthly, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations could also play a monitoring and evaluation
role in following up on the commitments made by the
Security Council regarding triangular cooperation in
its previous resolutions on peacekeeping operations.
(spoke in French)
We would be remiss if we did not underscore
the importance of partnership and political and
operational cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Those partnerships can contribute to

S/PV. 8570

strengthening triangular cooperation in situations that
warrant different levels of coordination.
Allow me, on behalf of the three African members
of the Council, to therefore underline the need for
increased predictability, sustainability and flexibility
in the financing of peace support operations led by the
African Union and authorized by the Security Council,
through the assessed contributions of United Nations
Member States, on a case-by-case basis.
Moreover, effective triangular cooperation can help
Africa achieve some of its most important objectives,
as set out in the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by
2020, which aims to make Africa a peaceful and stable
continent, free of conflict, and will ensure inclusive
growth and sustainable development.
In conclusion, the three African members of the
Council fully support the Secretary-General’s ongoing
efforts to improve the efficacy of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in full harmony with the
wider membership.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
thank Peru for convening this important debate. We
also thank all the briefers for the most valuable insights
they provided today.
At a time when peacekeeping operations face
constant and evolving challenges, as States Members
of the United Nations we feel even more compelled
to fulfil the objectives set out in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. In that regard, it is imperative that we
recognize the essential roles that the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs)
play in entrusting, planning, managing and executing
peacekeeping operations. That is why we need to
strengthen that triangular relationship to promote
collaboration, cooperation and mutual trust.
Triangular cooperation has been the focus of various
debates and discussions, and they continue to identify
the lack of timely information and effective dialogue
among the three parties, which, in turn, has led to a
sizeable challenge. In that regard, we understand that
a balance must be struck between formal and informal
consultations with efficient formats and effective and
timely interactions. Similarly, such consultations are

19-211409/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

necessary in situations of transition from a peacekeeping
operation to a peacebuilding operation and in cases of a
reduction or withdrawal of a mission.
It should be stressed that it is important that the
triangular dialogues be conducted in a participatory,
timely and inclusive manner, while paying greater
attention to the concerns expressed by the TCCs and
PCCs and bearing in mind their knowledge of the
existing realities on the ground, which can contribute
to making effective decisions on peacekeeping
operations, especially before the renewal, adjustment
or reconfiguration of troops in a mission by the
Security Council. That is why we understand that the
suggestions made by troop-contributing countries are
key in the design of peace missions.
With regard to the preparation of meetings, we
underscore the importance that TCCs and PCCs receive
updated and regular information from the Secretariat
on the situation in each peacekeeping operation.
Similarly, rapid responses from the Secretariat to their
requests for information are crucial. The open debates
that are convened by the Security Council are another
way of exchanging information on peacekeeping issues,
in which the participation of TCCs and PCCs should
be highlighted.
The joint work of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and troopcontributing countries is an additional mechanism
that allows for close dialogue on peacekeeping issues.
We should encourage the further strengthening of
mission-specific meetings more actively to create an
exchange of ideas and information that will contribute
to boosting the efficiency of such dialogues. We believe
that the meetings of the Working Group should be
held on a more regular basis to follow the issues and
processes of peace missions and therefore foster the
most effective communication among the three pillars.
In conclusion, we once again wish to reiterate our
commitment to peacekeeping and our conviction that we
must all shoulder responsibility for it. It is only through
our determination and joint efforts that we will be able
to successfully achieve lasting and sustainable peace.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, I thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this topic on the agenda. At
least from what we have heard so far, this is a matter on
which the Security Council really is united — again, it
is a very important issue.
10/29

10/07/2019

Let me start by thanking Mr. Lacroix for his
briefing and the work he is doing. Very early on
in his presentation, he made a proposal that was
basically taken up by all of the speakers afterwards.
It is a question of more regular meetings among the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
(TCCs/PCCs) and Members States. I also thank
Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff, who I believe made the
most formal proposal in terms of institutionalizing it.
Mr. Lacroix seemed more open to it being an informal
process, which was echoed by Ambassador Adom on
behalf of the three African members of the Council, as
well as by Ambassador Singer Weisinger.
I think we really have to look at how can we
intensify this. Personally, I would lean more towards
the proposal that Mr. Lacroix made, therefore in a more
informal way. As Ambassador Singer Weisinger said, it
has to be meaningful and substantive, so this meeting
should not just be allocated a regular slot on the agenda,
but rather as and when missions or thematic topics
require them. Nevertheless, we should have more of
these meetings. I think that everybody who has spoken
so far sees the benefit in this.
The second point I wanted to make, on the subject
of TCCs/PCCs, is that we could perhaps invite the head
of a police component to the next meeting, as they are
a very important element of our cooperation, as well as
our missions on the ground.
Thirdly, something that was mentioned by
almost everybody is cooperation with regional and
subregional actors. We have seen this here when we
have seen representatives from the African Union
or the European Union (EU); we have missions like
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur where it is, in fact, a joint mission, or in Mali we
have the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and then
we have the EU Training Mission. Therefore, I think
we should really look more into having these kinds of
meetings where we work together with all actors on the
ground. We are very much in favour of that.
I would like to thank Lieutenant General
Gyllensporre for coming all the way from Mali to brief
us and give us a very practical view on one of the most
important and critical missions there. I think that, for
those of us who attended the trips to Mali and Burkina
Faso, we saw how important it was for us to go there,
too, to actually meet with the mission, the Government
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and United Nations representatives on the ground. I
think that Mr. Lacroix, in his intervention, said that
visits to missions are very important — I can speak
only for myself, but since my visit with the Security
Council I am far better able to understand the situation
on the ground.
I also support what Lieutenant General Gyllensporre
said with regard to expectations of peacekeepers and
that they are more agile, mobile, proactive, flexible
and robust. This is provided for in the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and what is expected but, at
the same time, we have to be aware that, in Mali in
particular, peacekeepers are paying a very high price.
Some Council members may have attended the meeting
of the Peacebuilding Commission this morning, attended
by the Minister of Economy, Planning and Cooperation.
Chad has sent approximately 2,500 soldiers to Mali, and
they have paid the highest price: 60 of the 200 soldiers
who have died in Mali were Chadian.
Of course, formally, the TCCs are asked to do
everything, such as providing equipment and overseeing
all the logistics, but this is an illusion. We have to do
more as Member States and beyond in order to support
those countries that are actually serving in the missions
and therefore I think we have to do more, as Lieutenant
General Gyllensporre said, in terms of predeployment
and mission training. Germany, for instance, is
supplying Chad with security vests and helmets, but
I think we have to do it more systematically so that,
when these countries go out and represent the United
Nations, we are doing everything we can to ensure their
troops do not lose their lives.
My last point concerns trilateral cooperation, which
is something I think we can even go beyond. Moreover,
going back to MINUSMA, I think we can achieve a
lot when we work together and when we have the best
peacekeepers, but we will not solve the problem on the
ground if the peace agreement is not actually being
implemented, or if good governance and respect for
human rights, inter alia, are absent in the country in
question. We must therefore further expand our global
view if we are to achieve success in our missions.
However, this is not the subject on the agenda today. I
thank you again Sir, for convening this meeting today
on what is, from our perspective, a very important
matter where there is a lot to be achieved.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I am most grateful to you, Mr. President, for

S/PV. 8570

organizing this debate on such an essential element
of the effectiveness and success of peacekeeping
operations: a goal we all share under the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. I would also like to express
my sincere thanks to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, the Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Ms. Novosseloff for
their particularly valuable contributions.
I would like to begin by echoing previous speakers
in recalling the vital importance that France attaches
to triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries. This cooperation, in the form of regular
consultations, is necessary at all stages of the life cycle
of a peacekeeping operation, including as it is drawn
up, drawn down, implemented and renewed.
Because they are present on the ground, often have
extensive experience and practice in peacekeeping
operations and are aware of the difficulties Blue
Helmets face, as the MINUSMA Force Commander
has just reminded us, as well as having broad expertise,
troop- and police-contributing countries have a lot to
contribute in terms of the planning, decision-making
and effective deployment of operations. The information
and lessons that they retain from theatres of operations
are very useful in drawing up but also adjusting
peacekeeping mandates and ensuring that the mandates
are adapted to the realities on the ground.
Nonetheless, in the face of increasing complexity
of conflict dynamics, sustained dialogue among
the Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat is essential for the effective management
of missions. Missions must be made to measure,
effective, credible and able to adapt to environments
that are constantly changing. Triangular cooperation is
therefore in the interests of us all and puts into practice
the values of
​​ multilateralism that bring us here today
and govern our actions at the international level.
Secondly, I wish to stress that we already have many
tools at our disposal to ensure the smooth functioning
of triangular cooperation, as Mr. Lacroix has just
reminded us. We have a number of meeting formats
within the Council that allow us to interact with troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat. The next
meeting of troop-contributing countries will be held
here in a few days. We also have the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, which provides an

19-2114011/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

opportunity for all peacekeeping stakeholders to speak,
as well as meetings with troop- and police-contributing
countries that are organized by the Secretariat. From
France’s point of view, I think that it is less a matter of
establishing new meeting formats than of working to
revitalize and improve the effectiveness of those we have
today. It is therefore important that everyone be present
and actively participate in those coordination forums,
which are essential to improving the development and
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
Finally, I would like to recall that France is fully
committed to triangular cooperation and strives to
be exemplary with regard to the mandates for which
it is the penholder, in particular the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali but also the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We seek to systematically consult troopcontributing countries throughout the year, not only
at the time of the mandate renewal. We organize field
evaluation visits prior to every mandate renewal. We
also consult the host State, and we work to prioritize
mandates, where possible. In that way, we try to create
a positive dynamic.
In addition to our consultation activities, we are
also fully committed to the training and capacitybuilding of troop-contributing countries, in particular
French-speaking countries. In that way, the training
is another key element of triangular cooperation. For
example, France supports six peacekeeping training
centres in Africa, three in Latin America and one in
Asia, which contribute to building the capacity of future
contingents deployed in peacekeeping operations. We
are also strengthening the skills of those contingents
in specialized areas, such as mine clearance, health,
judicial police, logistics and civil protection, thanks
to our network of national schools that work at the
regional level and our network of 320 experts working
as closely as possible with the defence and security
forces of many countries.
Through those various actions, France is committed
to training more than 30,000 African soldiers next year
to enable them to serve in peacekeeping operations
in particular. That is a considerable effort with direct
operational significance.
12/29

10/07/2019

Finally, because cooperation is based above all
on sharing, we are also involved in the informal
coordination mechanism — the light coordination
mechanism — which enables the Secretariat to be fully
informed of the various training activities carried out
by States for the benefit of troop-contributing countries.
I would like to conclude by underlining once
again the importance of the active engagement of each
stakeholder in the existing triangular cooperation
mechanisms in order to fully achieve the positive impact
expected for the success of peacekeeping operations,
to which we are committed through the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. I also thank all the briefers: Mr. Lacroix,
Lieutenant General Gyllensporre and Ms. Novosseloff.
I would like to address the topic of today’s meeting,
which is strengthening triangular cooperation, by
highlighting three basic aspects. In fact, some speakers
who preceded me focused on the same aspects that I will
mention now but I would like to deal with them from a
different perspective. They are procedural issues, the
subsidiary bodies and best practices.
On procedural issues, resolution 1353 (2001)
regulated the mechanism governing the meetings of the
Security Council with troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) as we know them today.
Presidential note S/2017/507, issued in 2017, presented
some requests and advice to promote the Council’s
ability to adopt effective resolutions, including making
the Secretary-General’s reports available to the
countries concerned for enough time before discussing
them in the meetings. Consequently, engaging the
stakeholders, be they contributing or host countries,
as much as possible is a practical request. As stated
in note 507, cooperation must not be limited to the
meetings held before the conclusion of a peacekeeping
operation’s mandate but must also include all those held
after the issuance of the Secretary-General’s reports.
Taking note 507 as a guideline is a great step
towards holding honest and interactive discussions.
The Council can also go back to what many States said
regarding today’s topic during the two debates held by
the Council under Kuwait’s presidency, in February
2018 (see S/PV.8175) and last month (see S/PV.8552),
on developing triangular cooperation to ensure synergy
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

between TCC experiences and the peacekeeping
reforms at the United Nations.
On the subsidiary bodies, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations is one of the most inclusive
subsidiary bodies. Its meetings are held with the
participation of TCCs and on an equal footing with
Council members. That makes the Working Group
one of the Council’s most inclusive tools for working
with TCCs.
The cooperation of the Working Group with the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
known as C-34, provides the Council with the
opportunity to take into account the concerns of TCCs
and PCCs as well as all the remaining members of the
United Nations, since the Special Committee is the sole
body mandated to tackle all peacekeeping issues. In
that regard, we thank the United Kingdom and Pakistan
for their non-paper of 2017, which is still valuable and
of relevance to our debate today in terms of benefiting
from formal and informal meetings as well as enjoying
flexibility in calling for meetings while preparing
for them.
On best practices, we believe that the engagement of
stakeholders must not be limited to the formal meetings
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. It would be
better if it included all our practices encompassing
informal consultations of penholders with TCCs as
well as with the host countries. That is a good and
commendable practice that we hope to encompass all
peacekeeping operations, including in cases where
the course of a mandate is altered following official
meetings in order to give stakeholders the opportunity
to express their opinion on new developments.
Holding those meetings early and regularly,
as far as possible, stresses that the responsibility
of the Security Council to maintain international
peace and security does not mean monopolizing the
decision-making process. Instead, it means taking into
account the advice and concerns of those most affected
by its resolutions, especially since they sacrifice the
most to maintain peace. The Council must also consult
with the host countries where peacekeeping operations
are deployed for the sake of their present and future.
We refer in that regard to the transitional stages in Haiti
and Darfur, since they provide a good opportunity to
adopt best practices.
In addition, we would also like to commend the
contributing countries Indonesia, Morocco, Pakistan,

S/PV. 8570

China and Egypt for holding the first meeting of its
kind on triangular cooperation last March. We also
commend the Cairo Roadmap, which developed the
concept of triangular cooperation into four-party
consultations by adding a fourth side representing the
host countries.
The
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2019/4
recognizes that the mandate of a peacekeeping
operation is defined according to the need of the country
concerned. Moreover, previous practices and initiatives
are an important foundation on which to build and pave
the way for more future development.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
today’s briefers for their informative briefings.
The United States recognizes the contribution that
contingents make in increasingly insecure environments
around the globe. We welcome the opportunity to work
together, through existing working groups, to make
peacekeeping as effective as possible. The United States
views peacekeeping reforms through the lens of our
five peacekeeping principles. Peacekeeping missions
must support political solutions; have the cooperation
of the host country; possess realistic and achievable
mandates; have an exit strategy; and adjust to progress
and failure.
The United States has worked tirelessly over the
past two years to promote a culture of performance
within United Nations peacekeeping. That will improve
the ability of peacekeepers to carry out their mandates
effectively. The unanimous adoption of resolution 2436
(2018) made it clear that United Nations peacekeeping
performance and accountability are a Security
Council priority.
To that end, we support the recommendations
outlined by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). The Panel recognized
that enhanced triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs) is essential
to strengthening performance.
The United States consults extensively with host
countries, peacekeeping mission personnel, troopand police-contributing countries, the United Nations
Secretariat and fellow Security Council members to
gain valuable information about the realities on the
ground for each peacekeeping mission. We conduct
those consultations regularly in New York, Washington,

19-2114013/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/07/2019

D.C., and capitals prior to the creation or renewal of
mandates. We will continue to do so.

TCCs and PCCs, to make recommendations on
peacekeeping policy.

That informal dialogue is an important mechanism
to discuss progress achieved, fluid dynamics on the
ground and areas for improvement with existing
peacekeeping mandates. It is important to keep the
discussions focused on the purpose and specific
requirements of the missions, including the protection
of civilians, the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and improved performance and
accountability. It is equally important to avoid overly
formalizing triangular consultations, as has been noted
by many of our colleagues here today. Adding layers of
unnecessary bureaucracy would ultimately weaken the
mandating process.

In the continued spirit of Security Council
efficiency and effectiveness, we strongly encourage
future discussions on this topic to remain in existing
Security Council working groups. Those forums are the
best vehicles for discussions, especially on mandates.

The United States notes that triangular
cooperation is already discussed in the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
The Working Group has reiterated its commitment
to hold consultations between itself and troop- and
police-contributing countries at different stages of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We would
encourage more TCC Member States to make greater
use of those forums by both attending and participating
in the discussions.

The importance and wide scope of triangular
cooperation is well recognized and acknowledged.
In my statement today I would like to highlight three
aspects that my country considers important in this
matter: first, the need for open and frank discussion
among all relevant stakeholders; secondly, the formats
in which the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) and the Security Council
can exchange their views, and last, but not least, the
potential role that the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations can play in this process.

Triangular cooperation is also discussed in
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
reviews working methods for the Security Council
to, among other things, enhance interaction and
consultation between the Security Council and troopand police-contributing countries.
In addition to efforts to enhance triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and TCCs and PCCs, we must also remember there
are other forums where all Member States have an
opportunity to engage with the Secretariat and to
provide guidance on issues that impact United Nations
peacekeeping, in particular in the General Assembly
Fifth Committee and in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
We are deeply concerned that recent negotiations
in the Fifth Committee on cross-cutting peacekeeping
policy issues were ultimately unsuccessful in
reaching a resolution owing to the parochial national
interests of a few Member States. That was a critical
missed opportunity for all Member States, including
14/29

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the presence of the Chiefs of Defence who
are representing Member States. We all look forward
to tomorrow’s discussion and the outcomes of the
Chiefs of Defence Conference. The Security Council
counts on their knowledge and experience. Let me also
thank all the briefers for their very informative and
valuable contributions.

Let me start with the widely expressed desire for
in depth consultations among TCCs and PCCs, the
Secretariat and the Security Council. That idea cannot
be questioned. There is, however, one particularly
important element that is indispensable to make
the conversation effective, namely, unhindered
information-sharing. An honest exchange of views
and meaningful discussion are possible only when all
partners sit at the table with the same understanding
of the subject. Consequently, up-to-date, relevant
information from the mission should be well established.
As an elected member of the Council, I would also
like to bring up the need for penholders to give Council
members extended time to work on draft resolutions.
In return, such time flexibility would also allow all
capitals to consolidate their inputs.
We are of the opinion that, while the informal
Security Council TCCs/PCCs meetings are already wellestablished and utilized, the pre-meetings organized by
penholders also serve the purpose of sharing concerns
and perspectives. It is yet another format that allows all
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

stakeholders to actively engage in a genuine and frank
exchange of views ahead of the mandate renewals. It
would be worth considering extending such discussions
as preparatory meetings to all mandate renewals of
peacekeeping missions.
Lastly, the third point I would like to make today
is on the role of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. There is potential in considering the
Group’s incorporation in triangular cooperation.
We see the value of the Working Group in its ability
to adjust its discussions to the current needs. Each
aspect of a mission could be discussed separately and
thoroughly, as required. Findings, recommendations or
proposals could then be utilized in further deliberations
of the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance and value of triangular cooperation for the
work of the Security Council and for the missions in
the field. As an elected member and incoming TCC,
we attach great importance to constant dialogue among
the Council, and in particular penholders, TCCs/
PCCs and the Secretariat. Expressing each other’s
needs, expectations and even demands in an open
and frank format is the only way to achieve effective
mandate implementation.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for bringing this important issue, which is always
near and dear to our Indonesian heart, to the attention
of the Security Council. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Force Commander
Gyllensporre and Ms. Novosseloff for their
comprehensive briefings. I would especially like to
thank Lieutenant General Gyllensporre for taking care
of our peacekeepers in Mali, including Indonesian
peacekeepers, and for having us there. I think we
learned a lot from our discussion with him at the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
The importance of triangular cooperation has long
been underlined in many major guiding documents
related to peacekeeping. The Brahimi report of
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see
S/2000/809), the report (A/72/19) of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34),
the New Horizon Initiative report, the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) and the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration all speak volumes about the need to

S/PV. 8570

strengthen triangular cooperation. What has been
lacking, however, are efforts to institutionalize
triangular cooperation. We have heard many important
recommendations today. But the question is: how can
we make sure that triangular cooperation works? Let
me highlight several points that we consider important.
First, implementing existing intergovernmental
commitments on triangular cooperation is crucial.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, for instance, identified, among other
things, the necessity of strengthening peacekeeping
mandate configuration processes and United Nations
capabilities through effective triangular cooperation.
The C-34 report also reiterated that triangular
consultations based on informal and inclusive thematic
debates among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries were essential.
All the recommendations from those meetings and
reports must be considered and follow-up actions must
be determined.
For our part, last March we held a triangular
formula meeting on training, capacity-building, safety
and security, and the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping. I stress the word performance. The
meeting was useful in bringing together all stakeholders
to discuss ways and means to improve and strengthen
training, capacity-building, safety and security, and the
performance of United Nations peacekeeping, which
in turn contributed to the issuance of presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/4 under Indonesia’s presidency
in May.
The second point concerns considering options for
further direct engagement between host Governments
and the Security Council. That would include
cooperation in the pursuit of Security Council mandates,
including facilitating access and the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates. The quadrilateral formula,
which includes host States in the discussion, can be one
of the options. Based on the quadrilateral consultations
with the host nations, the Security Council, troopcontributing countries (TCCs), police-contributing
countries (PCCs) and the Secretariat could discuss
the larger picture of political strategy and priorities.
Such consultations would be useful in revalidating
and rearticulating the long-term vision of the mission’s
political objectives and solution.
We concur with what Mr. Lacroix mentioned in his
statement, namely, that “mandates can also strongly

19-2114015/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

benefit from the perspectives and experiences of troop
and police contributors present on the ground”. Our
troops on the ground need to be clear on the mandate,
and the experts on the Council should make sure that the
mandate is simple, clear and executable on the ground.
I think that is the message that the Force Commander
was trying to deliver, and I think that is also the message
that many Force Commanders who have come into the
Security Council Chamber have delivered. I will not
name those Force Commanders, but that is the message.
The questions then centre on how we will do it
and when we will do it. I deliberately used the word
“experts” for those who are discussing the draft
resolution. I think that is extremely important. They
should strive for clarity instead of drafting lots of pages
of text. I had that experience when we were in Mali. I
spoke with many of our peacekeepers there, and I asked
them a simple question: Did they understand what they
were supposed to be doing based on resolution 2100
(2013)? Council members know what the answer was.
I would like to stress once again that better
coordination, coherence and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
during discussions of peacekeeping mandate and
transition are also crucial to improving engagement
between host Governments and the Security Council.
My third and last point relates to pursuing
innovative approaches, including through triangular
partnership projects. Cooperation does not have to
stop at that political level; it should be expanded to
the technical level. That is why innovative projects,
such as triangular partnerships, should identify the
partnerships necessary to address the capacity gap in
implementing peacekeeping mandates. That is also
important during the configuration of a mission’s force,
structures, size and posture so that it is matched with
appropriate human, material and financial resources.
In that respect, Indonesia will host the Triangular
Partnership Project in 2020, focusing on addressing the
gap between the mandates and the capacities of TCCs
and PCCs.
I note the remarks made by my colleague from
Germany on the various recommendations, as well as
the remarks made by Ms. Novosseloff and Mr. Lacroix.
I support not only the holding of meetings, whether
formal or informal, but also the substance, dynamics,
outcome and concrete action of those meetings. I would
love to have more meetings with the TCCs, PCCs and
16/29

10/07/2019

the other stakeholders, but what is important is to
stop the debate and to continue with something that
is concrete.
In conclusion, we hope that this debate also offers
an opportunity to revive and operationalize triangular
cooperation in the context of implementing the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. As a footnote, I would like
to underline the following. I note the message from the
Force Commander on the need for the Force Commander
and the troops on the ground to be agile and to have
the ability to respond appropriately, particularly in
missions that have a serious security threat.
I wish to underline once again that our objective for
the future is to make peacekeeping operations efficient,
effective, agile, responsive and, lastly, safe. I think that
is the important part that we tend to forget. The key
words here are coordination and good management. At
the end of the day, we should never forget that our Blue
Helmets are on the front lines, risking their lives for the
cause of peace.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Peru for taking the initiative to convene today’s
debate. I also thank the three briefers for their briefings.
Peacekeeping operations are an effective tool for
the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. The Security Council, troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), and the Secretariat are three important
components involved in peacekeeping operations.
Strengthening triangular cooperation among them is
crucial to enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. In 2018, the Secretary-General proposed the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, while 151 Member
States endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, making
commitments to strengthening consultations between
peacekeeping stakeholders on mandates and their
implementation and giving new impetus to advancing
triangular cooperation.
China wishes to make the following comments
on
strengthening
triangular
cooperation
in
peacekeeping operations.
First, improving the mandates given by the
Security Council is a precondition. The mandates of
peacekeeping operations should adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic principles guiding peacekeeping operations,
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

while remaining closely aligned with the fundamental
goal of a political solution. The formulation of
mandates must be tailored to conditions on the ground
and correspond to the needs and actual situations of the
countries concerned. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations should be clear and specific to facilitate
political solutions. The priorities and focus of each
phase need to be updated continuously according to the
dynamics and needs.
Secondly, improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations is crucial. The Secretariat
should optimize the logistical support mechanism
to ensure more efficient support and adequate
peacekeeping resources. Attention should be paid to
strengthening training in order to effectively help the
TCCs and PCCs improve their ability to implement
their mandates and respond to complex situations. More
attention should be paid to the safety and security of
peacekeepers. The Secretariat and the missions should
adopt integrated measures, develop safety and security
rules, improve early warning and response capabilities,
enhance information collection and sharing, improve
security equipment and protection measures, and
strengthen medical rescue and life-saving capabilities.
Thirdly, building stronger partnerships serves
as a buttress. The Security Council meetings with
TCCs and PCCs should be better utilized to promote
more comprehensive and in-depth discussions. The
role of the Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations should be better leveraged to serve as
a channel of communication among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs and PCCs so as
to forge synergy and resolve practical problems. The
penholders of the Security Council should strengthen
communication with the TCCs and PCCs in the process
of drafting relevant draft resolutions on peacekeeping
operations, to learn the actual needs and tailor the
mandates authorized by the Council’s resolutions, with
greater attention paid to improving actual results.
China is a permanent member of the Security
Council, as well as a major TCC and a major financial
contributor to peacekeeping operations. China is a firm
supporter of and an important participant in the United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, we are
comprehensively implementing the multiple pledges
made by Chinese President Xi Jinping to further
support United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We have already established a peacekeeping standby
force of 8,000 troops and two peacekeeping standby

S/PV. 8570

police units. At present, more than 2,500 Chinese keep
peacekeepers are implementing mandates in eight
mission areas.
China attaches great importance to and is ready
to actively participate in triangular cooperation in
peacekeeping operations. We support the Security
Council in strengthening communication with the TCCs
and PCCs and the Secretariat, and in working together to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
China would like to leverage the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund and its own advantages
in the area of training and strengthened coordination
with the Secretariat to focus on building the capacity
of developing TCCs. Through concrete actions, China
will continue to make its own contributions to enhance
the capacity of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and honour its commitments towards peace.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by expressing my thanks
to today’s briefers and to the Peruvian presidency.
It is indeed essential that the interaction between
the Council and the troop- and police-contributing
countries proceed in the direction of improved mutual
understanding on the basis of the provisions of the note
of the President contained in document S/2017/507.
Today I would like to focus on a series of concrete
measures that would achieve that objective, first, by
making better use of existing mechanisms and, secondly,
by advancing our thinking on other approaches.
First, with regard to making better use of existing
mechanisms, I would like to begin with the issue of
meetings between the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Security Council. Since we became
members of the Council, my delegation has endeavoured
to take full advantage of those meetings as opportunities
for sustained and substantial exchanges among the
Council, the Secretariat, the host State, the missions
concerned and contributors. Let us be frank — a
dysfunctional format cannot be publicly deplored in the
General Assembly unless we make the effort to bring
such interactions to life. I would also like to encourage
the penholders in the Council to take into account the
considerations expressed by contributors when drafting
resolutions for mandate renewals.
Furthermore, all meetings of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations are held in open format. We
therefore encourage all troop- and police-contributing

19-2114017/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

countries, as well as mission host States, to participate.
Small and medium-sized contributors should also make
their voices heard. As a member of the Council, we
have everything to gain from such exchanges as they
highlight operational difficulties and elements on the
ground that countries believe the Council must take into
account. Lastly, we welcome the fact that interpretation
is provided at the majority of the meetings held by those
two forums, thereby addressing multilingualism and
accessibility concerns.
Secondly, with respect to other approaches, while
making good use of existing forums is a useful first
step, we can certainly make a greater effort. We believe
that it is important to hear from financial contributors,
regardless of their rank. As a Member State, we provide
human resources for peacekeeping but we all also
invest financial resources to ensure that peacekeeping
functions well. From that perspective therefore, we
have a financial interest in its success. I would like
to quote from a recent report of the Boutros-Ghali
Peacekeeping Observatory.
“The participation of financial contributors in
meetings concerning mission implementation
would, first and foremost, enable the format of the
mandate to be adapted to the financial resources
available and overcome operational difficulties that
hinder its design and conduct.”
That would indeed be a useful step in our efforts to
align mandates and resources.
Some mandates are implemented in increasingly
challenging security environments, thereby requiring
greater efficiency, performance and operational
responsibility. We therefore see some merit in spurring
an enhanced dialogue on increasingly technical and
military issues in order to allow for horizontal dialogue
among the experts of the respective contributors.
Consideration should be given to the role that the Military
Staff Committee should play in a triangular structure.
Lastly, Belgium supports the proposal in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to ensure that information is
available to stakeholders further in advance of planned
Council meetings. We hope that that proposal can be
adopted quickly.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting on the important subject
18/29

10/07/2019

of strengthening triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat on issues related to
peacekeeping activities.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Force Commander Lieutenant General
Gyllensporre of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and Ms. Novosseloff, independent consultant from
the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations of
the International Peace Institute, for their briefings
and views.
It is indeed difficult to overstate the importance
of triangular cooperation. It plays a significant and
defining role in the practical effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping as it brings together the key
players involved in setting tasks, planning, managing
and carrying out United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The key platform of the United Nations
system for implementing such cooperation is the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34). It is
unique in its representativeness. It is within the Special
Committee that members of the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries develop
common approaches to the parameters of peacekeeping
activities and engage in interactive dialogue with the
Secretariat on current issues.
A sine qua non for reaching the necessary level
of trust among all interested parties is ensuring
transparency and observing in practice the consensus
agreements reached in intergovernmental formats.
For example, it is the recommendations and decisions
adopted by the C-34 that should guide the Secretariat
and missions on the ground in discharging their
executive functions. That covers the textbooks,
concepts, guidelines and other documents developed
by the Secretariat.
With those objectives, it is also important to
observe the division of labour within the United Nations
system among the structures that define the functional
modalities of peacekeeping operations to ensure that we
do not impede the Special Committee in its mandate of
considering common issues in the area of peacekeeping.
To that end, the Security Council, as the organ endowed
by the Charter of the United Nations with responsibility
for preventing threats to international peace and
security certainly plays the primary role in designing
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the mandates for United Nations
operations in each specific country.

peacekeeping

We advocate putting into practice the proposals for
promoting triangular cooperation outlined in the reports
of the C-34. We believe that peacekeeping mandates
and the conceptual know-how of the Secretariat should
correlate with the opinions of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), police-contributing countries (PCCs)
and host countries. That, in turn, will allow us to have an
accurate interpretation of the objectives set to avoid the
possible overburdening of mandates and, in so doing,
increase the effectiveness of their implementation. In
that context, we note the opportunity to increase the
effectiveness of triangular cooperation by involving the
host countries, which bear the main responsibility for
protecting civilians, guaranteeing the political process,
removing reasons for crisis and engaging in postconflict reconstruction.
As practice has shown, in countries where there is
active cooperation based on mutual respect between
missions and the State, there is a precondition for the
effective achievement of objectives. TCCs and PCCs
also play a defining role in guaranteeing effective
United Nations peacekeeping operations as it is the
Blue Helmets they send who are called on to fulfil the
objectives set by the Security Council. Their opinion
and the timely information they can provide from the
area of operations are indeed very important. The
experience garnered also enhances the institutional
memory of the United Nations system and provides
lessons for the future. We therefore reiterate the value
of the meetings held among the Security Council,
TCCs and PCCs before the mandate of a peacekeeping
mission is extended.
We also note that the potential of the Military
Staff Committee remains underestimated. Pursuant to
Article 47 of the Charter, the Committee shall be called
upon to advise and assist the Security Council on all
questions relating to the Security Council’s military
requirements. We believe that it would be logical to
consider more closely ways of utilizing the analytical
capacities and practical assistance that the Military
Staff Committee can provide. A useful element is
the practice of conducting country visits to United
Nations missions, following up with a report with
recommendations for the Security Council and inviting
military representatives of the elected members of the
Council to take part in the meetings of the Military
Staff Committee. We also believe it important that

S/PV. 8570

the authority of the Military Staff Committee be
reconfirmed and that the Secretariat provide it with all
the necessary assistance in its activities involving the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I start,
Mr. President, by welcoming your choice of topic for
today’s debate. I think that, from the conversation we
have had around the table and the contributions made,
this is one that has provoked considerable interest. It
is a really good choice. In the same spirit, I would also
like to thank our briefers for coming to us today and
setting out their views.
The United Kingdom greatly values triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat, represented by Jean-Pierre Lacroix —
who is also of course also a key player there —and the
troop- and police-contributing countries, which are so
vital for all of us in in terms of achieving any mandate.
As the Ambassador of Kuwait kindly reminded us,
we set out these issues in a joint non-paper with our
friends and colleagues from Pakistan last year, which
we think is still highly relevant to these conversations.
At that time, there was broad agreement that the
purpose of triangular cooperation was to enable those
troop- and police-contributing countries to provide
reliable and relevant information on the realities of
implementing and delivering peacekeeping mission
mandates to decision makers here in New York.
Like many of its counterparts on the Security
Council, the United Kingdom is of course a troopcontributing country (TCC) itself. We therefore very
much recognize the importance in value of views from
the ground, which we happily pass on from our own
troops. And, as a Security Council member without
personnel presence in every mission, we know that
we need to seek the perspectives of other troop- and
police-contributing countries as we consider issues on
the Council’s agenda, and we do so.
As an example, in advance of the renewal of
the mandate of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) this year, we met each of the Permanent
Representatives of the troop-contributing countries
throughout the process and at every level in the
Mission. We hosted a meeting with other Security
Council members, and that helped directly inform our
approach towards resolution 2472 (2019) and, I believe,
the Council’s decision-making, particularly on how to
deliver the commitment that we have made repeatedly

19-2114019/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

concerning the transition from AMISOM to Somalialed security. That is just one example, in which it was
not necessary for us to create any new process. We were
able to do that within the existing parameters, and I
believe that we should consider that, as well.
We must also recognize, as troop-contributing
countries, that we may draw a particular view or
perspective from our own contingents’ activities, but
no single contributor has a monopoly on the truth of
what is happening on the ground. As a Council, we
need to make sure that we consider the views of the
Special Representatives and Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General, Force Commanders and all other
relevant analyses to make sure that we have a complete
and integrated picture.
As I said earlier, I think that there has been a really
interesting conversation about the best way of holding
these discussions. We have carried out these relatively
informal consultations one on one and subsequently
with other members of the Council. During the United
Kingdom presidency in August 2018, I also chaired a
TCC meeting (S/PV.8326). I would say that it was not the
most dynamic discussion that I have ever participated
in. I therefore believe that it is really important that
we consider how we can make those meetings more
informative and interactive.
We are very ready for that conversation, and I take
note of proposals made by Alexandra Novosseloff. But
we do not want it just to add to our already busy agenda.
If we are going to come out with a new idea for how
to do something, we need to take something else away
or amend the existing method. Otherwise, we will be
simply creating more and more meetings. I also agree
with all of those who have talked about the value of
missions and visits.
The Secretary-General has urged Member States
to make a greater commitment to peacekeeping
through the Action for Peace initiative (A4P), and
151 Member States have endorsed that declaration,
which specifically calls on us to implement existing
intergovernmental commitments on triangular
cooperation, namely, to strengthen consultations
among peacekeeping stakeholders on mandate
implementation, strengthen United Nations and
African Union cooperation, and expand the triangular
partnership project, which builds long-term capacity
for TCCs and supports capacity-building.
20/29

10/07/2019

When Alexandra Novosseloff talked to us earlier
about triangular cooperation, she also talked about it
in terms of avoiding tension. In that spirit, let me note
that the other shared commitments under A4P include
improvements to performance and conduct through
the use of performance data to inform deployment
decisions and agreement to hold personnel in leadership
to account for proper conduct, including in particular
on sexual exploitation and abuse.
For the United Kingdom, it is therefore
disappointing that some troop-contributing countries
have decided to obstruct improvements that would have
helped deliver better performance. The adoption of the
Fifth Committee’s draft resolution on cross-cutting
peacekeeping policy would have asked the SecretaryGeneral to take further steps to improve peacekeeping
performance and tackle sexual exploitation and
abuse. It was also deeply concerning that the same
Member States frustrated the usual consensus on the
independent Board of Auditors report (A/73/5 (Vol. II)),
which addresses actions within the Secretary-General’s
own remit, by forcing a vote and resoundingly rejecting
recommendations on improving performance. Such
recommendations would have not only helped to
protect civilians in conflict; they would have gone
hand in hand in improving the safety and security of
our peacekeepers.
Let me conclude by saying that, in seeking to
improve United Nations peacekeeping, the SecretaryGeneral has sought commitment and consensus. It is
now down to us to demonstrate our commitment to
implementing the reforms that we so often talk about
and on which we found consensus just last year.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Peru.
We too thank our briefers — Mr. Lacroix, Force
Commander Gyllensporre and Ms. Novosseloff— for
their in-depth analyses of the subject matter that brings
us together today, and we are glad to see the constructive
tone that the current discussion in this meeting has
taken. We also thank the troop-contributing countries
whose representatives are here among us this afternoon.
Peacekeeping,
in
particular
peacekeeping
operations, is a tool that is constantly evolving and
adapting to address the increasingly complex and
multidimensional environments in which conflicts take
place. That has required deploying them with more
precise objectives, coherent strategies and innovative
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

responses. In that light, we decided to convene this debate
and provide a space for reflection to discuss an issue
that, in our opinion, has yet to reach its full potential,
namely, strengthening and better coordinating dialogue
and cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. In recent
years, various reports and analyses by the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies, such the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, independent
high-level groups and other bodies, have provided
us with lucid evaluations and valuable proposals to
that end. It is now our responsibility to translate the
theoretical into concrete actions.
Among the important ideas and concepts put
forward this afternoon, we believe that there are
meaningful possibilities that can be provided within
the context of formal consultations to increase the
effectiveness of peace operations and the robustness of
their respective mandates, provided that we are able to
make effective use of them. In that regard, we agree
that there is an urgent need to provide them with greater
interaction, which involves ensuring that those who
chair them — preferably Permanent Representatives
in close coordination with penholders — foster a more
direct and genuine exchange of ideas and experiences.
Ensuring the participation of other relevant actors,
such as Force Commanders, when mandates are up for
renewal, as well as a balanced participation between
political and military experts, would also be advisable.
Aiming for a more fluid exchange also entails
ensuring the adequate prior preparation of the parties,
especially the contributing countries, and convening
meetings with due advance notice and defined purposes,
within the framework of an established calendar and
with all relevant documentation circulated in a timely
manner, including conceptual notes and performance
measures of the peace operation concerned. We also
believe that we must complement those formal meetings
with other informal meetings to provide flexibility
for coordination among the parties, especially when
the Council’s heavy agenda does not permit formal
triangular dialogue meetings to be held as often as
is necessary.
We welcome the efforts made in that regard by the
penholders in convening informal meetings to gather
reliable and relevant information that the contributing
countries are able to provide and to engage in in-depth
discussions on the texts of the resolutions. We also
underscore the central role of the Secretariat in those

S/PV. 8570

meetings through deep analyses of the situations and
capacities required for each mission, but we stress the
need for such informal meetings to take place at the
various stages of peace operations, and not only for the
renewal of mandates. In particular, they ought to be held
in a periodic, systematic manner that does not depend
on the goodwill or willingness of a given penholder or
on isolated initiatives of non-permanent members.
That last point leads us to the main point of
our statement, which is concerns the need to make
concrete progress towards the institutionalization of
triangular cooperation so as to give more structure to
our exchanges. We believe that this is feasible on the
basis of the broad coincidences raised by many of the
approaches that we have heard today, which add to our
understanding a substantial basis for agreeing on a bestpractices document as soon as possible. We believe that
the Working Groups on Peacekeeping Operations and
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
ably chaired by Côte d’Ivoire and Kuwait, respectively,
could prepare such a document, if they saw fit, together
with members and non-members of the Council that
have long-standing participation and experience in
peace operations.
Peru, in its dual role as an elected member of the
Council and a troop-contributing country since 1958,
will resolutely support all efforts to institutionalize
triangular cooperation. We hope that this debate and the
summary document that we will prepare at the end of
our presidency will give greater visibility and renewed
ideas to an issue that is of interest to all, insofar as it
contributes to the credibility and efficiency of peace
operations and, by extension, to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and particularly
on organizing this highly topical debate on working
relations and cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs). I
would also like to thank Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix and
the two other briefers.

19-2114021/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Triangular cooperation was, of course, partially
institutionalized with the establishment of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations in 2001.
As mentioned earlier by our colleague from Kuwait,
there have been a number of additional resolutions
and presidential statements adopted to promote
understanding among those three elements. The report
of the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) recommended that
the Security Council institutionalize a framework
to bring in troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat early in the process. There is no doubt that
a collective commitment to peacekeeping, based on a
shared understanding of the objectives and mandates,
remains critical to successful peacekeeping missions.
Today, missions are deployed in an increasingly
complex operating environment and with significantly
increased security risks. That underlines the
importance of a collective commitment and the need
for a continuous and meaningful dialogue among those
who create, coordinate, implement and finance peace
operations. That also emphasizes the importance of the
further institutionalization of coordination to ensure
policy and operational coherence across all United
Nations systems. It is indeed absolutely essential that
the Security Council, the troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat now work to streamline and
coordinate their activities in the increasingly complex
environment of peacekeeping.
In that context, I would like to make a number of
suggestions to encourage the spirit of partnership and
interdependence and to animate stronger cooperation
and confidence-building among those three elements:
the Security Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat.
First, we need to see greater involvement on the
part of troop- and police-contributing countries in
the mandating process. In its presidential statement
of December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26), the Security
Council itself recognized that consultations among the
three stakeholders were not working effectively. The
Council recognized that, in principle, the experience
and expertise of the troop-contributing countries could
greatly assist in the planning of operations. That would
especially be the case where political processes are
weak or non-existent and the environment is dangerous
and difficult. The Council also recognized that a
sense of ownership over the mandate and the planning
processes among troop-contributing countries offered a
direct link to performance.
22/29

10/07/2019

However, it is still the Secretariat and the resolution
penholders — and not those who will be involved on the
ground —that present analyses of the political, security
and humanitarian situations for a mission. Informal
meetings may take place, but there is plenty of room
for further input from troop-contributing countries.
Indeed, if triangular cooperation is to be strengthened,
that is imperative.
Secondly, the lack of participation in the process
of mandate preparation or renewal certainly affects
performance, and negatively so. It damages the trust
among the Security Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. Peacekeepers need to
know that authorized mandates have been set up as
a result of full consultation and candid discussions,
as well as further consultations on the challenges to
be faced. It might be added that this would also help
to improve the perception of financers, which often
seem to believe that countries are not doing enough to
ensure efficiency.
Such painful exclusion has created a sense of that
life is compromised for money, which, unfortunately,
is now prevailing in the situation of peacekeeping
operations. I would also recall that United Nations
peacekeeping operations would not be possible without
the participation of troop-contributing countries. It is
only common sense to guarantee their full involvement
in planning and organizing, which would provide
equality and fair treatment.
Thirdly, I would suggest that there is still plenty
of room for the further development of links within
triangular cooperation. For example, the Security
Council is not effectively represented at the field level
of missions. Earlier, Ambassador Heusgen mentioned
the importance of field visits, where one feels the
heat and sees the challenges to and opportunities for
peacekeeping. But the Security Council still takes
decisions on the basis of reports, which are sometimes
based on perception rather than reality. For successful
mandate operations, it is necessary that the Security
Council institutionalize regular consultations with
the stakeholders. That must cover not just the mandates
of operation, but also include areas such as the safety
and security of peacekeepers, strategic force generation
and gender, conduct and discipline.
Proper consultations and institutionalization of
this kind would also allow the resolution of disputes
over mandate capabilities or national caveats. Equally,
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

such discussions should not be confined to formal talks
in New York. There should be field-level informal
discussions that could address shortfalls in information
flows and institutional arrangements. In this context,
penholders should make it a priority to consult with
TCCs in good faith and not overlook the significance
of institutional arrangements. As our colleague from
the United Kingdom mentioned earlier regarding the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we have
held thorough consultations with troop-contributing
countries and I believe that has created ample
opportunity for us to understand each other, as well as
for the United Kingdom to take into consideration some
of the challenges AMISOM has faced in the field.
It would also be sensible to strengthen the
contribution of other mechanisms for effective mandate
delivery. It is very clear, as the Security Council has
recognized, that successful peacekeeping operations
will increasingly require strong collaboration and
dynamic consultation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union. Continuous engagement and
consultation with relevant actors — particularly the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, which
significantly influence the standard and deployment of
capabilities in the field — is indeed imperative.
In conclusion, the deployment of peacekeeping
missions in the context of escalating levels of violence
and increasing asymmetrical threats has resulted in
growing numbers of Blue Helmets paying the ultimate
sacrifice. This should forcefully underline the necessity
of putting an end to unnecessary competition for roles
in peace operation decision-making. It is very clear
that the Security Council, TCCs and the Secretariat,
as well as other major stakeholders, must work closely
together to strengthen the system of United Nations
peace operations.
The Security Council and the Secretariat must
listen properly to the experiences of the troop- and
police-contributing countries. Regular, high-level
meetings of all three elements, with conclusions being
taken into account in any mission planning, must be
a requirement. This is the first and most obvious step
towards achieving the more effective and safer delivery
of United Nations peacekeeping missions and mandates.
It needs to happen urgently.

S/PV. 8570

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): At the outset, we
wish to join other speakers in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the Security
Council presidency this month. We also thank you for
convening this important debate.
We agree with most speakers that triangular
cooperation remains key to the success of peacekeeping
operations. Anything short of that will bring failure, as
we will have failed to cooperate on an important task.
We also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, the Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff for
their very useful briefings.
First of all, allow me to recall that the Security
Council adopted resolution 1353 (2001), which
set out a statement of principles underlining that
consultations between the Council, the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries should enhance the
ability of the Security Council to take appropriate,
effective and timely decisions in fulfilling mandates
and responsibilities. This means that peacekeeping
is a partnership. All partners must make efforts
towards better coherence and efficiency. Without that
cooperation among those three pillars of peacekeeping,
we are all bound to fail.
From what we see, there are those who establish
a mandate and those who implement it. This kind of
approach to peacekeeping operations is damaging their
effectiveness. It is hurting the authority and credibility
of the principal organ dealing with peace and security,
which is the Council, and it is hindering the tools it
creates to mitigate some of the most complex crises in
the world.
In that regard, all partners need to be on the same
page on issues affecting peacekeeping operations. As
most speakers have mentioned, sustained, meaningful
consultations with troop-contributing countries at all
levels and stages of planning and decision-making
processes are critical to the success of any United
Nations peacekeeping operation. This means that
the Security Council cannot work on these issues in
isolation from the implementers of its resolutions and
mandates.

19-2114023/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

What we are seeing is that United Nations
responses to conflicts have become very complicated
due to the political and social dynamics surrounding
conflicts across the world. The bottom line for
the accomplishment of a successful peacekeeping
intervention requires a high level of cooperation,
coordination and coherence. In a situation where
cooperation, coordination and coherence are weak,
strategic outcomes become much harder to accomplish.
This means that triangular partnership allows a
common understanding of the situation, which informs
the development of peacekeeping mandates.
Once again, resolution 1353 (2001), among other
documents regarding triangular cooperation, stresses
the need for the Secretariat to be given sufficient human
and financial resources to fulfil its peacekeeping tasks.
It is unfortunate that, recently, financial resources have
been diminishing to the detriment of peacekeepers and
at the expense of contributing countries. This reaffirms
the need for structured cooperation that will address
existing gaps between mandated tasks and resources
with a view to having mandates that are achievable.
Strengthening triangular cooperation is to the
benefit of the Council, the Secretariat and troopcontributing countries. Accordingly, I would like to
make the following points.
There should be regular meaningful consultations
between the Council, the Secretariat and troopcontributing countries. Meetings should be informal in
the sense that they promote a frank, transparent and
constructive dialogue. Such meetings should be held in
a format that allows the discussion of both operational
and political matters and in a manner that will facilitate
informed political decisions based on the reality on the
ground. This kind of regular and informal meetings
should be convened with a spirit and sense of common
concern among all peacekeeping stakeholders. In the
end, that should enable them to arrive at a common
foresight on how to best implement specific tasks as
they are presented in a specific peacekeeping mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting Bangladesh to address the
Council on strengthening triangular cooperation for
peacekeeping operations.
24/29

10/07/2019

Triangular partnership is critical to effective United
Nations peacekeeping; there is no question about that.
Yet, building partnerships across divergent views of
the three key stakeholders — the Security Council,
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
and the Secretariat — has always been a challenge and
remains so even today. I hope that today’s discussion
will play an important role in informing and guiding
our upcoming work. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and the other briefers.
Despite a clear division of responsibilities among
the three parties of the triangle, there are significant
interlinkages and interplay among their work. Therefore,
meaningful cooperation and consultations among those
three parties are crucial to crafting clearly defined,
realistic and achievable mandates. Furthermore, such
consultations can also help to narrow gaps between
mandates and realities during the implementation
phase, ease tensions on unresolved issues in other
bodies, such as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) and the Fifth Committee and bring
in fresh ideas from the field in defining the contours of
future policies, particularly during the drawdown and
exit phase of a mission.
In our efforts to set triangular dialogue in a
better and more robust framework, in the past we
held discussions both on procedural and substantive
matters. In that regard, we must commend the work of
delegations in the 2018 C-34 negotiations for coming
up with a consensus-based section on triangular
cooperation with specific recommendations. In keeping
with those discussions, let me take this opportunity to
share some concrete thoughts.
First, the objective of strengthening triangular
cooperation should be primarily about overcoming
the so-called Christmas-tree mandate dilemma. More
flexibility and receptiveness to the inputs coming
from TCCs and PCCs and the ground while setting
the mandates are key in that regard. The performance
appraisal system and apportionment of responsibilities
must also be uniform and informed by realism,
practicality and achievability. Essentially, the idea
should be to allow ownership among the TCCs and
PCCs by creating spaces for their voices in critical
decisions, including the composition of peacekeeping
operations, force adjustments, resource requirements
and so on.
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secondly, very often in the United Nations bodies
dealing with peacekeeping operations, such as the
C-34, the Fifth Committee, the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Contingent-Owned Equipment Working Group,
the views of the Council, the TCCs, the PCCs and
the Secretariat become very divergent. In addition,
those United Nations bodies have their own ways
of operating, which are not necessarily in sync with
each other. Triangular dialogue can certainly play
an important role in eliminating those barriers and
creating platforms for more meaningful and regular,
perhaps institutionalized, interactions among various
intergovernmental processes on important issues, such
as safety and security, performance, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, among others.
Thirdly, we must take concrete steps to further
systemize triangular dialogue with an appropriate mix
of formal and informal meetings. We see great value
in holding regular informal meetings at the expert
level with adequate opportunities for participation by
field-level actors through videoconferences or other
means. That will encourage dynamic, field-focused,
two-way discussions. Such meetings should encourage
bottom-up thinking and, as such, be adequately
flexible, constructive and open in nature to inform
decision-makers of the views and concerns expressed by
actors and contributors in the field. It is also important
to maintain an adequate balance between the military
and the civilian voices. Those informal meetings can
be used to lay the ground for higher-level meetings in
a formal setting, with an effective decision-making
agenda and political commitment.
Fourthly, the existing mechanisms, such as the
C-34 and the Security Council Working Group, need
to be utilized for more in-depth discussions of common
concerns over various policy issues. In addition, other
existing practices for formal and informal meetings
need to be further strengthened and streamlined through
innovative ways. The Security Council Working Group
can play a catalytic role in further institutionalizing
triangular cooperation by regular and systematic
engagement with TCCs, PCCs and the Secretariat. They
can aim to push the discussions beyond the traditional
pro forma and formulaic domain to a more open and
interactive one and to keep the Security Council
informed of the outcomes of such discussions. In turn,
the Security Council can reflect the outcomes of such
discussions in mandate setting and renewals.

S/PV. 8570

Fifthly and lastly, to guide the discussions towards
convergence in a systematic way over a period, it is
essential that the discussions in a meeting adequately
inform the meetings to follow. The Secretariat can keep
track of the discussions in a matrix format, particularly
for meetings on thematic issues and mission-specific
matters. In addition, advance planning and a tentative
yearly calendar for triangular consultation with a
flexible agenda can help to prepare Member States to
contribute to such meetings appropriately.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Allow me, too, to begin
by thanking Peru for organizing today’s debate. Let
me also thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and the other briefers for their insightful
briefings this afternoon.
My country has been a consistent troop/
police-contributor (TCC/PCC) to United Nations
peacekeeping for almost six decades. More than 200,000
of our bravest have served in 46 missions around the
world in some of the most high-risk environments.
One hundred and fifty-six of them have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the cause of international peace
and security. The dedication and professionalism of
our peacekeepers are widely acknowledged. They are
well trained, well equipped and prepared to act in all
circumstances, in accordance with their mandate.
We have also been proud to contribute to United
Nations peacekeeping in the realm of ideas and normbuilding. During Pakistan’s presidency of the Security
Council in 2013, the landmark resolution 2086 (2013)
was adopted (see S/PV.6903). For the first time, the
resolution recognized the multidimensional nature of
modern peacekeeping and its evolving role in facing the
complex challenges that come with it.
We believe that TCCs are the eyes and ears of the
United Nations on the ground. Their inputs are therefore
invaluable for the Secretariat as well as the Security
Council. Pakistan has therefore been a strong proponent
of proactive and robust triangular cooperation.
In that vein, in 2018, along with the United
Kingdom, Pakistan presented a non-paper to the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
to aid discussions and find ways to improve triangular
cooperation. We were pleased to see that initiative
referred to in the concept note (S/2019/538, annex) for

19-2114025/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/07/2019

today’s debate. As a result of our efforts, an entire chapter
was dedicated to triangular cooperation in the 2018
C-34 report (A/72/19). Let me now make five specific
points to further improve triangular cooperation.

and policy formulation. However, without real and
effective triangular cooperation, we cannot expect to
successfully deal with the multiple challenges that we
face today.

First, Pakistan considers effective communication
and
consultation
among
the
three
main
stakeholders — the Security Council, the Secretariat
and the TCCs — critical for effective and resultoriented peacekeeping, which is a point that has also
been made by many of the speakers this afternoon.
There is therefore a real need to institutionalize
triangular cooperation as a framework to engage troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
early in the process.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.

Secondly, with operating environments becoming
ever more volatile and with a chorus of demands for
doing more with less, that three-way communication
has assumed even greater importance.
Thirdly, we do not need to add another layer of
formal mechanisms to improve things. All we need
to do is to better utilize the existing avenues and a
balanced mix of formal and informal dialogue. Both, of
course, have their own merit.
Fourthly, formal meetings need to be revitalized
to maximize their benefits through the provision of
relevant information to TCCs and PCCs in a timely
manner in order to ensure substantive and meaningful
dialogue well ahead of mandate renewals.
Fifthly, the elected members of the Council
continue to play a critical bridge-building role in
facilitating discussions on triangular cooperation.
That aspect of triangular cooperation also needs to be
further strengthened.
Pakistan, along with Morocco, established an
informal group of troop- and police-contributing
countries in 2017. It includes almost all top contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping missions. Our group
co-hosted a meeting on triangular cooperation with the
participation of leading TCCs, senior representatives of
the Secretariat and members of the Security Council.
We believe that the platform can be used to further
our common objective of effective communication and
better peacekeeping.
Finally, allow me to say that the Security Council
and the Secretariat can continue to count on Pakistan
as a key partner not only in the field but in all
dimensions of peacekeeping, including norm-building
26/29

Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first of all to thank Peru for convening this
important debate on the issue of tripartite cooperation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
in peacekeeping operations, as well as for inviting
Egypt to participate as one of the largest contributors
to military and police contingents in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This meeting is especially
timely in the light of the important debates taking place
at the United Nations on the reform and enhancement of
the peacekeeping system. I also express my thanks and
appreciation for the important briefings we heard earlier
in the meeting and to those speakers who preceded me.
We are aware that peacekeeping reform initiatives
tend to focus on strengthening regular capacities and
operational aspects of peacekeeping despite the fact that
many of these initiatives originate from Boutros-Ghali’s
An Agenda for Peace (A/47/277), the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), the report of High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and finally
the current Secretary-General’s Action for Peace (A4P)
initiative, all of which comprehensively addressed
the various political and operational dimensions
of peacekeeping.
The prevailing focus on the technical and
operational elements of peacekeeping effectiveness and
performance has shifted to carrying out consultations
between the Security Council, TCCs and PCCs in
recent years, mainly on the operational and technical
requirements for contingents and staff in performing
certain tasks, although the increasing complexity of the
operational environment of peacekeeping operations on
the ground highlights the importance of a comprehensive
review of the entire mission in order to ensure better
design and implementation of peacekeeping mandates
for better results.
There is a need for a clear political strategy that
supports the implementation of the mandate within
a comprehensive vision for sustained peace. Those
present may agree with me that the availability of a
political framework constitutes a key indicator for
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

measuring the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and determining their suitability for action in specific
contexts, which necessarily differ from one case
to another.
We believe that it is important for the scope and
nature of the dialogue between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the TCCs/PCCs to be developed.
Although extensive consultations are ongoing in that
regard, we as TCCs continue to see the absence of a
strategic dimension in those dialogues that would
make TCCs real partners in efforts to ensure that
peacekeeping operations meet their strategic objectives.
The current format of the consultations, in accordance
with resolution 1353 (2001), does not rise to the desired
level of triangular cooperation. There is therefore a
need to rethink this old and still existing format.
Based on its continued commitment to enhancing
the effectiveness of the peacekeeping system, and being
aware of the enormous challenges facing peacekeeping,
Egypt, as a major TCC, was at the forefront of the
countries supporting the Secretary-General’s A4P
initiative and the joint commitments. In the context of
its readiness to assume the presidency of the African
Union, Egypt took the lead in placing African TCCs
and peacekeeping host countries at the centre of the
efforts to implement A4P initiative. In November 2018,
Cairo hosted the first high-level regional conference,
which provided a unique platform for the key actors of
the peacekeeping system to discuss ways to enhance
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations from a
global perspective that addresses the strategic, political
and operational dimensions across a given operation.
The regional conference resulted in the Cairo
Roadmap for Enhancing the Performance of
Peacekeeping Operations from Mandate to Exit. The
Cairo Roadmap defines the concept of performance
to reflect the broad range of responsibilities and
obligations underpinned by the A4P initiative and
the joint commitments. It focuses in particular on
the priority of conducting field analyses based on
a comprehensive consultative process among the
Mission’s leadership, host countries, TCCs/PCCs and
active regional organizations, with the conclusions
and recommendations arising from this analysis to
serve as an important source of information for the
Security Council when reviewing, restructuring and
withdrawing missions.

S/PV. 8570

Hence, the Cairo Roadmap develops the concept
of tripartite consultations into one of quadrilateral
consultations including host countries, TCCs/
PCCs, the Security Council and the Secretariat. The
Roadmap also sets operational and technical capacities
on a par with the policy priorities and the essential
contribution of peacekeeping operations to building
and sustaining peace.
I would also like to point out that the Cairo
Roadmap has benefited from extensive consultations
over the past several months to reflect the experience,
expertise, wisdom and aspirations of a wide range of
key actors and stakeholders, including TCCs and host
countries, most of which are African countries that
contributed to the formulation and development of this
initiative and expressed strong support for its content,
which represents African leadership and ownership.
I therefore call on the Security Council, which
has the inherent competence to maintain international
peace and security, to give serious consideration to the
practical solutions put forward by the Cairo Roadmap
to the challenges undermining the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations, including the strengthening
of mechanisms for consultation among the Council, the
Secretariat, TCCs and host countries.
The Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali noted the great challenges and serious and complex
operational difficulties facing his forces in Mali. I
would like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Force Commander and to his forces, while pointing
out that the most serious tasks in Mali are undertaken
by Egyptian forces, as Egypt is one of the main
contributions to that major United Nations operation in
a sisterly African country.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again,
Mr President, for convening this important meeting at a
very important time and during a challenging period for
peacekeeping operations, which requires us all to work
together and demonstrate the genuine will and support
necessary to make United Nations peacekeeping
operations more suited to the purpose established for
them in order to achieve the desired objectives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express our

19-2114027/29

S/PV.8570

United Nations peacekeeping operations

gratitude to the presidency of Peru for having organized
this debate on triangular cooperation in the context of
peacekeeping operations, as well as for having invited
Uruguay to participate in it.
We wish you and your delegation every success,
Mr. President, in leading the Council during this month
of July.
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, Lieutenant
General Dennis Gyllensporre; and the Senior Fellow
at the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations
of the International Peace Institute, Ms. Alexandra
Novosseloff, for their briefings. We have also taken
careful note of the statements delivered by members of
the Council and those troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) that have spoken before us.
I wish to reaffirm Uruguay’s commitment to the
United Nations peacekeeping system and peacekeeping
operations. Our country has already deployed more
than 50,000 troops to more than 20 operations
around the world in our long history as a troop- and
police-contributing country. As of today, Uruguay’s
contribution of troops places our country as the main
contributor from the Americas and very close to being
among the top 20 in the world. That effort, which has
been sustained for decades, has afforded our country a
very rich experience in this field.
Cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries — known as triangular cooperation — is not
a new concept. On the contrary, it has been a regular
element of the deliberations of the United Nations since
at least 1990, almost 30 years ago. It is not my intention
to reiterate concepts that have already been mentioned
by delegations that have spoken before me, but I do
wish to at least emphasize that there are a number of
precedents on this topic — documents and initiatives
emanating from the Security Council itself and from
the General Assembly. Among those precedents, I
should like to mention the Brahimi report of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809)
of 2000; the Capstone Doctrine report of 2001; the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) of 2015; the New Horizon
initiative of 2009; and the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative of 2018.
28/29

10/07/2019

At the Security Council level, we note the creation
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
in 2001, the adoption of resolution 1353 (2001) in the
same year, presidential statement S/PRST/2015/26 of
31 December 2015 and the update to note 507 on the
Council’s working methods (S/2017/507, annex). At
the General Assembly level, since 2010 the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has dedicated
a section of its reports to triangular cooperation.
Moreover, those broad efforts, based on theoretical
discussions, have been accompanied by the creation
of various mechanisms to bring triangular cooperation
into practice.
However, in spite of all those precedents, there
remains a shared perception among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries that the current consultations fall short of
expectations and are yet to reach their full potential.
As we said earlier, although the topic of triangular
cooperation has regularly formed part of our debates
for several years, we wish to underscore the greater
importance today more than ever of improving those
mechanisms, given the particular challenges faced by
peacekeeping missions today.
We have reached the point at which peacekeeping
operations are working in increasingly complex and
changing operational environments and facing threats
of all kinds. Peacekeepers require a high level of
preparation and training for the various mandated tasks
and in the use of more sophisticated equipment and new
technologies. Greater efficiency and effectiveness are
also being demanded of peacekeeping operations while
the budgets allocated to finance those operations are
being reduced year after year and the Organization faces
serious problems in making timely reimbursements to
troop- and police-contributing countries.
In Uruguay’s view, addressing these challenges
in the current context requires strong triangular
cooperation among the Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries. In that
regard, we believe that first-hand information and
experience, as well as the perspectives of countries
whose personnel are deployed in conflict zones, are of
great use to the Security Council in its process to better
understand the situation and consider the opportunities
and threats arising on the ground. Furthermore, we
should not underestimate the importance of having a
broad base of support for the mandates approved by
the Security Council, particularly taking into account
19-21140

10/07/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the characteristics of the new tasks that have been
incorporated into those mandates, which are more
complex and involve more robust rules of engagement,
such as in the case of the protection of civilians.
Allow me to very briefly share some ideas that
my country believes could contribute to improving the
quality of triangular cooperation.
During our participation as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in 2016 and 2017, we
had the opportunity to develop an initiative proposed
by New Zealand that consisted of convening, on the
part of the penholder, an informal meeting among
troop- and police- contributing countries, members of
the Council and the Secretariat well in advance of the
renewal of a mandate. That informal format, with the
combined presence of diplomatic delegates and military
and police advisers, has been proven to foster a more
fluid exchange among stakeholders and is a suitable
complement to the formal meetings with TCCs/PCCs
organized by the Security Council. We believe that this
practice, which we understand continues to be used,
albeit sporadically, should be more systematized in the
work of the Security Council, for example through an
update to note 507 working methods, which contains a
section dedicated to this topic.

S/PV. 8570

The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
is also a viable platform for strengthening triangular
cooperation through discussions on specific issues,
such as the protection of civilians, the security
of peacekeeping personnel, the use of technology
or environmental management in peacekeeping
operations, among others. The Secretariat, particularly
through its Department of Peace Operations, also has a
key role to play in convening meetings with members
of the Security Council and TCCs/PCCs as and when
needed, for example in the context of strategic reviews
of missions or when there are abrupt changes in an
operational environment.
Finally, within the scope of the General Assembly,
the Special Committee for Peacekeeping Operations
constitutes a useful body that brings together the
three actors of triangular cooperation and from which
recommendations and political directives can be issued
on the topic.
In short, and with this I will conclude my speech,
the strengthening of triangular cooperation should be
in the interest of the three parties given that they will
benefit from enhanced dialogue, which in turn will have
a positive impact on the efficiency and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

19-2114029/29
