iVAl-‘IoNS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 2 APRIL 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agknda (S/Agenda/ 1411) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/85 16);
(b) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8517) , . . . . . . I . . .

1

S/PV.1411

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND ELEVENTH

on Tuesday, 2 April

President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

MEETING

1968, al: 3 p.m.

representatives who wish to participate in the debate to
take the places reserved for them in the Council Chamber,
on the understanding that when they wish to address the
Council they will be invited to take places at the Council
table for that purpose. If there are no objections we shall
proceed accordingly.

hesent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. Since there are no objections, this proposal is adopted

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l41 1)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra,
representative of Jordan, and Mr. M. Y. Tekoah, represen tative of Israel, took places at the Council table; and Mr. G. J.
Tomeh, representative of Syria, Mr. M. A. El Kony,
representative of the United Arab Republic, and Mr. A.
Pachachi, representative of Iraq, took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Security Council Chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(4 Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/85 16);
(bl Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/85 17).

5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The Security Council will now proceed to consider the item on the
agenda. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
India, on whom I now call.

Adoption of the agenda
6. Mr. PARTNASARATHI (India): Mr. President, I should
like first of all to welcome you as President of the Council
for this month. My delegation is confident that under your
wise and statesmanlike guidance the Council will be able to
discharge its duties satisfactorily and expeditiously.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Cciuncil (S/8516);
(bl Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8517)

7. We should at the same time like to express our sincere
and whole-hearted gratitude to the outgoing President.
During his outstanding Presidency, Ambassador Diop of
Senegal made a very valuable contribution to the work of
this Council in most trying circumstances. His wisdom,
judgement and diplomatic skill never failed during delicate
and very often prolonged negotiations which resulted in the
adoption of unanimous resolutions in two critical areas of
our work. Our regret is that Ambassador Diop’s departure
has deprived us of the benefit of valuable advice from an
experienced colleague. We should like to take this opportunity to wish him all success in his new field of activity.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): We have
today received requests from the representatives of the
United Arab Republic and Iraq to participate, without the
right to vote, in the discussion of the agenda item now
before the Council. If there are no objections, I shall
consider that the Council agrees to invite the two representatives I have just mentioned, in addition to the representatives of Jordan, IsraeI and Syria, who have been previously
invited.

8. Only a few days ago the Security Council held a series
of meetings to consider the grave situation in West Asia
resulting from the Israeli armed attack on Jordanian villages
east of the Jordan River. After four days of debate and
intensive, almost round-the-clock consultations, the Council
unanimously adopted a resolution condemning Israel for
that attack and deploring violent incidents in violation of
the cease-fire. Less than a week after the adoption of that
resolution, the Council is again confronted with a serious
violation of the cease-fire which took place on 29 March. It
is clear from all available reports that this major military

2. There being no objection, we shall proceed accordingly.
3. In view of the fact that there are more requests to
participate in the meeting than there are places at the
Council table, I would propose that we follow the previous
practice of inviting the representatives who requested that
this item be included on our agenda to take places at the
Council table for the duration of the discussion on the
question before us, and that we invite the remaining
1

in violation of the United Nations Charter and the cease-fire
resolutions, and warning that the Security Council “would
have to consider further and more effective steps as
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition of such
acts”, the Ambassador of Jordan, on 29 March, called for
an urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider a
new, premeditated attack by Israel against Jordan,

clash, extending to the use of aircraft with its attendant loss
of life and its damage to civilian property, was against the
injunction of Security Council resolution 248 (1968) of 24
March.
9. It has been maintained that violent incidents in occupied Arab territories are the cause of the recent aggravation
of tension. My delegation finds it difficult to reconcile itself
to this view. We must clearly state that Israel’s recent
measures affecting the civilian population of occupied Arab
territories and resulting in the uprooting of many thousands
of Arab inhabitants from their homes are not permissible in
terms of various United Nations resolutions. Those resolutions cannot be interpreted to mean that the Arab people
should accept Israeli military occupation.

14. The depravity of that new aggression must be emphasized. Nine Jordanian frontier villages, inhabitated by
civilians, and the Karameh refugee camp were subjected to
intensive shelling by the Israeli air force and artillery,
indiscriminately killing civilians. The target was the east
Goar canal area, which is the site of agricultural develop
merits, and the express purpose was to deprive the Arab
population of its sources of livelihood. This attack was
dire,qted from the occupied territory of Jordan. The cynicd
justification giien by the Israeli representative was, among
other things, to protect Israeli children. These unprovoked
attacks against civilians, the wanton killing of civilians and
the destruction of Arab villages have become a Zionist dally
exercise in sadism and genocide surpassing Nazi atrocities,
They constitute war crimes.

10. My delegation has had occasion to state in the past,
and would like to repeat once again, that a situation in
which the Security Council has to go from one cease-fire to
another without withdrawal of foreign forces has serious
consequences which cannot be ignored. As long as Israel
refuses to withdraw from Arab territories occupied as a
result of the hostilities of June 1967, there will be little
worth-while prospect for peace in the area. Serious tensions
will continue to prevail and the Arabs under foreign
occupation will continue to reject that occupation. It
would be erroneous to believe that peace in West Asia could
be brought about under the pressure of such continued
military occupation. It is therefore imperative that Israel
should agree to implement fully the Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

15. The Security Council and world public opinion should
not be astonished at these new acts of Zionist Israeli
viciousness. In fact, one day after the unanimous condemnation of Israel by the Security Council, Mr. Eshkol,
Zionist leaders and the Zionist press made no secret of their
defiance and utter disregard of the Security Council
resolution; and showing an arrogance of which they alone
are capable, declared their determination to perpetuate
their annihilation of the Arabs and malce the new occupied
Arab territories-as
they made Palestine before-Goyim
rein, to use their own terminology, that is to say, clear of
the Arabs.

11. It is equally important that the parties should COoperate with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador Jarring, in his task of bringing about
the implementation of that resolution. During the Council’s
discussion culminating in the adoption of the resolution
248 (1968) of 24 March, my delegation expressed serious
anxiety over the effects of armed clashes on the success of
the mission of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative. We note from the Secretary-General’s report of 29
March 1968 [S/8309/Add.2]
that Ambassador Jarring is
directing his efforts towards obtaining an agreed statement
of the position concerning the implementation of the
resolution. We should like to hope that the Government of
Israel will co-operate with the mission of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Represen-tative in fully implementing the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967. In this
connexion, my delegation notes with appreciation the
strenuous efforts of King Hussein of Jordan to prevent a
deterioration of the situation, and his positive attitude
towards the Jarring mission. We should also like to pay a
tribute to the King for his leadership of his people under
the extremely difficult and trying circumstances in which
his country is placed.

16. Thus the Security Council has before it one new
complaint-a
complaint of Israel’s continuous war of
aggression on Jordan and the Arab States which, occurring
as it did, can only mean that the Security Council has failed
to stop continued Israeli defiance. The repetition of these
Israeli acts is an ominous sign to all concerned about world
peace.
17. I am duty bound to warn the Security Council and the
United Nations of the forthcoming renewal of large-scale
military operations by Israel against the Arab States. The
continuous attacks on Jordan under the pretext of stopping
infiltration, and the large concentration of Israeli troops on
Syrian borders and in Sinai, are but proof of Israel’s
aggressive designs and military planning. The appeals for
peace by the Israeli representative monotonously chanted
and repeated in the Council cannot and should not deceive
anyone. They only confirm what I have just stated, because
they fall within the pattern of the Israeli Zionist empirebuilding-a pattern which constitutes the history of Israel in
the last twenty years.

12. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call
upon the representative of Syria and invite him to take a
place at the Council table.

18. Members of the Council will undoubtedly recall the
most recent proof: the sneaky and treacherous Israeli
attack of, 5 June. It took place while the Security Council
was in session trying to find a solution to the Middle East
crisis. On 23 May 1967 Mr. Levi Eshkol, in an address to

13. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Five days after the adoption, on
24 March, of a unanimous resolutian by the Security
Council, resolution 248 (1968), condemning Israel for its
large-scale, carefully planned military action against Jordan
2

:ase.fire
“would
‘teps as
of such
Illed for
nsider a
emphalted by
xted to
.rtillery,

the east
levelop.
le Arab
Lck was
cynical
among
rovoked
ans and
ist daily
rocitics.

I should
Israeli
ondemEshkol,
of their
C0uncil
y alone
petuate
ccupied
-Go-vim
clcor of
ne new
war of
xurring
IS failed
3f these
it world
and the
ge-scale
ta. The
topping
oops on
Israel’s
eals for
chanted
deceive
bCGlllSE

empire-

Israel in
call tile
; Israeli
Council
lie East
dressto

the Knesset was quoted ashaving told the Arab countries
that Israel had no aggressivedesigns.He said: “We do not
demand anything except to live in tranquillity in our
present territory.”

“The eruption of the Palestinianresistancemovement
onto the international scene,a movementwhich some
thought had beenwiped out forever, is certainly a cause
of .concern to those who have adopted a policy of
ravaginganddespoiling;but it would be illusory to think
that the rebirth of the Palestinianpeoplecan be delayed
any longer, and neither collective repressions,so-called
preventiveactions,nor so-calledgraduatedreprisalmeasures,will stop the fighting whichhasbeenbroughtabout
by the occupationitself.” /1409th meeting,para. 104.1

19, On 5 June 1967 the then IsraeliPermanentRepresentative to the United Nations read to the Security Council
the following statement of the Israeli Defence Minister:
“We have no aim of conquest. Our soleobjectivesare to put
an end to the Arab attempt to conquer our land and to
suppressthe blockade . . .“. [1347th meeting,para. 33.J

25. The Israelirepresentativein the Security Council has
continuously scorned our upholding of the inalienable
rights of theArab peopleof Palestine.I wishto remind him
herethat the Headsof Stateor Governmentof Non-Aligned
Countriesat a Conferenceheld in Cairo in 1964 resolved
to:

20. That was the prelude to the conquest,Thus, heavy
attacks on the Arab States have always beenprecededby
pious calls for peace. Israelhas thus two declaredpolicies:
one is to the world proclaiming peace;the other is an active
policy voiced at home. It is a combination of expansion,a
crippling of the Arab’s economictake-off and development,
a resort to armsto settle disputesand a continuousdefiance
of the United Nations. We are today faced with the same
grave and threatening situation. There is all the more
reason to make the Council fully aware of its world
responsibility.

“(1) endorsethe full restorationof all the rights of the
Arab people of Palestineto their homeland,and their
inalienableright to self-determination;
“(2) declaretheir full support to the Arab people of
Palestinein their strugglefor liberationfrom colonialism
andracism.“1

21. Another ominous sign of Israel’svicious designsand
we&known pattern, usedasa pretext for every treacherous
attack on the Arabs, which they have engagedin actively
since 1947, is to describethe Arab people of Palestine-the
still legitimate owners of the land of Palestine-and the
Arabs under the yoke of Israeli occupation asterroristsand
saboteurs.

26. Terrorismwas introducedinto the Arab landsprimarily by the JewishZionist undergroundin Palestine.On 22
March [1404th meeting], I madean enumerationof the
various underground organizations-the Haganah, the
Palmach,Irgun Zwai Leumi, the Lehi-and I neednot go
into the detailsagain.But hearingis onething and seeingis
another.

22. My delegation has consistently maintained and continues to maintain that thesetermsare incongruous.In fact,
on 25 July 1966 I stated in the Security Council:

27. The leadersof theseorganizationshavewritten extensively of their exploits.The book,Memoirsof an Assassin,2
by Avner Gruszow is one of them.You will seethat they
havecalledthemselves
gangsters
andkillers.Weneednot go
into any part of this book, but needonly look at what is,
quotedfrom it on its coverto introducethe book:

“Our policy is clear: un8quivocal attachmentto justice,
in any cause, and in particular in the legitimate causeof
our Arab brothers of Palestinewho feel, accordingto the
words of the High Commissioner.. . in his report of
1965, that: ‘. . . a nation has been obliterated and a
population arbitrarily deprived of its birthright’.”
/1288th meeting, para. 98.1

“I raisedmy sub-inachine
gun andstuck the barrel out
of the carwindow. Conquestwasright in front of us. The
majorturned his head-his faceslackened,then hardened
again. I pulled the trigger. Three bullets hit him in the
stomach.He pitched heavily forward on to his face. The
milk bottles he was carrying flew from his hands and
burst on the pavement,his blood mingling with the
milk . . .”

23. Again, at a meeting of the Security Councilheld on 14
October 1966 my delegationstated:
‘L1 . . whenever we are discussingthe problemsof Israel

and the neighbouring Arab States, one thing is lost sight
of, . . and that is that besides,beyond. . . and above
either the Syrians, the Egyptians, the Lebaneseor the
Jordanians”-or any other group-“theri: is an Arab
people of Palestine, The whole wretched story that we
hear time and again. . . is due to the fact that theseArabs
of Palestine have been forgotten. . . . There is an Arab
people of Palestine, and these Arabs of Palestineare not
different from any other people in their determination,
will, attachment and loyalty to their homeland.”[1307th
meeting, para. 68.1

Later speakingabout the assassination
of anotherMajor:
“The villa wasguardedby two Arab Police. Instead of
quietly overpoweringthem, Ouzy shot them thirteen
times in the stomachwith his Mauser.The four dynamiters ran toward the villa. Under the blast of 100
kilometresof explosivesthe villa disintegrated.Later that
evening,washedand wearinga white shirt, I went to the
cinema.”
28. The leadersof the sameundergroundorganizations
and their rank andfile later becamethe leadersand mY of

24. To stress this irreducible fact, I wish to quote the
following very wise words used by the representativeof
Algeria in his brilliant statement during the meetingof the
Security Council on Saturday, 30 March:

1 See A/5163.
2 New York, T. Yoseloff, 1959.

3

,

completely stagnant that they think only in terms of
further murders and further aggressions. Condemned by the
Security Council and by world opinion for their acts, they
are the ones who are developing stagnation and claustrophobia. Is it not their Prime Minister who is now advocating
the use of “different methods”, as, in his words, Israel “has
to consider world opinion and her powerful friends”? But
world opinion,hasalready taken its standagainstcolonialism and is increasinglyawareof the calamitiesengendered
by the new forms of colonialism;the mostruthlessand the
most unscrupulous,the colonialism of settlementto the
detrimentof the rightful peoples.

Israel. We know what underground movements the former
Israeli representatives to the United Nations belonged to;
we should greatly appreciate it-because we are perplexedif Mr. Tekoah would identify himself to us.
29. Whereas these gangs used to boast of their exploits, of
murder, looting and destruction, now these exploits have
been incorporated into the history of the State; they have
been pre-empted and transformed into activities of the
Israeli army, and the Israeli Government acknowledges
them as legitimate manifestations of its career.
30. A great rabbi justified
terrorists in these terms:

the criminal acts of the
35. The Israeli representativein a further intervention
thought it appropriateto refer to the considerationby the
Security Council in 1966 of the Israeli allegationsof
infiltrations from Syria. What he forgot to mention was
that the appropriateUnited Nationsmachineryto dealwith
suchallegationshasbeenobstructedby his authorities.

“To those who believe that we ought to excommunicate the so-called terrorists in Eretz Israel”-Israel
did not exist then-“1 am forced to declare that . . .
Irgunists and the others are really martyrizing themselves
for the Jews and for Eretz Israel.”

36. The Secretary-Generalmadethis fact abundantlyclear
in paragraph3 of hisreport of 1 November1966/S/7.572/.
This obstruction was not limited to 1966, but, as the
Secretary-General
pointed out, dated from 1951.

31. Israel, from its inception, has been on a colonial basis
but it has surpassed the established methods of colonialism
in ruthlessness and barbarism against the indigenous people.
While classical colonialism uses the means of suppressing
the indigenous people so as to tighten its grip over their
land, resources and destiny, Israel sought to dispose of the
autochtonous people altogether by murder and displacement. It transformed a people living peacefully and
rightfully on its land into refugees living on international
charity.

37. Indeed,what the Israeli representativealsoomitted is
that the Secretary-General,dealing with the core of the
problem in his report of 2 November 1966, did not leave
any doubt asto wherethe roots of the trouble lay. He said:
“On the westernbank, Arab villageshave beendemolished,their inhabitantsevacuated.The inhabitantsof the
villages of Baqqara and Ghannamereturned following
Security Council resolution 93 (1951) of 18 May 1951.
They werelater, on 30 October 1956, forced to crossinto
Syria where they are still living. Their lands on the
westernbank of the river, and Khoury Farm in the same
area, are cultivated by Israel nationals.” [S/7573,
paru. 16.1

32. But from a basis of colonialism Israel evolved into a
spearhead of imperialism. That it is based on expansion is
evidenced by the size of the Arab territory it has invaded
and still occupies. That aggression is its instrument is
evidenced by the series of attacks which it launched against
the Arab States and concerning which its criminal record in
the United Nations speaks for itself. That it is racist is
evidenced by its cult of hatred against the Arabs, against
their past, their present and their future and against any
sign of their renaissance and economic development.

38. Those are the words of the Secretary-General.Can
anyone in all consciencecome to the Security Councilto
say that thesepeople,deprivedby force of their homes,are
infiltrators? Infiltrators in their own villagesandfarms?

33. In all of this, it differs from the racist rigimes of
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia only in the intensity
of its ruthlessness, and imperialist ambitions and the
perfection of the Nazi methods of genocide and blitzkrieg,
Like every colonial criminal, conscious of its guilt, the
slightest resistance to its aims of expansion constitutes for
it a nightmare which arouses its fear of accountability for
what it did to 2 million Arabs, what it is now doing to
further millions of its victims and what it intends to do. If
there is any doubt about it, the new Fiikrer dispels it. In his
most recent statement he openly admitted that “the attacks
on Jordan are part of a campaign that wilI continue until
Israel came to a decision with the Arabs.” Thus Israel is
openly declaring its intentions to continue its terror until it
comes to a decision about the fate it wants for the Arabs.

39. Israel is continuing its policy of armed aggression
againstthe Arab Statesand the resolutionsof the Security
Council have not halted this aggression.
The threat to take
effective measures,as provided by the Charter, did not
deter Israelfrom repeatingacts of the samenature,always
in wider dimensions.As a matter of fact the threat by the
Council to take effective measures
doesnot date only from
24 March of this year. Security Council resolution
111(1956) of 19 January 1956, condemningIsraelfor its
attack in the Lake Tiberiasareaof Syria, calledon Israelto
comply with its obligations, in default of which the
Council, accordingto paragraph5 of that resolution,“will
have to considerwhat further measuresunder the Charter
arerequiredto maintain or restorethe peace”.

34. The Zionist spokesman in the Council forgets all of
this and comes here to ascribe to my country, in his own
words “stagnation and international claustrophobia”
[1409tk meeting, paru. 64j. No words better illustrate the
position of his leaders, whose own sense of humanity is so

40. Thus, any mere threat to take action againstthe
aggressor
hasfor long now proved ineffective, andthe time
is for action, not for threatening to take it. Nor is the
stationing of observersthe issue The issueis that the rule
4

.n terms of
nned by the
ir acts, they
nd claustroir advocating
;, Israel “has
Lends”? But
1st colonial.

engendered
dessand the
nent to the
intervention
ition by the
egations of
lerition was
to deal with
orities.
dantly clear
5/S/7572],
but, as the

3 omitted is
core of the
id not leave
ay. He said:

jeen demol.
.tantsof the
d following
May 1951.
.o crossinto
Ids on the
in the same
’ [S/7573,

eneral. Can
Council to
‘homes, are
I farms?

aggression
he Security
reat to take
:I, did not
:ure,always
reat by the
: only from
resolution
Eraelfor its
on Israel to
which the
Ition, “will
the Charter

against the
Id the time
Nor is the
lat the rule

of force, conquest, occupation, annexation, destruction and
murder have long been banned from international law, and
tie Council will fail in its responsibility if it does not halt
fie aggressor and uphold the right of the victim to its
integrity and independence. The Arab people have the
honourable duty to defend this right and to deny the
aggressorthe fruit of its aggression.

conclusively demonstrated that individual acts by the
People of Palestine against the occupation forces in that
country cannot be equated with the well-prepared military
actions ordered and controlled by the Israel Government. It
is these acts of military reprisal,for which the Government
of hrael is solely and exclusively responsible, that can be
considered violations of the cease-fire.

41. The right of the Palestinian people to resist liquidation
of their personality and rights and the right of every Arab
under Israeli occupation to resist annexation and occupation is a natural right whose sanctity and integrity are
recognized by the United Nations Charter and scores of
resolutions on colonialism. The exercise of this right is an
act of honour, not an act of sabotage and terrorism.
Representatives who freely use such descriptions had better
look into their own history of liberation and adopt one, not
a double, moral standard, because morality is indivisible.
42. Indeed, the problems of our area are not the problems
of resistance; they are the problems of usurpation and
genocide, invasion and occupation. Only when justice is
restored can peace prevail.

47. Secondly-and this is no less important-it
has been
shown beyond any doubt that Israel does not accept and
has not the slightest intention of carrying out the resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. The attempt by the
representative of Israel to reduce that resolution to a mere
invitation to direct negotiations is contrary to the letter and
spirit of that resolution. The members of the Council
cannot possibly forget that during the lengthy discussions
which preceded the adoption of that resolution many
proposals, explicit or implicit, for direct negotiations were
put forward but were rejected, and it was on the basis of
that rejection that the resolution was drafted in the way in
which it wasdrafted. Therefore the Council can ill afford to
indulge any further in self-deception; it must now face the
realities of the situation.

43. The PRESIDENT [translated from Russian): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Iraq, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table. I call on the
representative of Iraq.

48. There is one central issue before the Council: will
Israel be allowed to solidify its occupation and thereby be
enabled to realize its avowed aim of annexing the occupied
Arab territories?

44. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I have asked to be allowed to
participate in this debate of the Council in view of the
referencesmade yesterday by the representative of Israel to
my country and the role played by the Iraqi contingents
stationed in Jordan in defending that country against Israeli
aggression.

49. That is the fundamental problem which has faced the
United Nations since June and still faces it today. Shifting
emphasis from this basic challenge to secondary or peripheral issues can only consolidate and prolong Israel’s
occupation of Arab land. This can hardly be the intention
of the United Nations since there has been, and I trust there
still is, virtual unanimity among the members of this
Organization regarding the principle that territorial conquest by military force is inadmissible under the Charter,
and consequently that it is necessary for the Israeli troops
to withdraw completely from the occupied territories. Such
withdrawal has assumed an even more urgent and necessary
character at present in view of the murderous attacks
launched by Israel against Jordan and the intensification of
its repressive acts against the inhabitants of Palestine.
Failure to take action can only be interpreted by Israel as
an endorsement of its defiant and aggressive policies.
Silence in the past has greatly contributed to Israel’s
intransigence.

45. Let me say at once that we are proud to help the
freedom fighters in their struggle against oppression and the
alien occupation of their country. We do so, not only
because as Arabs we have a national duty to help our
people in their hour of need, but also because as loyal
Members of this Organization we have the obligation to
render all possible assistance to peoples fighting for their
freedom. Over and above this, as human beings we cannot
stand idle while such unspeakable crimes are daily committed against defenceless people who for fifty years have been
the victims of a savage and ruthless campaign to obliterate
their national identity and drive them out of their ancestral
homeland. It is an insult to the intelligence of the members
of this Council and an offence against every decent impulse
for the representative of Israel to call these fighters for
freedom cowardly creatures. It is the actions of the Zionist
guerrillas that can best be described thus. Do we forget that
on 9 April 1948 250 Arabs, among them many women and
children, were slaughtered in cold blood and dumped in a
well in the village of Deir Yassin, outside the city of
Jerusalem? Do we forget that in October 1956, 011 the day
when Israel launched its attack on Egypt, scores of
innocent Arab civilians were mowed down by a machinegun at Kafr Qasim? Do we forget the numerous instances
of premeditated and callous disregard of human life?

50. Besides flatly rejecting the resolution of 22 November,
Israel has done the following since the war in June 1967. It
has completely disregarded two General Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem (2253 (KS-V) and 2254 (ES-V)]. It has
refused to implement the Security Council resolution on
the refugees(237 (I967)/, twice reaffirmed by the General
Assembly [resolutiorzs 2252 {ES-V) and 2341 (XXII)]. It
has refused to apply the Geneva Convention of 12 August
19493 to the inhabitants of the occupied territories in
Palestine. It has not responded to the Secretary-General’s
request to send observers to Gaza to look into atrocities
and acts of oppression perpetrated against the people of
that area, It has unilaterally denounced the Armistice

46. However, the debates in the Council during the past
two weeks have not been in vain. They have clearly and

3 United Nations, Treaty Serbs, vol. 75 (19501, NOS.970-973.

5

populations. The new society which Zionism wanted to
establishin Palestinewasto be completely and exclusively
Jewish. Such an aim wasbound to be opposedby the Arabs
of Palestinefor reasonsthat must be clearto all membersof
the Council.

Agreements, It has tried by every conceivable strategem to
pave the way for the annexation of the west bank of the
Jordan through such methods as changing the designation
of the area from “enemy territory” to merely “occupied
territory”, and even such methods as changing the names,
and, we are informed, only recently introducing a five-year
agricultural plan for the occupied area-1 repeat, a five-year
agricultural plan.

56. The Arabs of Palestine could not be expected to
co-operate in their own destruction. The story of the
implementation of the Zionist programmeis well known,
and it is this gradual and piecemeal implementation,
frequently by force, that is at the heart of the problemand
is the basiccauseof the conflict.

51. We read in the press that when the Director of the
Ministry of Agriculture of Israel was asked whether such a
five-year plan had political implications, he said, “Well, we
do not interfere in politics; this is not our business”.

57. In our discussions
we should constantly keep in mind
this overriding fact. We are,dealingwith the fate of a whole
people in its attempt to survive as a distinct and home.
geneousnational community. All the problems besetting
our area were created as a result of the onslaughtof
Zionism againstthe people of Palestine.Nothing will be
settled and nothing will endure until and unlessthe
consequencesand implications of that aggressionare
recognizedand fearlesslydealt with.

52. Let me continue listing the acts perpetrated by Israel
since June. It has wantonly and unilaterally prevented the
opening of the Suez Canal. It has continued its expulsion of
Arab people from the occupied territories, It has continued
its murderous attacks on Jordan, the last of which, on 21
March, provoked a stroni condemnation by this Council as
a flagrant violation of the :United Nations Charter and the
cease-fire resolutions. New Jewish settlements have been
established in the occupied areas. Large Arab lands and
properties have been expropriated. Finally, only a few days
ago, on 29 March, Israel launched another massive attack
against Jordan, now under discussion in this Council. These
acts clearly follow a very well established pattern of Israel
policies, that was exactly its policy before the war.
53. Let me mention a few of the actions of Israel before
the war, of which the actions after the war can only be
considered as a logical continuation: the extension of the
boundaries beyond those of the 1947 Partition resolution
of the General Assembly [l’81 (II)]; the conquestof Elatli
after the cease-fireand the truce in 1949; the murder of
Count Folke Bernadotte;the encroachmenton the demilitarized zones establishedunder the Armistice Agreements;
the refusal to repatriate the refugeesor to give them the
right of choice, in spite of nineteen resolutionsto that
effect adopted by the GeneralAssemblyby overwhelming
majorities; the seizureand division of the Jordan waters;
the confiscation of Arab propertiesin Israel;the treatment
of Arab inhabitantsasthird-classcitizens; the savageborder
raids; the massacres;
the expulsion and maltreatment of
United Nationspersonnel;and,of course,the boycotting of
the Mixed Armistice Commissions.
54. The representativeof Israel never tires of repeating,
every time he appear;before this Council, the story about
the so-calledembattled and beleagueredIsrael. However,
the true nature of the conflict betweenIsraeland the Arabs
bears no resemblanceto the picture which Zionist propagandahas presentedto the world, a picture of the Arabs
with their vast homelandsand rich resources,maliciously
and wantonly begrudginga long-persecutedpeople their
little corner of earth which someof their ancestorshad
once occupied thousandsof years ago. But what are the
facts?
55. The conflict arosebecausethe Zionists planned to
establisha State in a country which for centurieshad been
overwhelmingly Arab in population, languageand culture.
This was not a clash of nationalism,nor was it the usual
antagonismbetween settler communitiesand indigenous
6

58. The one solid and unalterablefact that hasdominated
and will continue to dominateour discussions
is the refusal
of the peopleof Palestineto disappearasa distinct national
Arab entity and their determination to stay alive whatever
the ‘cost. For years the people of Palestine have been
cajoled,intimidated, and subjectedto all kinds of pressures
and temptations to give up their claim to their homeland,
but they haveresisted.And who can blamethem?
59. The relationsof Israelwith the Arabs of Palestineand
the Arab States have followed an unchangeablepattern:
Israel made agreementwith the Arabs which could not be
violated later. I give two examples,namely, the Armistice
Agreementsof 1949 and the LausanneProtocol4 of that
sameyear. No undertaking was given which could not be
repudiated later; no promise was given which was not
broken later. The only choice offered to the people of
Palestinewassubmission,either peacefully or by force. But
the people of Palestinewill never submit, no matter what
force is usedagainstthem and no matter what possibilities
and capacitiesthe State of Israel can marshalagainstthe
peopleof Palestine.
60. The creation of Israel, far from being part of the
world-wide movement of national liberation which began
after the SecondWorld War and is still continuing in our
day, was in fact a complete reversal of that trend, an
anomaly, in fact a classicexample of a racist settler regime
imposed upon an Afro-Asian land. All this has been
happeningat a time when the rest of the world hasbecome
awareof the horrors of similarregimesin South Africa and
Rhodesia.The people of Palestinehave been the victims of
a colonial invasion unparalleled in its viciousnessand
ferocity. Like other colonial peopleswho were alsovictims
of alien rule, they aspire to regain their rights and to
recover their lost freedom and usurped homeland. Is this
unreasonable?Are they not entitled to the understanding,
sympathy and support of other peoples of the world,
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly; Fourth Session,
Hoc Political Committee, Annex, vol. II, documentA/921,
annexes
A andH.
Ad

nism wanted to
and exclusively
sed by the Arabs
o all members of
be expected ta
le story of the
: is well known,
implementation,
the problem and
!
:ly keep in mind
: fate of a whole
:inct and home.
Fblems besetting
ie onslaught of
Nothing will bc
and unless the
aggression are ’
.t has dominated :
Ins is the refusal
distinct national j
y alive whatever i
itine have been
inds of pressures
their homeIand,
them?
of Palestine and
lgeable pattern:
ch could not be
V, the Armistice
otocol4 of that
ch could not be
which was not
I the people of
or by force. But
no matter what
{hat possibilities
shal against the
ing part of the
In which began
mtinuing in our
that trend, an
st settler rt!gime
this has been
3rId hasbecome
outh Africa and
.n the victims of
viciousnessand
Jerealsovictims
c rights and to
bmeland.Is this
: understanding,
of the world,
I, Fourth Session,

documentA/927,

!
i
!
j
:

I
;
’
i

/
1

especially those who only recently emergedfrom colonial
rule, or those whoseterritories have alsobeenoccupiedby
a ruthlessenemy?

growing confrontation and conflict unless,by somedetermined and concerted effort, the Council can arrest these
dangerousdevelopmentsbefore it is too late.

61. Can we forget, dare we forget, that the record of
Zionism in the Arab world is one of continuous advance,
gradual but relentless, and pursued with unparalleled
fanaticism and ruthlessness?

69. The large-scalemilitary operations and other violent
incidents in violation of the cease-firethat havebeentaking
place of late in the Jordan-Israelisector have in many
respectsfurther increasedthe tension in the areaand, if we
are to judge by official pronouncementson both sides,it
seemsthat there is nothing which can warrant immediate
hope for a decreasein the presenttension.

62, In view of this record of uninterrupted expansionand
violence, are we not entitled to ask whether it. is the
security of Israel that is really in danger-this Israelwhich
fifty years ago did not exist, when the Jewishpopulation in
Palestine numbered barely 50,000, whereasit is now over
2 million? Do we forget that only fifty years ago, there
were two or three smallsettlementsand yet today we have
before us a State which imposesits rule and oppressionover
more than one and a half million Arabs and hasa military
capacity to endangerand threaten the security of eachand
every Arab State?

70. My Government is particularly concernedthat, if the
present pattern of violations of the cease-fireand of other
conflicts is allowed to continue, the delicate task of the
Secretary-General’sSpecial Representative may well be
jeopardized, if not altogetherrenderedimpossible,andwith
it the only hope which hassustainedUnited Nationsefforts
to bring peace.to the regionwill have disappeared.

63. Let us look at the record of the last fifty years;on the
one side, a record of continuous attack and advanceand
growing power, and on the other side, a record of defence
and retreat and diminishingstrength.
64. Rut if the presentgeneration of Arabshasbeenfound
wanting and has not been able to overcomethe challenge
hurled against our peopleby the Zionist invaderswho came
fifty years ago, there should be no doubt of the ability of
the Arab people, or the vast untapped resourcesof
resilience and power in the Arab nation, sufficient to
overcome its present agony and to prevail over thosewho
cameto conquer andplunder and subjugate.
6s. Lij EndalkachewMAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, I should like first of all to convey through you to
your predecessor,AmbassadorDiop of Senegal,my delegation’s appreciation and gratitude for the admirablemanner
in which he conducted our deliberationsduring the busy
month of March.

71. This, then, is the paramount considerationand the
frightening prospect that we have to bear in mind as we
examine the particular problem of cease-fireviolations .that
is now before us, for it is obvious that the cease-fireis a
first, albeit prec;lriousand modest, steptowardsthat peace
which we wish to cstabllshin the Middle East; and if that
first step is continuously undermined,then it isgoing to be
that much more difficult to make a forward move towards
the other stepsthat will leadto the final goaluf establishing
a just andlastingpeacein that troubled region.
72. It is our consideredview that there can be little hope
of makingprogressin the greater and more important task
of peace-makingif the initial cease-firearrangementsare
underminedby repeatedconflict and violation. This apprehension on our part is fully confirmed by the SecretayGeneral’sreport of 29 March 1968, in which he Cellsus that
the efforts of his SpecialRepresentativehave not resulted
in an agreement,and goeson to say: “Moreover, they have
been interrupted by recent events” [S/R309/JlcIc1..2,
pam 41.
73. That being the reality of the situation, it becomesthe
urgent duty of the Council to ensure that its cease-fire
decisionsare fully compliedwith so that a climate can be
created in the areawhich can be conduciveto the ultimate
and urgent goal-that of’ establishing peace based 011
resolution 242 (1967) unanimouslyadopted by the SCCW
rity Council on 22 November1967.

G6. I should also like to take this opportunity, my first
intervention in the presentdebate,to congratulateyou, Sir,
on your assumptionof the high office of Presidentof the
Council for the month of April, I wish to assureyou of my
delegation’sfull and faithful co-operationio the important
task that we have to undertake together under your able
and experiencedleadership.

74. In the face of the new military action and of the
violent incidents in violation of the cease-fire,it seemsto
my delegationthat the immediatetask of the Coui?cilmust
be to reaffirm resolution 248 (1968), which censured
military acts of reprisaland all other violent incidentsin
violation of the cease-fire,and alsoto warn in the strongest
possibleterms againsta repetition of suchacts.

67. The Security Councilis meetingfor the secondtime in
less than a week to consideryet another violation of its
cease-firedecisions.It is a matter of great concernto us,as
I am sure it must be to all membersof the Council,that SO
soon after we unanimouslyadopted resolution 248 (1968)
we should be faced once againwith the eruption of conflict
and violence in the area of the Jordan river, resulting in
flirther loss of life and in the aggravationof an already
dangerousand explosivesituation.

75. The Council must declare,once and for all, that such
actions cannot be tolerated and that their repetition will
necessitatethe taking of further andmore effective stepsas
envisagedin the Charter.

68. Indeed, I should be failing in my duty andwantingin
candour if I were not today to expressthe growinganxiety
of my Government over the increasingdeteriorationof the
situation, which seemsto be heading towards an ever-

‘76. It is moreover obviousthat if the Councilis to fulfil an
effective function in this respect,it shouldbe in aposition
7

of 22 November 1967, which we adopted unanimously,
represents a’ delicate balance of principles, obligations and
requirements. If that delicate balance is to be maintained
and the difficult task of peace-making is to be successful,
we have to give to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representative our sincere and dedicated support. We have
to reiterate our mutual confidence in the decision we have
taken together. We have to urge and encourage the parties
to use the good .offices that have been established for the
purpose of building a just and lasting peace through the full
and faithful application of the principles set out in
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. It is only in
this way that we can hope to avert the dangers of future
conflict in that area, and it is only in this way that we can
ensure a just settlement and lasting peace in that vital and
historic region.

to receive verified information from impartial observers of
the United Nations on all violations of the cease-fire. The
report of the Secretary-General of 30 March 1968 (S/
7930/A&.66]
speaks for itself with regard to the need for
such action. It would not be fair, in the view of my
delegation, for the Council to request the Secretary-General
to keep the situation under review and to report to the
Security Council as appropriate, without giving him the
means by which he c&n obtain verified information from
objective sources.
77. Moreover, as the Secretary-General himself has so
poignantly reminded us in his report:
“
. . . the presence of United Nations observers in an
area can be helpful in preserving a cease-fire in ways other
than reporting. The mere fact of their watchful presence
can be something of a deterrent to military activity. They
can be in position to report on indications of the
build-ups which often precede military action. When
fighting does break out they can quickly intervene on the
spot with the opposing local commanders to arrange
immediate Cease-fires.” (S/793O/Add. 66, para. 2.1

82. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, as you take over the Presidency of
the Security Council, I should like to congratulate you on
behalf of my delegation on the high honour and great
responsibility entrusted you, and to assure you that, as
always, we are ready to co-operate fully, sincerely and
loyally, to help you to fulfil the difficult and delicate task
of conducting our debates.

78. Furthermore, the Secretary-General goes on to give
concrete and meaningful evidence in justification of his
request for the stationing of observers when he states to us:

83. At the same time, my delegation wishes to pay a
sincere and well-earned tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Ousmane So& Diop of Senegal, whose outstanding
services to the Council during March were marked by his
characteristic ability, enlightenment and tact. He is on the
point of leaving us, and although we know that Senegalhas
need of his services, we shall miss him in the Security
Council.

“It may be noted that, largely because of the presence
of United Nations observers, the Security Council ceasefire resolutions are better served and maintained in the
Suez Canal and Israel-Syrian sectors than in the IsraelJordan sector.” (Ibid.]
79. In view of the Secretary-General’s request, which my
delegation finds justified, we would consider it useful and
timely for the Council to envisage appropriate and acceptable arrangements for the stationing of observers in the
Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector so that the Council may have
the advantage of first-hand testimony, as well as the benefit
of verified information on all incidents that may take place
in that sector.

84. For the second time within a very short period we are
confronted with serious violations of the cease-fire in the
Middle East as ordered by the Security Council. Once again,
they have occurred in the Israel-Jordan sector. The considerable loss of life and the heavy damage and destruction
caused in the past have been followed by further loss of
life, more damage and more destruction, and as though
such incidents were not serious enough in themselves, a new
element now has to be considered, namely, the flagrant
violation of the provisions of resolution 248 (196X),
adopted unanimously by the Council a mere five days
before the date of the new incidents,

80. Let me hasten to add, in view of some of the
reservations made during this debate, that my Government
envisages the cease-fire arrangements-and, for that matter,
the special mission of Mr. Jarring-as being only of temporary duration, without any permanent character, and
certainly with no purpose other than that of contributing
to the final goal of peace and of peaceful settlement.
United Nations arrangements are made with the mutual
consent of all concerned, and without prejudice to the
rights and positions of any party in any given situation, The
duty of the United Nations representatives in such
situations is to work themselves out of a given responsible
job. The sooner the task is accomplished, the sooner must
such arrangements come to an end. And no one will be
happier to see that happen in the Middle East than the
delegation over which I have the honour to preside.

85. The authority of the Security Council requires that its
decisions should be implemented, and by this I mean not
only resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March 1968, but also the
earlier resolutions in which the Council gave and renewed
the order for a cease-fire, in particular resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. In the present circumstances the establishment of a just and stable peace in the
Middle East requires the implementation of each and every
one of the provisions of that resolution, and in view of the
fundamental importance of its objectives it must be borne
in mind at all times. Resolution 242 (1967) also gave the
Secretary-General a most important task: it requested him
to appoint “a Special Representative to proceed to the
Middle East to establish and maintain contacts with the
States concerned in order to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in

81. In conclusion, I should like to emphasize once again
the need for concerted Council effort in giving Ml backing
to the special mission of the Secretary-General and to his
Special Representative in the area. Resolution 242 (1967)
8

unanimously,
bligations and
be maintained

accordance with the provisions and principles in this
resolution”.

implementation

be successfLl1,

86. With regard to the violations of the cease-firein the
Israel-Jordansector, the Council hasheard the accountsof
the representativesof the States involved and has had
before it the supplemental reports furnished by the
Secretary-Generalconcerningthoseviolations. In my statement at the 1403rd meetingon 21 March I quoted part of
the Secretary-General’sreport /S/793O/Add.6#/, which I
consideredvery important. It hasnow beensupplemented
by the report contained in document S/7930/Add.G6
referred to severaltimesby my colleaguesin the Council.I
refer in particular to the observationsin paragraph2 of that
document,and I cannot resistthe temptation to quote the
Secretary-General’sevaluation of the role that the United
Nationsmight play in that area:

91. The PRESIDENT(translatedfrom Russian):The next
speakeron my list is the representativeof the United Arab
Republicand I invite him to take a place at the Council
table I call on the representativeof the United Arab
Republic,

to hisSpecial
port. We have
:isionwehave
ge the parties
lishedfor the
roughthe full
S set Out in
. It is only ia
gersof future
IYthat wecan
that vital and
wslated frul?l
Presidency
of
&late you on
our and great
you that, as
sincerelyand
d delicatetask
IlIesto pay a
predecessor,
e outstanding
narkedby his
, He is on the
at Senegal IUS
the Security

periodweare
ase-firein the
il. Onceagain,
tor. The conrd destruction
urther lossof
nd as though
nselves,
a new
the flagrant
’ 248 (1968),
ere five days
quiresthat its
is I meannot
3,but alsothe
and renewed
lr resolution
esentcircuni.
: peacein the
achandevery
in view of the
lust be borne
alsogavethe
equestedhim
oceedto the
actswith the
ent andassist
settlementin

‘I. . . largely becauseof the presenceof United Nations
observers,the Security Council’scease-fireresolutionsare
better served and maintained in the Suez Canal and
Israel-Syriansectorsthan in the Israel-Jordansector”.

of the provisionsof resolution428 (1968),
and call upon the partiesto acceptresolution 242 (1967)
unconditionally,thus facilitating the task of the Secretary
General and Mr. Jarring. Our greatest hope lies in the
acceptance of that resolution and in co-operation with
Mr. Jarring’speacemission.

92. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): It is our
earnest hope that our frequent appearances
before the
Councilto complainof the systematicIsraeliaggression
will
contribute to emphasizingthe gravity of the questions
brought to the attention of the Council and to sharpening
the senseof urgencywith whichthose questionshave to be
dealt with by the Council.They constitute a clearindication of the increasingtension in the area and of the
seriousness
of the situation, both of which call for an
immediatereactionfrom the Councilto restorepeacein the
Middle East. Let usalsohope that the flow of distortions
and falsehoodsemanatingfrom the representativeof the
Israeli authorities will not succeedin distracting the
members
of the Councilfrom assuming
their clearly defined
dutiesandresponsibilities
aslaid down in the Charterof the
UnitedNations.

87. In my statement of 21 March already mentioned, 1
said that my delegation was not prepared to condone or
justify the acts of violence committed in that sector;that
the Council should first of all condemnthem andthen take
swift and effective action to prevent their recurrence;that
violations of the cease-fire had jeopardized and were
continuing to jeopardize the successof Mr. Jarring’smisby heavy bombardmentand the
sion; and that the Council shouldhaveindependentsources )93. This latestaggression
of information to enableit to establishclear responsibility incursioninto Jordanianterritory by the IsraehAir Force is
an integralpart of a determinedpolicy of intimidation of
for each and every violation of the cease-fire.I thought
then, as I do now, that to assistMr. Jarring in his mission the Arabsby the Israeliauthorities.It is by now no secret
and to provide him with somesemblanceof a suitable that the Israeliauthorities,hidingbehind anallegedright of
self-defenceand usingthe pretext that they are defending
atmospherein which to work, it wasand isessentialfor the
themselves
againstso-calledterrorist activities, are merely
cease-fireto be respected,on the understandingthat the
trying to justify-in vain-their persistentpolicy of expansituation it created was only temporary pending the full
implementation of resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November sionat the expenseof the Arab Statesand the Arab people.
I say that this policy isno longera secretfor it is at present
1967.
openly advocatedby the various echelonsof the Israeli
88. The United Nationspresencein that area,I would now Government.
add, would have two equally important advantages:firstly,
it would enable the Security Council to obtain impartial 94, Yesterday, the membersof the Council heard the
reports in the event of any new violations, which we hope Israeli representativespeakabour his country’s absolute
Hisargumentswereembodiedin
will not occur, and secondly, it would have a preventive right to act in self-defence.
an
ultimatum
devoid
of
respect
for this augustbody. The
value in discouragingthe recurrenceof incidents such as
Tel Aviv premiseis that Israel is free to attack other
thosewhich have occasionedour presentdiscussion.
countries, expel millions of the legitimate inhabitants,
occupy land by force, defy numerous United Nations
89. I repeat that the resultant situation would be proviresolutions,and yet when the suppressed
populace sponsional; it could not be otherwise.My country has strong
taneouslyreactsagainstthe sufferingsIsraelhas inflicted
feelings on this matter. The situation in the region is the
and continuesto inflict upon them, their resistanceshould
result of armed conflict. Together with other Latin
be called terrorism. Should Israel be glorified when its
American delegationsmy delegationmadeits viewsabunarmedforcesquell the legitimate aspirationsof the Palesdantly clear during the fifth emergencyspecialsessionof
tjne Arabs with Hitlerite brutality? Should Israel be
the General Assembly by reiterating,in the draft resolution
regardedas justified and exempted from the rule of law
we co-sponsored,5our conviction that a stableinternational
whenits armedforcesattack another State Member of the
order could not be basedon the threat or useof force, and
UnitedNations?
that no recognition should be given to the occupationor
acquisition of territory through suchmeans.
95. The contingency of an aggressorclaiming to have
90. To conclude this statement,my delegationwould once acted in self-defenceafter perpetratinghis crimeswasnot
overlookedby the men of vision andforesightwho drafted
again urge scrupulousrespect for the cease-fireand the
the Charter.They deliberatelychosea strict criterion to foil
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
the attempt of the would-beaggressors
to evokeArticle 5.1.
Special Session, Annexes, agenda
item5, document
AlL523lRev. 1.
9

to peoples under the yoke of colonialism. The obligation
stands whether the colonial Power is the Ian Smith rbgime,
the South African rigime, or the Zionist authorities in the
Middle East. They all have in common the abhorrent policy
of discrimination, oppression and military occupation.

96. The fact that the only armed attacks which did occur
were undertaken by Israel clearly identifies the culprit.
Besides, by what right is Israel occupying Arab territories?
Who gave Israel the right to speak about the wishes and
aspirations of the Arab population which is being cruelly
suppressed by brutal force, and how can Israel have been
allowed to defy the United Nations Charter for twenty
years with complete impunity?

103. I should like to dwell briefly on a quotation from the
statement of the representative of the United States
(1409th meeting] who has wisely told the Council that
“violence breeds violence”. I doubt that anyone can
disagree with him, yet I am convinced also that no one will
disagree with me when I state that if violence breeds
violence, then occupation automatically breeds resistance.
If Israel, against the will of the civilian population in the
occupied territories, is determined to impose its presence, it
should expect that the people of the area will react to the
unwanted presence of a foreign oppressor. Let it be
crystal-clear to everyone that the will of the Arab people
shall not be daunted and that they shall continue to resist,
for no one can tolerate foreign domination, and Israel
should expect that it will have to pay the price of its
procrastination.

97. No amount of distorted interpretation by the Tel Aviv
representative can change the true facts of the situation or
alter the provisions of the Charter.
98. Last week the Security Council adopted a resolution
[248 (194811 in which the Council censured in unambiguous terms the military acts of aggression committed by
Israel. Yet the ink on the resolution had barely dried when
Israel once again, in flagrant defiance of the unanimous
decision adopted by the Council, disregarded the basic and
fundamental principles of the Charter and the various
resolutions adopted by this international Organization.
Israel is, in fact, gloating in its defiance of the United
Nations; Israel these days seems to be wallowing in a fit of
arrogance reflected clearly in the words addressed by its
representative to this Council. He has told the Council
defiantly that Israel, notwithstanding the outcome of the
Council’s decisions, will continue to pursue the policies it
deems fit.

104. The crux of the matter is that Israel, in violation of
the principles of the United Nations Charter and in defiance
of the collective will of the international community is still
occupying territories acquired by it as a result of a
treacherous and sneaky attack against the Arab States. The
precarious situation existing in the Middle East is the direct
outcome of the attempts by Israel to perpetuate its
occupation indefinitely. We believe that since the Security
Council unanimously adopted a resolution on 22 November
reaffirming the necessity of the withdrawal of Israeli armed
forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict, it
should resolutely stand behind its decision. The Security
Council should make it clear to the Israeli authorities that it
expects them to withdraw forthwith from all occupied
territories and should indicate unequivocally that their
reluctance to abide by the principles of the Charter, and
their defiance of the United Nations resolutions and their
refusal to withdraw their troops from the occupied territories constitute a threat to peace and security in the area,
and hence a threat to international peace and security. The
longer Israel refuses to abide by the rule of law, the more
strongly will the people in the occupied territories resist the
unlawful presence of Israeli forces. It is a resistance IlOt
only against the acts of violence perpetrated by rhe Israeli
authorities against the civilian population, but’ also and
mainly against the presence of those authorities, which in
itself constitutes an act of violence.

99. I have had the opportunity in this Council to
underline the danger of allowing Israel to persevere in this
policy of aggression and defiance. I need not remind the
Council that though the Israeli armed attack against Jordan
on 21 March did not accomplish its objectives due to the
valiant resistance of the Jordanian forces and people,
Israel’s policies of intimidation have not abated. But let me
assure the Council and its members that the Arabs have not
been intimidated in the past and they shall not be
intimidated in the future.
100. Direct and indirect attempts have been made around
this table to vilify the noble endeavours of the national
liberation movement in the Arab-occupied territories. It is a
source of pride for me to extol the heroic acts of the Arab
resistance in those territories. Their resistance to occupation and their refusal to accept foreign domination as
epitomized by the oppressive presence of Israeli aImed
forces in their homeland, are extreme acts of bravery and a
sacred and honourable duty. No one can detract from the
valour of freedom fighters, especially those who, against the
heaviest of odds, are still resolved to regain their freedom
and liberty.

10.5. I repeat that the continued presence of Israeli armed
forces in Arab territories is at the root of all the tension and
the dangerous situation in the Middle East. Nothing short
of the withdrawal of these troops will effectively contribute
to the efforts of the United Nations towards establishing
peace in the area.

101. The plight of people under foreign occupation has
been discussed at length in the United Nations. In resolution 2160 (XXI) entitled “Strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international relations,
and of the right of peoples to self.determination”, the
Assembly recognized that peoples subjected to colonial
oppression are entitled to seek and receive all support in
their struggle which is in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

106. My delegation is of the firm belief that the time has
come for the Council to face its responsibilities courageously under the Charter. The Council should view with the
gravest concern the deteriorating situation in the Middle
East resulting from the iefusal of Israel to comply with its
resolutions. The Council should not hesitate to resort to the

102. All States Members of the United Nations are, by
virtue of this resolution, requested to give assistance and aid

10

obligation
.th regime,
ties in the
ent policy
tion.
1 from the
ed States
until that
yone can
0 one will
ce breeds
resistance.
ion in the
resence,it
act to the
Rt it be
,ab people
: to resist,
end Israel
ice 0Cits
olation of
n defiance
lity is still
;ult of a
tates. The
the direct
:tuate its
: Security
\Jovember
leli armed
onflict, it
i Security
:ics that it
occupied
;hat their
arter, and
and their
lied terriLthe area,
.Irity. The
the mace
resistthe
tance not
the Israeli
also and
which in
1el.iarmed
nsionand
ling short
ontribute
tablishing
) timehas
ies court
r with the
he Middle
y with its
ort to the

provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter to ensureIsrael’s
respectfor the obligationscontained in the Charter and its
compliance with the various resolutionsadopted by the
Council.

he referred. In an editorial article signedby Ambassador
Andre FranqoisPoncet and contained in the Parisiandaily
Le Figaro on 27 March,we read:

“As one readsthe texts in which the Security Council
107. In my statementbefore the Councilon 21 March, we
unanimouslyexpresses
its disapproval,in an indirect and
requested the Council to apply the enforcementmeasures
oblique manner, of the actions of the Palestiniancomof Chapter VII of the Charter in order to deter Israelfrom
mandos, while at. the sametime directly and severely
further acts of violence. The Council then did not deemit
condemningIsrael as guilty of retaliation, one beginsto
fit to do so, with the consequencethat it is now meeting
wonder whether commonsensehasbeendone away with
again to deal with a similaract of violence committed by
and the world beenturned upsidedown. Wehave become
Israel. Today we are againrequestingthe Councilto invoke
so accustomedover the centuries to thinking that the
Chapter VII of the Charter. The failure of the Council to
Jews have no rights other than that of allowing themheed this request can only have an encouragingeffect on
selvesto be massacred
without resistancethat when they
the aggressivepolicy of the Israeli authorities. Let wisdom
standup andfight we arescandalized.Fortunately, public
and effectiveness and not political expediency prevail.
opinion is lessnaiirethan it is thought to be; it is not on
Should it be the former, then we could all look to the
the sideof the Security Council.“6
future with more hope; shouldit be the latter, the future
would be fraught with danger.
114. On the statementsmadehere by the representatives
of Egypt and Iraq, I need not add anything to what I
108. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russia.n):I call on
submitted yesterday to the Security Council. Egypt and
the representative of Israel,
Iraq are still at war with Israel. Egypt and Iraq refuseto
make peacewith Israel. Egypt and Iraq promisebeforethe
109. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I regret that I must bring to
Security Council to continue to wagewarfare againstIsrael
the Council’s attention the following additional acts of
by terror, murder and sabotage,despite their obligations
aggressiqncommitted against my country stice our last under the Charter, despiteSecurity Council decisions.We
meeting.
are not discussing
here allegedoppositionof the population
in areasunder Israel control. This is a figment of the
110. Tonight at 2120 hours local time, mortar fire was imaginationof Arab Governments.But here we are discussopenedfrom Jordanian territory acrossthe Jordan river on
ing ocganizedincursionsfrom the outside in violation of
the area of Kibbutz Ticat-Tzvi in the Beit She’anValley.
Security Council resolutionsand in violation of Charter
provisions.
111. An hour later Kibbutz Maoz Chaimwasshelledfrom
the same direction. At approximately the sanletime the
115. At yesterday’s meeting I describedto the Council
water installations of Kibbutz Neve Eitan, anothervillage in
how the Governmentsof the United Arab Republic and
the Beit She’an Valley, was blown up by explosives. A
Iraq are actively ocganizing,training and supplying the
searchof the area where the explosion occurredresultedin
terrorist organizations;how they train saboteursat army
the discovery of two mines and the tracks of a band of
campsandhow they haveassigned
officers and men, indeed
saboteurswho had crossedthe Jordan river.
entire battalions of their regular armies, to terrorist
operations.The record is clear and incontrovertible. In a
112. I listened carefully to the words of advice-not
speechon 13 March 1968, President Nasserannounced:
unusual-expressing the position of the Government of
“We will not rely on a political solution.” On 30 March
India. I should like to refer to an interesting statement President Nasserpromised to continue to support the
made by the representativeof India in the Security Council terrorist ocganizations.Ten daysearlier on 20 March, Radio
on 4 September 1965. He said:
Cairoproclaimed:
“India is a peace-lovingcountry. We have neither the
inclination nor is it in our interest to be deviatedfrom the
path of peace and economicprogressto that of a military
conflict. Pakistanhas,however, by sendingarmedinfiltrators in large numbers acrossthe cease-fireline brought
about ‘a situation in which we have no choice but to
defend ourselvesand take such preventive action as may
be deemed essential.In taking suchpreventive action we
have, in certain sectors,had to crossthe cease-fireline for
the purpose of effectively preventing further infiltrations.
This is a matter of great importance to us.” [1237th
meeting, para. 203./
113. Why, may I ask,shouldIndia presumethat principles
applicable to its policiesandactionsarenot valid when it is
Israel that is involved? May I draw his attention to a
comment published recently following the adoption of the
24 March Security Council resolution 248 (1968) to which

“The real Palestineproblem is Israel’sexistence.What
mattersis the liquidation of Israel’sexistenceand there is
no difference betweenterritories captured recently and
thoseoccupiedin the past.”
That is Egypt’s true image,best illustrated perhapsby the
following.
116. Severaltimes East Europeancountries,now alliesof
Egypt, have demandedthe extradition of a number of
particularly wanted nazi war criminals, Egypt has flatly
refused every request. The Soviet Union has requested
Friedrich Warzok’s extradition no lessthan three times,
without success.Czechoslovakia,another Arab ally, wants
Dr. Erich Weinmannbadly. Poland would like to try Karl
Wesermann,alias Adolf Moeller. Poland headsthe list of
6 Quoted in French by the speaker.

declared: “The Palestine problem will be settled on the soil
of Palestine and not in the United Nations.” The name of
the Foreign Minister of Iraq at the time was Adnan
Pachachi.

those nations which would like a crack at Egypt’s nazi elite:
Dr. Rudolf Mildner, formerly of Katowice, heads an impressive list which includes Wilhelm Boeckler, Bernhard Bender
and Gustav Wagner, Thus, twenty-two years after the end
of the Second World War, Hitler’s nazis have in fact become
Nasser’s nazis.

122. The protracted, tragic war in the Middle East has
brought bloodshed to all its peoples. There is pain and
sorrow on both sides. But there is something particularly
sinister and malignant in the Arab Governments’ attitude
and actions, There is an element of bestiality which seems
to come to the fore again and again. In this morning’sNew
York Times we read that, when the coffins of three Israeli
soldiers killed in the recent fighting were returned by the
Jordanian authorities at the Allenby Bridge and were
opened, two of the coffins were found to contain nothing
but sand.

117. As for the words of the Iraqi representative, he, in
fact, fully confirmed to us Iraq’s direct participation in the
warfare by stealth and terror carried out by the Arab States
against Israel. He complained that the Council, and indeed
the world, did not accept the theory that the marauders
trained in Egyptian, Syrian and Iraqi army camps and sent
across the cease-fire line in the darkness of night to murder,
in a cowardly and indiscriminate manner men, women and
children were to be considered heroes and freedom fighters.
But this has been the United Nations jurisprudence
throughout the years. War by terror has never been
acquiesced in and never will Fe-at least, not by my
country. This is a jurisprudence which the representative of
Iraq cannot change, whatever his wishes.

123. If there is a State in the Middle East whose actions
symbolize above those of all others a perverse inhumanity
and a brutal criminality, it is Syria.
124. In 1948, when the Syrian Army in defiance of the
United Nations launched a war of aggression against the
nasent State of Israel, the invading forces were not satisfied
with conquest. The Israeli villages which were then
captured were razed to the ground in an orgy of fire and
destruction. When the Syrian Army withdrew in 1949, it
was a wasteland of death and desolation that it left behind.

118. As for his wish to call despicable murderers “freedom
fighters,” let me refer him to a statement made by the
representative of India on 17 September 1965, as follows:
“Then something more. The Morning News of Karachi
of 19 August quoted a statement by the Central Home
and Kashmir Affairs Minister, Chaudhurl Ali Akbar,
under the headline ‘Kashmiris Free to Cross Line.
Pakistan Will Help Freedom Fighters’. To call these
people ‘freedom fighters’ causesme to say: What sins are
committed in thy name, Freedom! ” [1239th meeting,
para. 43.1

125. Since then Syria has written into the annals of our
region a grim page of sadism and cruelty. For years and
years Israeli farmers and fishermen kidnapped by Syrian
raiders from inside Israeli territory lingered on in the
prisons of Damascus and Palmyra, subjected to the most
brutal and inhuman physical and mental torture. I shall
spare the Council a description of what man is still capable
of doing to man in our age. For years and years, while these
unfortunate captives served as slaves and guinea-pigs for the
perversities of the high and mighty in the Syrian Government, the Damascus authorities denied even that they were
being held in Syria. No appeals or interventions from the
United Nations, the International Red Cross, the Vatican,
or third Governments helped. In reaction there was nothing
but denials from the Syrian Government and from the
Syrian Chief of Staff. When, after efforts of more than
twelve years, the Government of Syria finally admitted to
holding those persons and agreed to return them in an
exchange of prisoners, those who came back to Israel alive
were wrecks of human beings, shadows of men, all of whom
had to be confined in mental hospitals.

119. I notice the interest of the Iraqi representative in
human rights. Apparently this is a totally one-sided and
prejudiced interest. The world knows by now of the tragic
situation in which the Jews of Iraq find themselves. The
Iraqi newspaper El Thaura El Arab&e stated on 12
November 1967: “The first thing that we must do to purge
our ranks is to establish that the Jews living within Iraq
shall be second-class citizens”.
120. The Iraqi representative found it appropriate to
complain also about development plans and projects in
certain areas under Israeli control. In a report which
appeared in the Christian Science Monitor of 25 March we
read:
“Israel’s Agriculture Ministry says it is preparing a
five-year plan to modernize and develop farming on the
west bank.of the Jordan river. The Ministry’s DirectorGeneral said Israeli experts would train 38,000 Arab
farmers in modern techniques and help them switch from
traditional summer produce to year-round agriculture
with more economic cash crops.”

126. This is not over. Today the Jewish communities of
Syria, in Damascus and other towns, communities much
older than the Arab conquest in the seventh century, live in
dismal oppression and suffering, deprived of food and
freedom of movement, many of them in prison and
concentration camps.

121. That is the kind of project that arouses the ire of the
Iraqi representative, and that is not at all surprising. He is
not interested in understanding between Jews and Arabs.
He and his Government are opposed to peaceful co-operation between the Israeli and Arab peoples. As far back as 29
October 1966 the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs

127. It was perhaps to be expected that Syria should come
before the Security Council to plead the cause of the
loathsome methods of warfare by stealth. After all, Syria is
in a way the spiritual father of these methods. Members of
the Security Council will recall the complaints brought by
Israel and the debates held in the Council on Syria’s role in
12

resorting to warfare by terror asfar back as1965 and 1966.
As a matter of fact, El-Fatah was first organizedin Syria as
an arm of the Syrian Army’sDeuxi~meBureau. The speech
made today by the Syrian representativewe heard already
in October 1966. Weknow what hashappenedsincethen.

I the soil
name of
Adnan
East has

lain and
titularly
attitude
:h seems
1g’s
New
!e Israeli
i by the
Id were
nothing
actions
umanity
e of the
.hst the
satisfied
re then
fire and
1949,it
behind.
s of our
:ars and
f Syrian
in the
he most
, I shall
capable
ile these
Pfor the
Governicy were
ram the
Vatican,
nothing
‘om the
Ire than
litted to
n in an
aelalive
If whom
pitiesof
:s much
I, live in
lad and
on and
Id come
of the
Syriais
nbersof
ught by
s rolein

R
/

128. No words can whitewash evil deedsor consecratea
crime. The world still hearsRadio Damascus
calling day and
night on the eve of the June hostilities: “Kill, kill, kill,
butcher, butcher the Jews.” The people of Israel still have
before their eyes the Syrian Army postersshowinghow to
murder Jews,how to suffocate them, how to drown them
in the sea.Nor can we forget Syria’s rejection of United
Nations peaceefforts, its refusal to receivethe SecretaryGeneral’spersonalrepresentative,Mr. Jarring.
129. As recently as3 March 1968 the ForeignMinister of
Syria, Mr. Makhus, declared:“Terror will continue.” On 18
March 1968 he said: “The only way is force and armed
struggle.”
130. Additional evidence that has reached us since my
previous statement confirms beyond doubt that officers
and men from the regular units of the Syrian Army have
been transferred in the past few days to Jordan to
strengthen and expand the terrorist incursions.That step
was taken with full co-ordination between the Syrian and
Jordanian Armies.
131. Thus Syria, the symbol of warmongering,crime and
inhumanity in the Middle East, appearsbefore the Security
Council, its hands soakedin blood, not to speakof peace,
not to mend its deedsand changeits ways, but to proclaim
to the world that it will persistin its attitude.
132. Shakespearewrote : “0 shame,where is thy blush?”
There is no escapingreality. The Arab States have not
changed their attitude towards Israel. It remainsthe same,
still founded on the premise of war, still basedon the
Khartoum decision:’ no peace,no negotiations,no recognition, Only when they do change their position and when
they agreeto peace, to negotiations and to recognition of
Israel will the Middle East conflict find a solution and light
and hope and happinesscometo all the nationsof the area.
133. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
representativeof Syria has askedto be allowedto exercise
his right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the
Security Council table. I call on the representativeof Syria.

waspresentingthe petition refusedto do that. I shallnot
mention either the nameof the university or the name of
the professorwho told me the story, becausethe Zionists
canretaliatenot only in Arab landsbut alsooutside.
135. In the wretched history of Palestineof which the
representativeof the United Kingdomisaware,letters with
explosivesusedto be receivedin Great Britain. That led to
many tragedies,evenoutsidePalestine.
136. Thereis anotherinterestingstory, quite revealing,in
fact, asrevealingasthe first. The manwho wascarrying the
petition replied to the first professor: “If you were a
Zion&t anda Jew,you wouldunderstand”.
137. In the samecity I learnedthat the childrenwho play
in the streets-Americanchildren;I neednot mention their
faith-have a game.They say: “Let us play Arabs and
people”. Perhapsnot all peoplewill understandwhat this
means-butthe peoplehavethe right to kill the Arabs. That
is the amountof hatred that isinculcatedin the mindsand
soulsof the childrenof a particularpeople.
138. I have maintained,and still maintain, that we are
dealing not with a usualmentality, not with a normal
people,but certainly with an abnormalpeople.In fact, they
are a brand of terrorists,and I repeat that again.In doing
so, I can cite no lessan authority than the Under-Secretary
who is now sitting in this Council,Dr. Ralph Bunche, the
Acting Mediator after the assassination
of Count Folke
Bernadotte and his aides.In his report to the Security
Councilof 27 September1948,he usedthesewords:
“These assassinations
constitute a critical challenge
from an unbridledband of Jewishterroriststo the very
effort of the United Nations.. . . In a broadersense,they
gaveevidencenot only of contemptfor the actionsof the
Security Council, but alsoof a cynical disregardfor the
United Nationsasa whole.” [S/1018, para. 15./
I apologizeto the distinguished
Under-SecretaryandI hope
that he will not be subjectedto any reprisalby the Zionists.
139. The Niiremburgtrials have defined war crimesand
crimesagainsthumanity. They areasfollows:
(a) Any actsof aggression;
(b) actscommittedto destroy
a national, ethnical, racial or religiousgroup; (c) inhuman
acts against any civilian population, such as murder,
extermination, deportation or persecution on political,
racial, religiousor cultural grounds;(d) plunder or looting
of public or private property and wanton destruction of
cities,townsor villages.8

134. Mr. TOMEI-I (Syria): Not long ago,in fact about two
weeks ago, I attended a seminarat an Americanuniversity.
A professorwho was participating in the seminartold me
about something that had actually happened to him.
140. Have the Israeliscommittedsuchcrimes?I referred
Someonewas circulating a petition askingthe professorsto
the membersof the Council,the lasttime I spoke,to three
protest againstthe useby the American army in Viet-Nam
books written by leadersof the Zionist underground,
of napalm bombs, fragmentary bombs and phosphorus MenachemBegin has a whole chapter in his book, 77ze
bombs. The professor who told me the story replied to
Revolt Story of the &un,9 entitled: “We fight, therefore
him: “If you can include in this petition the samekind of
we are. A new raceis born to the world, the fighting Jew:
attack by the Israeli army and authorities for having used from now on we will attack, we will not only be on the
napalm, phosphorusand fragmentary bombson the Arabs,
defensive.”
then I will sign the petition.” Of course,the professorwho
8 See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 82 (1951), NO. 251,
p. 288.
9 New York, Schuman, 1951.

7 Arab Summit Conference held at Khartoum from 29 August to
1 September 1967.

13

146. He spoke about Syrians kidnapping Israelisfrom
Israeli territory. Certainly he has hallucinations. Such
hallucinations, as manifested by delirium, were indeed
expressedin his statement before this Council yesterday
when he beganto comparehimself and his authoritiesto
Napoleon.I simply laughed.

141. There is the book which I quoted before: Memoirs of
an Assassin. Here is an author who calls himself an assassin.
I showed the Council that book. Here it is. I wish that the
very learned Israeli representative would take the time to
read just the first chapter of this book entitled “Philosophy
of Hate”. He would read how they have been taught from
childhood to hate the Arabs and to displace them and expel
them outside of the Holy Land, outside of the country
which they occupied for thousands of years. I was not
wrong. Chapter I of the book is “The professorof hatred”.
I refer him to 7’heHaganah*o by Munya M. Mardor, who
now occupiesa very high position in the Israeli Government. Describingthe illegal operations of the Haganahat
that time, he commentedasfollows: “We wereconspirators
outside the law, and yet obeying what to us was a higher
law.” I underlinedthosewords and I checkedon eachone
of them. I was so impressedby them that I kept them in
my mind: conspiratorsoutside the law and yet obeying
what to them wasa higherlaw.

147. As to the facts about the demilitarized zones,I did
not say anything which was not contained in two documents submitted by the Secretary-General, S/7572 of
1 November 1966 and S/7573 of 2 November 1966. I
would submit that membersof the Council shouldperuse
those two’reports in order to seethe Israelilogicwhich,to
put it briefly, preacheslaw and practiseslawlessness.
148. The representativeof Israel spokeabout the Jewish
community in Syria. I challengehim to prove one thing
that he said.I visited my own home town of Damascus,
where I have friends in the Jewish community. I visited
them and they visited me. Everything he saidwasa lie that
could only comefrom someonelike him.

142. What wasthis higherlaw? To kill the Arabs, to expel
the Arabs. Did they do so?
143. Mr. Pachachimentioned Deir Jasin, but there were
many other dastardlymassacres
after Deir Jasin, aswell as
before. Surely Lord Caradonknows about the King David
Hotel massacre
of 22 July 1946 in which 110 personswere
killed in an infamous attack, There was the massacreof
Naseruddineon 14 April 1948; the massacreof Carmel,20
April 1948; the massacreof Al-Qabu, May 1948; the
massacreof Beit Daras,3 May 1948; the massacreof Beit
Khoury, 5 May 1948; the massacreof AZ Zaytoun, 6 May
1948; the massacreof Wadi Araba, 13 May 1950; the
massacreof Sharaft, 7 February 1951; the massacreof
Falamh, 2 April 1951; the massacreof Qibya, 14 October
1953, condemnedby the Security Council; the massacre
of
Nahhalin, 28 March 1954; the massacreof Gaza, 28
February 1955; the massacre
of Khan Yunis, 31 May 1955;
the massacre
of Khan Yunis, 31 August 1955; the massacre
of Tiberia, 11 December1955; the massacreof As Sabha,
2 November 1955; the massacreof Gaza, 5 April 1956; the
massacreof Rafa, 16 August 1956. I could go on
enumeratingand enumerating.But let the representativeof
Israel tell us what Israel did with the humanitarian
resolution[237 (1967)/ which specifically calledon Israel,
after its sneakblitzkrieg attack of 5 June 1967, to preserve
the lives of the civilians, to allow them to return to their
homes,andto observethe lawsof civilized humanity.
144. The representativeof Israel said that in the attitude
or statementswhich he heard today there was an element
of bestiality on the part of the Arab States. This Zionist
jargon is the privilege of the representativeof Israel. We
have a sayingin Arabic to the effect that every vasespills
out the water that is contained in it. That is certainly a
reflection of what he hasdone

149. He spoke about the five-year plan for the development of the Arab landsin occupiedArab territories. Surely
he is not trying to convince us that Israel wageda war
againstthreeArab Statesand occupiedareasthree timesthe
area of Israel in order to develop Arab agricultureandto
put into effect some developmentplans. We have heard
thesestoriesfor a longtime. I wonder how a self-respecting
personcanpermit himselfto say suchthings.
150. He spokeabout our refusalof resolution242 (1967)
of 22 November1967. Wedid refuseit. But everythingthat
Israel hasdone sincethe adoption of that resolutionproves
every word of what we saidthen.
151. In the joint statementissuedby PresidentJohnson
and Mr. Eshkol,the word “spirit” wasmentioned.
152. The other day, after the representativeof Jordanhad
answeredhim, Mr. Tekoah spoke about the goals,andI
believe that the representativeof Jordan told him that the
goalswere in the Charter but that this is a resolutionwith
specific provisions. Israel has recently said that it constitutes a generalframework.
153. Therefore, it is much wiser to call things by their
right namerather than to deceivepeopleasthey havebeen
deceivingthem. Let him tell us what they did with the two
resolutionson Jerusalem,with the humanitarianresolutions
and with all the resolutionsconcerning Arab rights that
were adoptedby the United Nations.
154. Certainly, the learnedspeakerfor the Zionist authorities doesnot lack quotations,andhe quoted Shakespeare.
I
would not name the State that is mentioned in Shakespeare,but there is a line in Shakespeare
which says“There
is somethingrotten”-and I would add “in the State of
Israel”.

145. He spoke about Syria, but three of the Security
Council’scondemnationsof Israel’swanton and dastardly
attacks againstour territories-the condemnationsin 1951,
1956 and 1962-were because of Israeli attacks against
Syrian territories.

155. In conclusion,I should like to quote from Voltaire,
who said: ‘Mentez, Mentez; il en resteratoujoursquelqlte
chose.”

10 New York, New American Library, 1964.

4

[sraelis from
ations. Such
were indeed
cil yesterday
lutliorities to
: zones, I did
in two docu.
S/l572 of
;ber 1966. I
llould peruse
lgic which, to
isness.
Jt the Jewish
ve one thing
If Damascus,
lity. I visited
was a lie that
the developtories. Surely
waged a war
lree times the
ulture and to
‘e have heard
;elf-respecting

In 242 (1967)
lerything that
llution proves
dent Johnson
ned.
of Jordan had
: goals, and I
him that the
:solution with
I that it conlings by their
hey have been
1 with the two
ian resolutions
,ab rights that

Zionist authorShakespeare. 1
ned in Shake91 says “There
I the State of

from Voltaire,
~jours qttelqtre

156. The PRESUENT (translated from Russian): The
representative of Iraq has asked to be allowed to exercise
his right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the
Security Council table. I call on the representative of Iraq.

instancesof specialcurfewsthat have beenimposedon the
Jews in Iraq; of any Jewish dwellingswhich have been
dynamited and destroyed by the authorities; of any
indiscriminatekilling, of wholesalearrestsand intirnidation? This has beenthe lot of the Arabs in the occupied
areas.He cannot give me onesingleinstancein which the
Jewsof Iraq have beensubjectedto the kind of repressive
treatment that the Arabs of Palestinehave been,are now,
and, I am unhappy to say, are likely to continue to be
subjectedto underIsraelioccupation.

157. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): My friend and colleague, the
Ambassador of Syria, has made it unnecessary for me to
make a lengthy reply to the rather hysterical outburst and
lurid details we have heard from the representative of Israel,
But I thought I could not miss this opportunity to
congratulate the representative of Israel on his very frank
and open admission about the five-year plan which is to be
launched in the occupied areas of the west bank of the
Jordan in order to integrate the agriculture of that area
with that of Israel.

163. The representativeof Israelspokeabout our refusal
to seethe Jewsand Arabs live in peaceand harmony. But
they have lived in peaceandharmony for centuriesall over
the Arab world. It is only with the advent of Zionismand
with the impositionof the Zionist programmeby force on
the people of Palestinethat that peace and traditional
harmonyhasbeendestroyed.

158. Are we to understand that all the resolutions of this
Council, especially that
of 22 November 1967
[242 (.2967)/, calling, among other things, for Israel’s
withdrawal from the areas occupied in the recent conflict,
are to be put in deep freeze for the next five years while
Israel completes the integration of the occupied areas into
its economy?
159. I do not think there could be better proof of our
contention that Israel hasrejected that resolutionanddoes
not have the slightestintention of implementingit. Surely,
if it had the slightest intention of implementing that
resolution, it would not have gone to all the effort and
expense of launching this five year plan in the occupied
areasof the west bank of Jordan. So there you have the
answerfrom the representativeof Israelhimself.Thereis no
longer any need for proof, for official reportsfrom United
Nations representativesor from our Secretary-General.The
fact is there, and it is very clear andobvious.
160. Now, is the Security Council going to take the
statement of the representativeof Israelseriously,or is it
going to dismissit asthe fulminations of hysteria? I think
the Security Council can ill afford not to take that
statementseriouslyand believe that it is the firm intention
of the Government of Israel not to implement that
resolution, not to withdraw voluntarily from the occupied
areas-now, in five years, or ever-until and unlessit is
forced to withdraw by the struggle of the people of
Palestine,supportedby the Arab nations.

164. The people of Palestine, as I said earlier this
afternoon,have beenoffered no alternative but to resistor
to submit completely to the designs of the Zionist
movement to take over their country and usurp their
homeland.They decidedto resist;they had every right to
resist; and we shall continue to help them resist the
occupationof their landandthe spoliationof their country
by the Zionistinvaders.
165. Finally, the representativeof Israel quoted a statement which I had madea year anda half agoregardingthe
solution of the Palestineproblem on Palestinesoil, rather
than at the United Nations.I do not deny that I madethat
statement,and I madeit in view of the record of twenty
years of continuousIsraeliaggression,
advanceand expansion at the expenseof the Arabs, and the failure of this
world Organizationto take the necessaryaction to prevent
that advance.All my fearsand suspicions
were fully borne
out a few months after I madethat statement,when in
June 1967 Israel launchedits treacherousattack-against
Arab countriesand ended by occupying vast Arab territories which today it refuses to relinquish under any
circumstances.

166. In spite of all that, we have put our trust in the
Security Council, and that is why we come before the
Security Council askingit to take the necessarymeasures
for the restitution of the rights of the Arab people of
161. I think this imposesa duty on the Council. The
Palestineand to put an end to the aggression
of the Israeli
Council cannot possibly ignore that important revelation,
invaders.After what we have heard this afternoon about
that important statement we haveheardfrom the represen- the completerefusalof the IsraeliGovernmentto acceptor
tative of Israel. I think it should take. the necessary to implementthe resolution of 22 November 1967, and
measuresand should reach the only logicalconclusionthat
after its mostrecentactionsto makethe implementationof
can be drawn from that statement: that Israel doesnot
that resolutionimpossible,without there having beenany
intend to, and will not, withdraw from those lands,
useof force or any coercivemeasures
taken by the Council,
irrespective of any decision which may be taken by the
I think the time has come, as I said, for the Security
Security Council or any other organof the United Nations.
Councilto take action and to removethe doubtsthat have
It is up to the Security Council to take the enforcement
besetour mindsfor the nearly twenty yearsof inaction and
measuresthat are available to it under the Charter of the
of coddlingthe aggressor.
United Nations. The time is now, andthe representativeof
Israel has provided us with the justification, with the
167. The PRESIDENT(translatedfrom Russian):1Cd on
reason, indeed with the necessity for adopting such the representativeof India in exerciseof his right of reply.
measures
at present.
168. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): I apologize for
162. The representativeof Israel spokeabout the Jewsin
taking
the floor againtoday, but the representativeof Israel
Iraq. Let me ask him one question: can he give me any
15

has left me no choice. This is not the first time that a
representative of Israel has tried to inject the India-Pakistan
question into the discussion of the West Asia situation, On
13 November 1967 the Foreign Minister of Israel also tried
to draw inspiration from statements made by Indian
eaders. On that occasion I had the following to say:

174. The representative of Iraq entertained us with an
exercise in the construction of castles in the air. The only
trouble with castles in the air is that they topple at the first
puff of air. I referred the representative of Iraq to a report
in the Christian Science Monitor. I shall read it again,
adding this time the last paragraph:

“The representative of Israel has also referred to the
position of my Government on India-Pakistan relations. I
must state in all frankness that the two situations are
completely different and have no bearing whatsoever on
the question under discussion. The Foreign Minister of
Israel, while comparing his Government’s stand with that
of the Government of India, ignored-and I am sure he
will be the first to appreciate this-the differing origins of
the unfortunate situations as well as the divergent
histories of relationships among States in different regions
of the world. If, however, the Foreign Minister of Israel
insists upon drawing parallels, he should remember the
eminent practice of this Council, which, in 1965, insisted
upon coupling the demand for a cease-fire with a call for
withdrawal to positions previously held. Thereafter, it
was possible for India and Pakistan, which had never
interrupted their formal diplomatic relations, to negotiate
at Tashkent with the help of the Soviet Union.” [1375th
meeting, para. 136.1

“Israel’s Agriculture Ministry says it is preparing a
five-year plan to modemize and develop farming on the
west bank of the Jordan River. The Ministry’s DirectorGeneral said Israeli experts would train 38,000 Arab
farmers in modern techniques and help them switch from
traditional summer produce to year-round agriculture
with more economic cash crops. Officials emphasized that
the plan did not indicate any Israeli intention .of annexing
the region.”
175. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
representative of Iraq has asked to exercise his right of
reply and I now invite him to the Council table.
176. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I wish categorically to deny
the allegations made by the representative of Israel and
contained in a letter of the Foreign Minister of Israel
regarding the treatment of Iraqi Jews. But the representative of Israel did not answer my question. Does he know of
any instances in which Jewish properties and houses have
been dynamited in Iraq? Does he know of any instances in
which hundreds of Jews have been put in jail without
reason? Can he give me any instances of the indiscriminate
kind of slaughter and murder to which the Arabs of
Palestine have been subjected in recent months? Of course
he cannot give me such instances. Instead, he has made
allegations which are completely unfounded and which
have not been, and in fact cannot be, substantiated, because
they are not true.

169. May I today again remind the representative of Israel
that, in regard to the India-Pakistan question he should
leave well enough alone. However, if he ,insists on drawing
inspiration from us, he should go all the way and persuade
his Government to withdraw from territories occupied in
June 1967; he should persuade his Government not to
expand the area of occupation over Arab peoples and Arab
territories.
170. We shall be glad if, like India and Pakistan, Israel is
ready to declare its willingness to withdraw from occupied
territories.

177. Before I end my statement, I should like to refer to
one point which the representative of Israel made in his
first statement, regarding the right of freedom fighters to
resist the forces of occupation and oppression in their own
country. He said that United Nations jurisprudence was
against giving the right of resistance to such freedom
fighters. That is not true. In recent years especially,
numerous resolutions have been adopted by the General
Assembly expressing the support of the international
community for the’ activities and the struggle of the
freedom fighters in many colonial territories; and if there is
any United Nations jurisprudence on the subject, it is that
the United Nations has, in an unequivocal manner, put
itself and its prestige behind the struggle of such peoples
against colonial exploitation and domination-and
the
occupation by Israeli forces of Arab lands is a form, in fact
the worst form of colonial domination and exploitation
that exists in the world today.

171. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call on
the representative of Israel in exercise of his right of reply.
172. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): J should like to refer briefly
to two points made by the representative of Iraq.
173. He spoke about the situation of Jews in his country.
Last summer the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel sent
a letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations in
which he said, inter alia:
“The Iraqi authorities, particularly the Secret Police,
threaten the Jews with murder and expropriation of
property. Dozens of Jews were arrested in Baghdad and
released only after paying a high ransom for their lives,
The authorities cut telephone lines leading to Jewish
homes. A Jewish girl was arrested, put into a criminals’
prison and repeatedly raped. She was later removed in a
state of shock. The Jews of Iraq are under constant fear
for their lives.”

178. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The list
of speakers for today’s meeting of the Security Council has
now been exhausted.

My Foreign Minister pointed out the danger of expropriation of Jewish property in Iraq. Since then, on 4 March the
Iraqi Government published a law confiscating all Jewish
property in the country.

179. As a result of informal consultations, the members of
the Council have’ agreed that the next meeting of the
Council on the item now under consideration should be
convened following consultation among Council members,
16

USwith err
ir. The only
e at the first
1 to a report
ad it again,
preparing a

would therefore ask the distinguished representative of
Senegal, who has been present at our meeting, to convey to
Mr. Diop all the good wishes that have been made with
regard to him. For my own part, I should like to thank all
those representatives who have offered me their good
wishes and assured me of their co-operation.

but not later than 4 April at 3 p.m. Since there are no
objections to this, it is so decided.
180. Before closing this meeting of the Council, I should
like to express my gratitude to those representatives who
have offered their good wishes to my predecessor, the
distinguished representative of Senegal, Some of them have
requested that their good wishes be conveyed to Mr. Diop. I

The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m.

ming 011the
I’S Director8,000 Arab
switch from
agriculture
hasized that
.of annexing
wan): The
his right of

ally to deny
f Israel and
er of Israel
: repcesentahe know of
houses have
instances in
jail without
discriminate
e Arabs of
? Of coucse
le has made
and which
ted, because
: to refer to
made in his
1 fighters to
in their own
udence was
ch freedom
especially,
the General
nternationai
:gle of the
rd if there is
ct, it is that
nanner, put
uch peoples
n+--and the
‘arm, in fact
exploitation
an): The list
Council has
members of
king of the
n should be
:il members,
17

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the wwld.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
der
d6paritairer
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Nations
Unies
rant
entier.
Informer-vow
des ventes, New York

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicacioner
de lar Naciones
Unidas
estdn
en todos
porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
a IV librero
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

!
:
I,
,’
!,,

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

UNIES

en vente
danr
ler libroirier
aupris
de votre libroiric
ou
ou Genbve.

DE LAS NACIONES

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

throughout
New York

kt ler agences
odrcsser-vour
b:

UNIDAS

an venta en librerlar
y cosas distribuidorar
o dirljase
a~ Nacioner
Unidar,
Secci6n

in other currencies)

de

35374~September

1972-2*100
