A /67/PV.63

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

63rd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 22 January 2013, 11.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations (A/67/693 and
A/67/693/Add.1)
The President: Before proceeding to the other
items on our agenda, I would like, in keeping with the
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to documents A/67/693 and A/67/693/Add.1.
In document A/67/693, the Secretary-General informs
the President of the General Assembly that 22 Member
States are in arrears in the payment of their financial
contributions to the United Nations within the terms of
Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the General
Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or
exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it
for the preceding two full years”.
In document A/67/693/Add.1, the Secretary-General
informs the Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/67/693, Fiji
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia have
made the necessary payments to reduce their arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.

May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in these documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Representatives will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012, the
General Assembly allocated sub-item (a) of agenda item
20 to the Second Committee. In order for the Assembly
to proceed expeditiously on this sub-item, may I take
it that the Assembly agrees to consider this sub-item
directly in plenary meeting and to proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation
of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development
Draft decision (A/67/L.48/Rev.1)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/67/L.48/Rev.1.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-66287 (E)

*1266287*

A/67/PV.63

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
decision A/67/L.48/Rev.1, entitled “General Assembly
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals”, I wish to put on record the following statement
on financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
In sub-paragraph (a) of the draft decision, the
General Assembly decides “to establish the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
called for in paragraph 248 of the outcome document”.
With reference to that paragraph, the resource
requirements in relation to the establishment of the
Open Working Group have been included in the report
of the Secretary-General (A/67/591) on the revised
estimates resulting from the decisions contained in
the outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex)
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”.
Accordingly, draft decision A/67/L.48/Rev.1 does not
entail financial implications for the programme budget
for the biennium 2012-2013.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of France.
Mrs. Montel (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to point out that the French translation of document
A/67/L.48/Rev.1 refers to an “Open-ended Working
Group” of the General Assembly, which is not the
correct translation of “Open Working Group”. I therefore
request that the Secretariat reflect the translation that
appeared in paragraph 248 of the French version of the
original outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex) as
adopted, namely, “Open Working Group of the General
Assembly”.
The President: The Secretariat will take note of
the statement by the representative of France.
Statement by the President
The President: In a few moments, Member States
will hopefully adopt a draft decision establishing the
Open Working Group of the General Assembly on
Sustainable Development Goals. Its establishment has
long been overdue and I truly welcome that development.

2

I would like to extend my genuine, heartfelt
appreciation to the facilitator, Her Excellency Mrs. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of the
Federative Republic of Brazil, for her hard work and
dedicated efforts in getting us to this point. Months
of consultations, as we all know, were required, often
producing deadlocked positions. As a result, we have
fallen behind schedule, which is hardly encouraging.
The task that is now before us is of fundamental
importance. Last June in Rio de Janeiro, this body
was given the responsibilty to adopt sustainable
development goals (SDGs). I believe this is a strategic
issue of the first order, one that may frame much of
the United Nations work for decades to come. Our
duty is to do all that is in our power to narrow the gap
between the haves and the have-nots. We should aim to
transform failing States and to empower those who long
for peace and reconciliation. We ought to band together
to defeat extremists and embolden those who are ready
to forsake vengeance. We should strive to re-energize
the disarmament and non-proliferation regimes and to
eliminate the scourge of human trafficking. We have to
go on the offensive against organized crime and take
on the root causes of terrorism. We must endeavour to
strengthen the rule of law and to champion international
solidarity.
It is hard to imagine the fulfi lment of such aspirations
without clearly defi ned development benchmarks. In the
time ahead, the proposed Open Working Group needs
to establish new goals to eradicate poverty and hunger;
encourage scientific and technological innovation; raise
health-care and education standards; set renewable and
clean-energy targets; and decide on ways to protect and
manage our finite natural resources, among many other
things. To do what is right for the world, those tasks
have to be taken up with genuine passion.
During the resumed part of the sixty-seventh
session, I will closely engage with Member States to
ensure that the SDG process becomes a top priority,
while putting the work of the Group at the very centre of
our attention. Just an hour ago we heard the SecretaryGeneral talk about his priorities for 2013. The first one
he mentioned was sustainable development.
I am also ready to help the appointed facilitators
of the intergovernmental process to propose options
for an effective financing-for-development strategy, as
well as those tasked with creating the high-level forum

12-66287

A/67/PV.63

and preparing the special event on the Millennium
Development Goals during the sixty-eighth session.
We will need to further enhance coordination
among the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Secretariat. We must continue to
reinforce and complement each other’s efforts, so that
a single, fully coherent post-2015 agenda results from
this process.
In conclusion, I believe that it is of critical
importance that the Open Working Group begin its
substantive deliberations as soon as possible. I will
therefore schedule the Group’s inaugural meeting for
early February. In the meanwhile, my Office will take
an active interest in consultations on the procedural
matters that need to be sorted out before the Group can
begin its work in earnest.
As President of the General Assembly, I am ready
to give the Group my full attention, so that by the end
of its sixty-seventh session, it may be well be on its
way to fulfilling the task of formulating sustainable
development goals.
I believe that this is a moment for us to imagine
the future and to decide on new ways to address global
challenges to truly define the world we want and the
United Nations we need to make such a vision a reality.
With energetic leadership and the full institutional
support of the United Nations system, we should
seize this generational opportunity and craft a global
framework to ensure that our children inherit a planet
where no nation is left behind.
The Assembly will now take action on draft decision
A/67/L.48/Rev.1, entitled “Open Working Group of the
General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/67/L.48/Rev.1?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: Before giving the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Muñoz (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
is pleased to deliver this statement on the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals on behalf of
the delegations of Mexico and Peru.

12-66287

We welcome the adoption of this draft decision,
which will allow us to begin the process of defining
sustainable development goals. The decision is
based on a joint proposal submitted by Colombia,
Guatemala and Peru. We are convinced that this is
a unique opportunity to begin a process of change
and revitalization of the Organization’s development
agenda. We therefore believe that the process we are
initiating today should dovetail with that of defining the
post-2015 development agenda and result in boosting
the Organization’s capacity to contribute to resolving
the pressing problems of today.
We believe that there is an urgent need to bring
together the various unconnected efforts with regard
to the Organization’s development agenda. We must
benefit from synergies and avoid squandering resources
of any sort — limited as they are — and do so through
a revised strategic framework. The United Nations
must not have various parallel development agendas.
We need a single, integrated agenda under which, once
and for all, we agree on the singularity of development,
with various mutually complementary pillars that
strengthen one another.
Moreover, we believe that, in seeking an open
process that incorporates the proposals of all Member
States, it will be necessary to ensure ways by which civil
society can participate more actively and more directly
in discussions on the development agenda. We believe
that the enduring value expected of the Open Working
Group will depend greatly upon the achievement of that
major goal.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
effective efforts of the facilitator of the negotiations
on this decision, Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, whom we
sincerely thank.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
also thank all members for the consensus adoption of
this important decision. In particular, I would like to
thank the Ambassador of Brazil for all her efforts in
facilitating the adoption of today’s decision. We would
also like to thank the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States for their efforts to arrive at agreements
on the issue of representation.
Finally, I call for the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals to truly be an open

3

A/67/PV.63

working group wherein every State has an opportunity
to express itself. I also hope that its conclusions can
be arrived at unanimously through an inclusive and
transparent negotiating process.
Mr. Dhanapala (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka fully
supports your efforts, Sir, to ensure that the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
is effective, under the leadership of the Asia-Pacific
Group. I would like to thank my colleagues from
India and Pakistan, who will work with us in the Open
Working Group.
We have discussed this process over the past
several months and should now stop wasting time on
procedural matters. Therefore, we request you, Sir, and
the General Assembly to begin to address substantive
issues immediately. We are pleased to participate in the
Open Working Group with other Member States who
have expressed a willingness to work.
Sri Lanka extends its fullest cooperation to you,
Sir, in your efforts in this endeavour.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I join other speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting and for your guidance and leadership
in helping us to achieve this important first step of those
needed to realize the provisions of paragraph 248 of the
Rio+20 outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex),
which enhances our joint quest towards realizing the
future we want.
After consulting with my colleagues in the AsiaPacific States Group, I now speak on their behalf.
Among the various matters we agreed upon in Rio
de Janeiro was that we should work towards establishing
an Open Working Group to develop a set of sustainable
development goals to guide a large part of our work
on the post-2015 agenda. With the unanimous adoption
of today’s decision, we have taken an important step
in our quest to achieve the collective vision set out in
paragraph 248 of the Rio+20 document.
In that regard, let me thank our colleague
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti of Brazil for
her equally strong and steadfast leadership in ensuring
that this most critical step — the establishment of the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals — could be taken. I also commend her colleagues
at the Permanent Mission of Brazil for their tireless
efforts and support in that achievement. I recall
expressing the Asia-Pacific Group’s support for this

4

decision during a meeting on 9 January chaired by
Ambassador Viotti. We are pleased that we have today
adopted the draft decision by consensus.
It is the considered view of the Asia-Pacific Group
that it is imperative that the Open Working Group
commence its work immediately in order to
“decide on its methods of work, including developing
modalities to ensure the full involvement of relevant
stakeholders and expertise from civil society,
the scientific community and the United Nations
system in its work, in order to provide a diversity of
perspectives and experience.” (resolution 66/248,
annex, para. 248)
In conclusion, we must remind ourselves that the
Open Working Group is required to submit a report
containing a proposal for sustainable development goals
to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session for
its consideration and appropriate action. It is therefore
urgent that the Open Working Group commence its
work forthwith. We appreciate your leadership, Sir,
in convening a meeting of the Open Working Group
shortly.
Let me assure you, Sir, of the support of the AsiaPacific Group in the setting up and work of the Open
Working Group, especially the support of our Group’s
members who will serve on the Working Group.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As one of
the main advocates for establishing an Open Working
Group to define sustainable development goals,
Colombia could not pass up this opportunity, first, to
thank the Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Brazil for her work, which has made it possible for
us to adopt this decision establishing the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
I would like, Mr. President, to take advantage of
your recently reiterated readiness to strengthen and
support all the work of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals to ask that you convene
the Group as soon as possible, so that we can make up
the time we have lost in the course of discussing its
establishment.
As the representative of France has done, I too
would request that the Spanish version of the decision
just adopted accurately reflect the letter of the outcome
document (resolution 66/288, annex) of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,

12-66287

A/67/PV.63

namely, “Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals”.
The President: The Secretariat will take note of
the request of the representative of Colombia.
I can assure the representative of Colombia that
I will convene the Open Working Group as soon as I
return from Africa, which I will visit to consult with
leaders on the forthcoming work of the Group.
I would like to reiterate that I am prepared to
devote the full scope of my attention not just to the
commencement of the Group’s work, but also to its
ongoing deliberations. I truly believe in the importance
of its work.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item
20.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution (A/67/L.53)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on agenda item 121
and its sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting,
on 19 November 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Belize
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.53.
Mrs. Coye-Felson (Belize): I am pleased
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.53, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”, on behalf of the member
States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and
all our friends who have sponsored the draft resolution.
As documented in the Secretary-General’s report
contained in document A/67/280, the Caribbean
Community continues to benefit from direct engagement
with the Secretariat, as well as with the specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations.
The draft resolution before the plenary welcomes that
cooperation. It further requests the continued support
and assistance of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations system to promote and expand cooperation
with the States members of the Caribbean Community
so that they can more robustly confront the challenges
manifest in the region. Although the challenges are

12-66287

global, including the ongoing impact of the world
financial and economic crisis, food insecurity,
climate change, transnational organized crime and
non-communicable diseases, they are particularly
acute in our region, given the level of integration in
the Caribbean Community, our small open economics,
our young demography and our geography. It is for
that reason that the draft resolution also calls upon the
United Nations to intensify its assistance to CARICOM,
bearing in mind its vulnerabilities.
Moving forward, the Caribbean Community
encourages the United Nations to develop concrete
projects in the areas that the two organizations have
identified for strategic collaboration, namely, the
implementation of the single market and economy,
sustainable development, regional security, food
security and food safety, human development,
information and communication technology, and
institutional development. In refining the focus within
those areas, it is important that we work towards an
optimal impact on the ground and proper monitoring
and follow-up. A coherent approach to the partnership
among the United Nations system, the CARICOM
secretariat and the Member States themselves will
therefore be critical, as will the strong presence of the
United Nations in the region.
Regrettably, United Nations representation has
decreased most significantly in the critical areas
of security and regional development. We cannot
emphasize enough the point that the United Nations
commitment to supporting CARICOM in achieving its
objectives must go hand in hand with its commitment to
remain on the ground.
We consider the seventh meeting of representatives
of CARICOM and the United Nations an opportunity
to make progress on those issues and to move beyond
dialogue and on to action.
CARICOM reiterates its firm commitment to
multilateralism and to the United Nations as the principal
forum for multilateral cooperation. CARICOM member
States will continue to work towards enhancing our
support to the United Nations and through our regional
organization to attain the mutual objectives of peace,
security, development and respect for human rights.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.53, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”.

5

A/67/PV.63

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.53?

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in that document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/67/L.53: Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Greece, Honduras, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Slovenia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Uruguay.

Draft resolution A/67/L.53 was adopted (resolution
67/249).

6

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at noon.

12-66287
