S/PV.8986

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8986th meeting

Friday, 4 March 2022, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27769 (E)
*2227769*

Ukraine

S/PV.8986

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)

04/03/2022

stands as a lasting example of why it is vital to ensure
that all nuclear power plants have the highest standards
of safety and security. Every effort should be made to
avoid a catastrophic nuclear incident. The persistence
and bravery of the Ukrainian personnel who continue
to keep power plants safely operational during this
crisis are to be applauded.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.

Attacks on nuclear power facilities are contrary to
international humanitarian law, specifically article 56
of the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of
Victims of International Armed Conflicts states that:

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

“Works or installations containing dangerous
forces, namely dams, dykes and nuclear electrical
generating stations, shall not be made the object
of attack, even where these objects are military
objectives, if such attack may cause the release of
dangerous forces and consequent severe losses among
the civilian population.”

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Secretary-General welcomes the statements
and actions by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on this issue and is ready to assist however he
can. It is vital that all parties work with the IAEA to
establish an appropriate framework that will ensure
the safe, secure and reliable operation of Ukraine’s
nuclear power plants. Urgent and safe passage should
be granted to IAEA personnel, should they need to
travel to Ukraine to work with regulators.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The Secretary-General is gravely
concerned by the escalating fighting throughout Ukraine.
Ukrainian cities are today under siege and facing
repeated attacks. Over 1 million Ukrainians have
already crossed Ukraine’s borders and have been
welcomed by their European neighbours. We applaud
such solidarity and support. Everyone seeking refuge
should be afforded protection without any form of
discrimination. Millions of Ukrainians who remain
in the country are being subjected to heavy and often
indiscriminate bombardment and shelling. There
have been thousands of casualties and the number is
growing. The United Nations is significantly increasing
its humanitarian assistance in Ukraine to respond to the
escalating crisis.
The Secretary-General has followed with great
alarm reports of heavy fighting around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant in Ukraine. We understand that
a fire affected a training facility and not the cooling
system or power centre. Military operations around
nuclear sites and other critical civilian infrastructure
are not only unacceptable but highly irresponsible.
Ukraine knows only too well the devastation of a
major nuclear accident. The Chernobyl disaster in 1986
2/16

We welcome the reported agreement between the
Ukrainian and Russian negotiators during their second
round of talks in Belarus yesterday. We understand
that the discussion focused on the establishment of
humanitarian corridors to allow safe passage for
civilians and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We hope that this reported agreement is implemented
without delay and that a full and unconditional ceasefire
is quickly agreed and enacted. We urge the sides to
continue negotiations and to make urgent progress on
security, humanitarian and other issues.
As the Secretary-General has emphatically stated,
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders
must be respected, in line with General Assembly
resolutions. What we are witnessing in Ukraine today
is inconsistent with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Only diplomacy and negotiations
can achieve a last truly lasting solution to the current
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

conflict. The fighting in Ukraine must stop, and it must
stop now.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grossi.
Mr. Grossi: I will proceed with my briefing on the
current situation in Ukraine, especially after the events
last night.
We have been in contact with the nuclear regulation
agency of Ukraine from the very beginning of the
conflict and we have been receiving updates and
information from it without interruption. In general,
the situation could be described as follows.
The nuclear installations and the nuclear facilities in
Ukraine are quite important: four big sites, 15 reactors
and associated facilities, plus the site of Chernobyl.
Regarding Chernobyl, already last week we were
informed, and it was so confirmed afterwards, that the
Russian special military forces took charge of the site.
At the same time, the operators of the Chernobyl plant
continued to run its day-by-day operations over there.
A few days ago, we were again informed by the
Russian Government that military forces were moving
in the area of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant with
the similar mission to take over control of that facility.
We have received information since then that their
advance towards the perimeter of the nuclear power
plant was met by opposition and groups of civilians
blocking access to the plant.
Finally, last night, in the early hours of the morning,
we received information that a projectile had impacted
a building adjacent to the block of six reactors. The
projectile impacted the building and a fire ensued,
which, after some time, was put out by the fire brigade
at the station. We can confirm through our contacts at
the regulator, as well as directly from the plant, that
no security or safety systems have been compromised.
Only the building around the reactors themselves were
hit by those projectiles and caught fire. Members may
have seen some images of that in social media.
After that, the operations of and at the plant have
continued. From a technical point of view, we consider
that its operation is continuing normally, although,
as I have stressed to the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), there
is, of course, nothing normal about the situation when
military forces are in charge of the site.

S/PV. 8986

In terms of the next steps, we remain in permanent
contact with the Ukrainian governmental nuclear
regulatory authorities, as well as Energoatom, the
company that operates those facilities and the operators
there. That all constitutes the basis of the regular
updates, of which we have received 10 or 12 so far and
which have been made available on the IAEA website.
At the same time, I indicated this morning my
readiness to travel, as soon as practicable, to Chernobyl
in order to consult with our Ukrainian counterpart and,
when and if necessary, the forces in charge to establish
a stable framework to ensure the observance of the
basic principles of safety and security, starting with the
physical integrity of the facilities. Basic elements of that
proposal have already been shared with the Ukrainian
counterpart and the Russian authorities, who are, at
this point, evaluating it. We believe that, as we have
received a direct request for assistance, it is our duty at
the IAEA to heed that call and try to provide assistance.
Needless to say, in particular, the mission of the
IAEA, if and when it takes place, would not have
anything to do with the political and diplomatic
aspects that are within the purview of the Security
Council. Such a mission would be strictly restricted and
circumscribed to the safety and security of the nuclear
installations in Ukraine, which, as facts have shown,
are evidently at constant risk of damage and accidents.
I hope that these basic elements will help the
Security Council in its evaluation of the situation. As
I asked my Board of Governors in Vienna, we would
ask Council members to support my efforts as Director
General and those of the IAEA to ensure a basic element
in this very difficult situation, which is the safety and
security of this important part of the infrastructure of
the country.
I stand ready to answer any questions and clarify
any particular points that may not be clear. I am sorry
for the poor quality of my connection. As Council
members are aware, I am currently airborne. I am on
my way to Tehran to deal with another issue, which is
of direct interest to the Council, hopefully involving a
solution to the outstanding aspects of the nuclear power
programme in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The President: I thank Mr. Grossi for his briefing
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

22-277693/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Mr. Grossi for their briefings.
The United Kingdom and our partners called
this urgent meeting because last night Russian forces
attacked the largest nuclear power station in Europe. We
are grateful to the Ukrainian firefighters and authorities
who got the fire under control and are working bravely
to ensure that the plant remains safe. We support the
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
Ukraine and are relieved that so far, it has reported that
none of the safety systems in the plant were affected
and that there was no release of radioactive material.
This is the first time that a State has attacked
a fuelled and functioning nuclear power plant.
International law requires special protection for nuclear
facilities, and it is difficult to see how Russia’s actions
were compatible with its commitments under article 56
of the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of
Victims of International Armed Conflicts. It must not
happen again. Even in the midst of an illegal invasion
of Ukraine, Russia must keep fighting away from, and
protect the safety and security of, nuclear sites.
President Putin said yesterday that the special
military operation — or, as everyone else calls it, the
war — was going to plan. Everyone around this table
knows that that is not true. President Putin misjudged
the strength, resilience and will of the Ukrainian
people with regard to his invasion. He underestimated
the world’s condemnation of his actions. One hundred
and forty-one votes in the General Assembly and the
unprecedented sanctions on Russia demonstrate the
strength of the global response.
Every day that this war continues, the destruction
that it brings to Ukraine, the suffering that it inflicts on
Ukrainian and Russian people and the risks that it poses
to international peace and security increase. That must
stop. We call on Russia to end this violence, withdraw
its troops and enter into serious peace negotiations.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo , and we are happy that we
could listen to Director General Grossi. I would like to
reassure him of our full support in his efforts.
Ten
days
into
the
so-called
special
operation — which, in reality, is Operation How
To Invade Your Neighbour — and in the middle of a
4/16

04/03/2022

large-scale human tragedy, we are running towards
an overall catastrophe, first, for Ukraine, as well
as for Russia and, as we see every day, with serious
implications for Europe at large. Thousands have been
killed, including at least 2,000 civilians. According
to United Nations reports, approximately 12 million
people are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
and 1 million have already fled the country — the
fastest and largest mass exodus of people in complex
situations in decades.
All developments of the major geopolitical
crisis, artificially created by Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified aggression against Ukraine, indicate
unmistakably that it is headed towards further
escalation. The adoption of General Assembly
resolution ES-11/1 by an overwhelming majority just
two days ago told Russia that it could not take the
world hostage. Unfortunately, that loud call by the
world asking Russia to stop its aggression has not been
heard in Moscow, and Russia remains defiant and is
stubbornly descending into an abyss.
The world was alarmed late last night by the news
of the fire at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power station,
caused by Russian shelling. Thankfully, the huge blaze
at the site of Europe’s largest nuclear power station was
quickly extinguished, yet we remain gravely concerned,
and it is alarming that Russian forces have captured the
nuclear power plant. Russia’s grip on a plant that provides
more than one-fifth of Ukraine’s electricity is a serious
cause of concern that could have huge repercussions for
civilians and Ukraine’s economy. Fighting at the plant
or any other disturbance could cause a potential nuclear
disaster or radioactive damage and have irreparable
consequences for Europe’s environment. It is difficult
not to recall the dreadful images of Chernobyl.
We welcome the quick response of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IEAE) and the reassurance
that we heard from Director Genera Grassi, with regard
to operationalizing its Incident and Emergency Centre
for a full response, owing to the gravity of the situation.
They should be given urgent and unhindered access
to verify and monitor the conditions and ensure that
all safeguards are in place, as the situation remains
very challenging.
The Russian occupiers must immediately allow
unfettered access for emergency service to the plant and
whatever else is needed. We urge the IAEA to continue
working closely with Ukraine with a view to providing
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8986

maximum possible assistance to the country as it seeks
to maintain nuclear safety and security in the current
difficult circumstances. It is important for the nuclear
power plant to continue to be operated by its regular
staff. We are very concerned about the reports from the
operator that the situation remains difficult.

allow the operators to conduct shift changes to ensure
the continued safe operation of the plant. Ukrainian
firefighters and nuclear engineers must have full access
to the nuclear facility to assess damage, particularly to
water intake piping, and mitigate a further deterioration
of the situation, if needed.

We call on Russia to end its aggression, withdraw
its troops from Ukraine, halt the use of force near any
nuclear power plant, and any civilian infrastructure
in general, and respect article 56 of the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions. Attacking
civilians and civilian infrastructure constitutes a crime
and perpetrators must and will be held accountable.

Nuclear facilities cannot become part of this
conflict. Reliable electricity is vital for the nuclear
facility, as are backup diesel generators and fuel. Safe
transit corridors must be maintained. Russia must halt
any further use of force that might put at further risk all
15 operable reactors across Ukraine or interfere with
Ukraine’s ability to maintain the safety and security of its
37 nuclear facilities and their surrounding populations.

We welcome the establishment by the Human
Rights Council of an international commission of
inquiry to investigate war crimes committed in the
aggression against Ukraine. Evidence must be gathered,
documented and presented to the courts. For the
purpose of accountability, we support the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in investigating and
documenting crimes committed.
As Dag Hammarskjöld famously said, the United
Nations was not created to take humankind to heaven
but to save it from hell. It falls upon the Council to do
what it can and what is needed to save Ukraine, its
people and the whole of Europe from the hell to which
Russia is headed with its relentless aggression.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): By the grace of God, the world narrowly
averted a nuclear catastrophe last night. We all waited
to exhale as we watched the horrific situation unfold
in real time. I applaud the ability of the Ukrainian
operators to keep all six reactors in safe conditions
while under attack, and to report, as they were able,
to their nuclear regulator. Moreover, we appreciate the
State Nuclear Regulatory Inspectorate of Ukraine for its
continuous updates to the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the international community. We
are gravely concerned that the Ukrainian operators are
now doing their jobs under extreme duress.
Russia’s attack last night put Europe’s largest
nuclear power plant at grave risk. It was incredibly
reckless and dangerous and threatened the safety of
civilians across Russia, Ukraine and Europe. As a first
step, we call on Russia to withdraw its troops from the
plant to permit medical treatment for injured personnel;
to ensure that operators have full access to the site and
are able to communicate with nuclear regulators; and to

The United States remains highly concerned about
the fact that Russian military forces controlling the
Chernobyl site have not permitted operators there
to have a shift change since last week. That is highly
irresponsible behaviour and causes grave concerns for
the continued safe operation of both sites. We call on
all countries to support IAEA Director General Grossi
in his efforts to find arrangements going forward to
ensure nuclear safety and prevent a nuclear catastrophe
in Ukraine.
Over the past nine days, we have witnessed the
devastating impacts of President Putin’s war of choice
on the Ukrainian people. Yesterday, the United Nations
reported that Russia’s invasion had turned half a million
children into refugees. Russia has killed thousands of
Ukrainians and sacrificed the lives of thousands more
Russian soldiers in the process. Russia is destroying
critical infrastructure, which is denying people drinking
water to stay alive and gas to keep them from freezing
to death in the middle of winter. The humanitarian
impact of the destruction will be significant.
Some 141 nations across the world have called
loudly and clearly on President Putin to stop this brutal,
unjustified, unprovoked attack. Not only has he not
listened, but we have just witnessed a dangerous new
escalation that represents a dire threat to all of Europe
and the world.
To my Russian counterparts, I say that the Council
needs answers. We need to hear its representative say
that this will not happen again, as our colleague of
the United Kingdom just stated. We call on Russia to
withdraw its troops and weaponry from Ukraine. We
call on Russia to respect Ukraine’s borders, its people
and the Charter of the United Nations. We call on

22-277695/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

04/03/2022

Russia to respect its own troops enough not to send
them into an unjust war or on a suicide mission against
a nuclear power plant. We call on Russia to abide by its
international law obligations. The world demands that
Russia abide by international humanitarian law, which
prohibits intentionally targeting civilians and civilian
infrastructure, and allow humanitarian agencies full
and secure access to people in need of aid.

Energy Agency (IAEA), adopted a decision according
to which any armed attack on or threat against nuclear
facilities devoted to peaceful purposes constitutes a
violation of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the Agency’s Statute.
The competence of the Security Council under such
circumstances is also established in the resolutions of
the IAEA General Conference.

The United States and its partners have called for
a briefing on Monday on the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine. We support the urgent work of humanitarian
organizations on a humanitarian pause to allow for the
safe passage and delivery of humanitarian supplies.
President Putin must stop this humanitarian catastrophe
by ending the war and ceasing these unconscionable
attacks against the people of Ukraine. Mr. Putin must
stop this madness and he must stop it now. Cooler heads
must prevail. Russian forces are now 20 miles and
closing from Ukraine’s second-largest nuclear facility,
so the imminent danger continues.

Russia must immediately cease its dangerous
illegal activities in order to restore the control of
Ukrainian authorities over all nuclear facilities and
materials within the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine. Russia must also authorize regular and
unfettered access by facility personnel so as to ensure
that the plants can be run safely.

We narrowly avoided a disaster last night. The
international community must be unanimous in
demanding that Russia’s forces stop their dangerous
assault. As I have said before, the people of Ukraine are
counting on us, and we must not let them down.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grossi and Ms. DiCarlo for their briefings.
France is seriously concerned about the threats
to the safety, security and nuclear safeguards caused
by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. That is why France
and its partners called on the Security Council to
meet urgently.
On 24 February, Russian forces entered the
Chernobyl zone. The operating team at the power plant
were held against their will as Russian soldiers took
control of the plant. On 27 February, a loud detonation
was heard near a radioactive waste disposal site in Kyiv.
This morning, a fire was reported at the largest nuclear
facility in Europe, following the Russian attack.
As the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
said, France strongly condemns the attack on a nuclear
facility, whose security must be guaranteed.
The consequences of a nuclear accident resulting
from Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine
are potentially devastating for human health and the
environment. In 2009, Russia, along with the rest of
the General Conference of the International Atomic
6/16

We call for full respect of the Convention on
Nuclear Safety and other relevant conventions.
France supports the efforts of the IAEA Director
General to ensure ongoing monitoring of the safety and
security of nuclear facilities in Ukraine, in close contact
with the Ukrainian authorities. We ask the Director
General to use all instruments available to the Agency
to support Ukraine’s efforts to ensure the safety and
security of all facilities around the country.
In that regard, France supports the proposal of
the Director General of the IAEA for negotiations on
commitments between the parties to the armed conflict
in Ukraine, with a view to ensuring respect for the
seven principles set forth during the Board of Governors
meeting held on 2 March on the implications of the
situation in Ukraine in the areas of safety, security and
nuclear safeguards.
Finally, France reiterates its unwavering support for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Since 24 February we have witnessed the devastating
human cost of Russian aggression. An immediate
cessation of hostilities and the strict application of
international humanitarian law is a matter of urgency;
that is why France, along with Mexico, is putting
forward a draft resolution with that goal in mind in
order to put an end to the humanitarian tragedy that is
unfolding before our eyes. Here, as in other cases, the
Security Council must fully assume its responsibilities.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

Agency, Rafael Mariano Grossi, for their briefings, and
I thank Director General Grossi for his urgent call for
action today. We are here today because of our concern
about the ongoing situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
The Russian Federation’s continuing unprovoked,
unjustified invasion of Ukraine is wreaking havoc and
destruction on Ukraine and its people. That aggression
is inflicting enormous hardship and suffering.
Ireland stands full square in unwavering solidarity
with the people of Ukraine, who continue to show
extraordinary courage and resilience in the face of that
act of aggression.
The parties to the conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law. That includes the
obligation not to attack civilian objects and clear
prohibitions against indiscriminate and disproportionate
attacks. It includes the obligation to take all feasible
precautions in an attack. We demand nothing less than
full respect for those obligations.
The attack last night by Russian forces on the
nuclear power plant at Zaporizhzhya has shocked us all
and sent a chilling signal across Europe, indeed, across
the globe. That further reinforces the concerns arising
from the armed takeover by Russia of the nuclear
facilities in the Chernobyl exclusion zone just eight
days ago.
Ireland condemns the reckless firing against
nuclear power plants. Armed attacks and threats
against nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes
constitute violations of international law, including the
principles of the United Nations Charter, Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions and the IAEA
Statute. Director General Grossi has made that point
abundantly clear.
In attacking such sites, the Russian Federation
risks an environmental disaster compounding the
extraordinary human tragedy that we are witnessing
today in Ukraine. A radioactive release from any of
those sites would also have serious repercussions for
human life and health, agriculture and the environment
in Ukraine, the Russian Federation itself and the wider
European region.
We call on the Russian Federation to fully
respect its obligations under the United Nations
Charter, international law and the IAEA Statute. All

S/PV. 8986

international nuclear safety and security standards
must be maintained.
We call on the Russian Federation to allow
Ukrainian personnel at the plant do their work safely
and without undue pressure. It is crucial that safety
systems at the plant not be compromised. Power supply
to the plant must be maintained. That is essential not
just for the six reactors at this site but also for the spent
fuel stored there. There should be no interruption of
basic services, including energy to the population
across Ukraine.
Ireland commends the bravery and professionalism
of the Ukrainian personnel at the plant and the
Ukrainian nuclear regulator in seeking to ensure safety
at the plant in very difficult circumstances. We are
deeply concerned, however, for their safety and their
well-being.
At this worrying time, Ireland fully supports the
work of the IAEA and its incident and emergency centre
in its ongoing monitoring and assistance in respect of
the nuclear safety and security situation in Ukraine. We
believe that it will be important for the IAEA Director
General to keep the Council informed regarding nuclear
safety and security in Ukraine.
Cavalier, reckless behaviour with dangerous
forces such as nuclear power is utterly unacceptable.
The prospect of a nuclear event at Europe’s largest
nuclear power plant will have global impacts. We all
saw what happened at Chernobyl and Fukushima. That
is a spectre that no one at this table should be willing
to countenance.
The humanitarian implications of damage to civilian
infrastructure cannot be overestimated. The electricity
generated by the Zaporizhzhya plant powers homes and
hospitals, ensuring that civilians can feed themselves
and heat their homes and powering life-saving medical
equipment. Let us be clear: civilian infrastructure
should never be a target, and that must stop now.
Once more Ireland urges the Russian Federation
to immediately cease all hostilities, unconditionally
withdraw from the entire territory of Ukraine and to
refrain from further threats or the use of force of any kind
against Ukraine or, indeed, any other Member State.
To avert nuclear disaster, Ireland today calls
most urgently for an immediate cessation of military
activities at Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. We call for
the competent Ukrainian authorities to be allowed to

22-277697/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

04/03/2022

promptly regain full control over Zaporizhzhya and all
their nuclear facilities.

nuclear safety and security. Their perseverance is an
example to us all.

One more time, we call sincerely for a return to
dialogue and diplomacy in good faith.

Russia bears full responsibility for this act of
aggression and all the destruction and loss of life it has
caused and will continue to cause. We reiterate our call
upon the Russian Federation to immediately withdraw
its forces from Ukrainian territory and cease all threats
and military actions, including in the vicinity of, and
directed at, nuclear facilities.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael
Mariano Grossi, for their briefings to the Council. We
also thank the IAEA for providing frequent, factual
updates on matters within the Agency’s mandate.
We called this meeting along with partners because
this is an unjust war, unjustly fought. Norway condemns
the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine. And
now, as reported, we see shelling and fighting in the
immediate vicinity of a civilian nuclear power plant.
It takes little imagination to understand the possible
consequences of such action. It shows a blatant
disregard for Ukrainian lives, for Russian lives and
indeed life in Europe and beyond. It is irresponsible
and unacceptable. Civilians can never be a target. A
nuclear power plant can never be a target.
Yet this is only the latest in a string of assaults on
homes, hospitals, schools, bridges, roads and other vital
civilian infrastructure. Damage and destruction of a
nuclear plant would put us all in danger. It can lead to
a radioactive nightmare with the most severe long-term
effects for generations.
International humanitarian law is not optional. We
call on Russia to fulfil its obligation to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure. These actions also violate
the obligation under international humanitarian law
to maintain the physical integrity of nuclear facilities
and keep them safe at all times. And we recall the 2009
decision of the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency that
“any armed attack on and threat against nuclear
facilities devoted to peaceful purposes constitutes
a violation of the principles of the United Nations
Charter, international law and the Statute of
the Agency”.
We commend the efforts of the State Nuclear
Regulatory Inspectorate of Ukraine to keep the
international community updated on the status of nuclear
safety and security in the country. And our thoughts go
to the staff — the men and women — working at nuclear
facilities in Ukraine under these dire circumstances.
We laud their commitment to ensuring continuing
8/16

A ceasefire is desperately and urgently needed.
Diplomacy must win.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting is another attempt by Kyiv
authorities to kindle artificial hysteria around what is
happening in Ukraine, and they are being assisted in
this by their Western backers.
Today we have once again heard lies about how
Russian troops attacked the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, and this is all part of an unprecedented
campaign of lies and disinformation against Russia,
which is trying to present the situation of the power
plant as having allegedly been shelled by the Russian
military as a result of which a fire broke out. These
statements are simply untrue.
The city of Energodar, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant and the adjacent areas were brought under
the control of the Russian army back on 28 February.
As a result of negotiations with the management of
the power plant, an agreement was reached to place
it under the protection of the Russian military. The
goal is to prevent Ukrainian nationalists or other
terrorist forces from taking advantage of the current
situation to organize a nuclear provocation. The goal
is also to ensure the security of the station and prevent
interruptions in power supply to the population of
Ukraine and European consumers.
At present, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and adjacent areas are being guarded by Russian troops.
In order to do this, personnel with relevant experience,
including experience in operating the engineering and
technical facilities with which the nuclear power plant
is equipped, have been brought in. The current situation
is similar to that in the area of the Chernobyl power
plant. The security of these facilities is being ensured
jointly by the Russian armed forces and the Ukrainian
operators of the nuclear installations. Our servicemen
are not interfering in the work of the operators of
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

the Ukrainian power plants; they are limiting their
objectives merely to ensuring their security.
As we were informed by the Russian Ministry of
Defence, on the night of 4 March, while patrolling the
protected area, but not the area of the power plant itself,
rather the adjacent area, a Russian mobile patrol was
attacked by a Ukrainian sabotage group. In order to
provoke return fire on the building, small-arms fire was
opened on Russian troops from the windows of several
floors of the training complex located just outside the
area of the nuclear power plant.
The Russian patrol returned fire on the Ukrainian
saboteurs’ firing points from the training complex
and suppressed their fire. As they were leaving, the
Ukrainian sabotage group set fire to the training
facility. Let me emphasize once again that this building
is not located on the territory of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant.
The fire brigades that arrived were able to
extinguish the fire on the premises. At the time of
this provocation, none of the regular employees of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant were on site
in the training building. At present, the personnel of
the power plant — who were not injured, as we were
assured by the Permanent Representative of the United
States — continues to work normally and is maintaining
plant facilities and monitoring the radiation situation.
The background radiation levels in the area of the
nuclear power plant are normal.
All the nuclear power plant’s facilities are under
the control of the Russian military. Their security
has been fully ensured, and the station continues to
function normally, in accordance with technological
requirements. The power units of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant were not damaged. Their condition
is as follows. The first has been disconnected
for repair. The second and third units have been
temporarily disconnected by the decision of the
station’s management. The fourth is operating at 690
megawatts, and the fifth and sixth are being cooled.
According to the assessments of International
Atomic Energy Agency leadership set out in the 4 March
press statement, the operation of the nuclear power
plant continues normally. Nothing is threatening the
safety of the six power units. The radiation monitoring
systems at the station are fully operational and there is
no threat of a release of radioactive material.

S/PV. 8986

I would like to remind the Council that in 2014
Ukrainian nationalists tried to destabilize the situation
at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and in the city
of Energodar. Western States ignored that egregious
case back then, which could have led to disaster. We
drew attention to that serious incident at the time.
Now, when the Russian military is doing all it can
to ensure the safety and security of Ukrainian nuclear
facilities, a massive anti-Russian propaganda campaign
is unfolding based on absurd allegations that Russia is
trying to create a source of radioactive contamination. I
urge the Council to consider — what would be the point
of doing that?
We are the best positioned to be aware and on top
of the situation. We are also the party most interested in
maintaining and ensuring nuclear, physical and general
security in Ukraine. We are Ukraine’s neighbours.
Together with the people of Belarus and Ukraine, we
lived through the tragedy of Chernobyl. We are therefore
more interested than most in maintaining a normal
radiation levels throughout the territory of Ukraine.
I would like to once again emphasize that the danger
to the civilian population of Ukraine is not emanating
from Russian troops, but rather from Ukrainian
nationalists, who are holding the civilian populations
of a number of large cities hostage and carrying out acts
of sabotage and provocation, one of which we are now
discussing. They then try to blame Russia for all of it.
Yesterday’s incident at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant is a clear illustration of that. As to the
reaction of my dear Western colleagues to this incident
and their attempt to turn it into a global scandal, we
have no doubt that the radicals and extremists in
Ukraine were and are under the protection of these
colleagues and therefore have carte blanche to do as
they please. For the sake of their Ukrainian project, my
Western colleagues are ready to forget about the future
and well-being of ordinary Ukrainians, just as they
tried to ignore the systematic shelling for eight years of
the civilians of Donbas by the armed forces of Ukraine.
We urge these colleagues to calm down their mentees,
who, in the worst traditions of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant terrorists and their associates are hiding
behind civilians, placing heavy weaponry and multiple
rocket launchers in residential areas.
In Mariupol, nationalists have detained 60 citizens
who were on their way to the humanitarian corridor
that was established and forced them to the thirty-

22-277699/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

fourth local school, which has been mined. Now those
terrorists are using civilians as human shields and
are blackmailing the advancing forces of the Donetsk
People’s Republic with their readiness to blow up a
school full of hostages.
Furthermore, they are preventing civilians who
wish to leave the cities from doing so. That practice is
affecting not only Ukrainians, but also foreign citizens.
The number of foreign nationals who are being forcibly
held by Ukrainian nationalists is shocking. In Kharkiv,
they are holding 3,189 citizens of India, up to 2,700
citizens of Viet Nam, 202 citizens of China. In Sumy,
they are holding 576 Indian citizens, 101 Ghanian
citizens and 121 Chinese citizens. In Chernihiv, nine
Indonesian citizens are being held.
Yesterday, in Kharkiv, nationalists fired on a group
of Chinese citizens who were trying to independently
leave into Russian territory, and two were injured. The
Russian military is doing all it can to ensure the peaceful
evacuation of foreign nationals. In the Belgorod region,
at the Nekhoteyevka and Sudzha checkpoints, as of 6
a.m. today, 130 comfortable buses were stood ready to
leave for Kharkiv and Sumy in order to rescue Indian
students and other foreign citizens. Checkpoints have
been equipped with temporary accommodations, rest
facilities and hot meals, mobile medical stations have
been equipped with stocks of medication. The evacuees
will be later transported to Belgorod and, subsequently,
brought home by air.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
another egregious episode, and we would ask the
Secretariat’s Rapporteur to provide some clarification
in that regard. The Telegram channel of the so-called
territorial defence of Kramatorsk published a message
about the requisitioning of cars of United Nations
mission personnel. If the Secretariat is not aware of
that, we are ready to provide the relevant materials.
That message states: “Sorry, but the end justifies the
means. We have requisitioned United Nations vehicles,
as we need them now”. According to the nationalists,
“there is full understanding on the part of the United
Nations. There were no official statements or protests
from the United Nations”.
We are extremely concerned that United Nations
mission vehicles could already be in the hands of
terrorists and could be used for terrorist purposes. If
the Secretariat is actually aware of this situation, as
the nationalists claim, then we would like to receive an
10/16

04/03/2022

explanation of why the United Nations did not inform
Member States.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Director General
Grossi for their briefings.
It is regrettable that the situation in Ukraine has
worsened further since the Council last convened on
this matter (see S/PV.8983). An immediate cessation of
violence and end to all hostilities are essential.
We continue to carefully follow the developments
regarding the safety and security of Ukraine’s nuclear
power reactors and facilities. India attaches the highest
importance to ensuring the safety and security of
nuclear facilities, as any accident involving nuclear
facilities may have severe consequences for public
health and the environment.
India accords the highest priority to the discharge
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
its safeguards and monitoring activities, in accordance
with its statute, in an effective, non-discriminatory
and efficient manner. We also take note of the latest
information available with regard to the nuclear power
plants and facilities in Ukraine, including the updates
provided today by the Director General of the IAEA on
the current situation.
While we are discussing the nuclear dimension of
an unfolding conflict, the Council must acknowledge
that there is a pressing humanitarian crisis confronting
us in Ukraine, where the safety and security of innocent
civilians including several thousand Indian nationals,
in particular students, are at stake. We therefore hope
that the second round of talks between the two sides
contributes to the immediate establishment of a safe
humanitarian corridor.
As reiterated by my Prime Minister in his
conversations with global leaders, including of the
Russian Federation and Ukraine, differences must be
resolved through sustained dialogue and diplomacy.
Commitment to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, as well as respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
are key principles in that regard.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Director General Grossi for their briefings.
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

Like other delegations, I express my country’s
concern about the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plan.
Although the information we are receiving is that the
nuclear reactors were not affected and that radiation
levels have not increased, that does not diminish the
seriousness of the incident or the possible consequences
of a greater impact.
The firing of missiles at or in the vicinity of a nuclear
power plant violates the fundamental principle relating
to the physical integrity of nuclear facilities, which must
be secured at all times and under all circumstances.
In 2009, the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) unanimously approved
decision GC(53)/DEC/13, reaffirming resolutions
adopted in 1985 and 1990, stating explicitly that
“any armed attack on and threat against nuclear
facilities devoted to peaceful purposes constitutes
a violation of the principles of the United Nations
Charter ... international law”.
It is also necessary to mention the concern about the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Any incident at these
two plants or any other could have serious health and
environmental repercussions. Just a week since the start
of the conflict, there are already more than 1.2 million
refugees. The additional humanitarian consequences of
a radiological accident releasing radioactive material
would be so serious that it is imperative to take all the
preventive measures available to us to avoid it.
There is no justification for military activities
at these sites. They are clearly identifiable nuclear
facilities and they are expressly prohibited from attack
under international humanitarian law. The physical
security of nuclear facilities, as well as the personnel
guaranteeing their security, to which the IAEA Director
General pointedly referred, must be maintained at
all times. We support his initiative to ensure that the
parties fully comply with their security commitments
in the area of security for those facilities. The
Zaporizhzhya incident should be added to a growing list
of direct or collateral attacks on civilian infrastructure.
International law, international humanitarian law and
the conventions on nuclear physical security must be
respected without exception. We call for the military
action of the Russian Federation on Ukrainian territory
to adhere to the principles of international law and
the principle of proportionality of actions affecting
civilian infrastructure, in particular nuclear facilities,
equipment and radioactive materials.

S/PV. 8986

Mexico reiterates its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for an immediate ceasefire that would
allow for urgent humanitarian action. That is precisely
the objective pursued by France and Mexico in the draft
resolution that we have submitted for the consideration
of Council members.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this emergency
meeting of the Security Council at this critical moment
in the situation in Ukraine, and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Director-General Grossi for the
information provided.
Ghana is gravely concerned about the intensifying
military escalations across several cities in Ukraine, in
particular with the attack and shelling of sites close to
nuclear power plants and facilities. It is a relief to learn
that the situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant is currently stable and that radioactive emissions
remain within acceptable range. Every effort must be
made to mitigate the risk of accidental emissions, which
pose an immeasurable threat to the lives of civilians
and an already fragile environment.
We urge the continued support of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to provide necessary assistance
to the Ukrainian authorities so as to ensure the safety
and security of nuclear installations and staff present
on site.
We cannot forget the horrors of the 1986 Chernobyl
accident and the consequent nuclear catastrophe, which
have left in its wake long-term effects of radiation
exposure to many people in Ukraine and parts of
Europe even to date.
Ghana strongly appeals to the parties to exercise
restraint and halt the use of force in all areas of critical
infrastructure, including the nuclear power plants, and
to respect their international obligations to protect
human lives and to prevent potential disasters.
We take note of the ongoing diplomatic talks
between the parties in Belarus and welcome the
agreement reached to create a humanitarian corridor
to allow for the evacuation of the millions of people
caught up in the crossfires, as well as the considerations
to provide food and medical supplies.
Together with the international community, we
express our strong support for the peaceful resolution of
this conflict and urge further constructive engagements
by the parties at all levels in the pursuit of their security

22-2776911/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

04/03/2022

interests and the maintenance of international peace
and security.

the fire of further escalation and the deterioration of
the situation.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I listened
attentively to the briefings by Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Grossi.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
and Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Director General Rafael Grossi for their presentations.

China is closely following the recent developments
in Ukraine and expresses its concern about the relevant
report about the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
According to the information the IAEA received from
the Ukrainian nuclear authority, the main equipment of
the nuclear power plant remain intact and the level of
radiation unchanged. We also note the information and
clarification provided by Russia on relevant matters.

We support and commend the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for remaining in constant
contact with authorities in Ukraine and for fully
discharging technical responsibilities and functions,
as per the Agency’s statute and related instruments.
We commend the Agency’s Director General for his
offer to visit Ukraine and for his efforts to secure a
commitment of all parties to ensuring the safety and
security of nuclear facilities in the country.

China attaches great importance to nuclear safety
and security and hopes the relevant parties concerned
will act with great caution and, with specialized technical
assistance from the IAEA Technical Secretariat, work
to jointly ensure the safety of relevant nuclear facilities
inside Ukraine.
The Ukrainian crisis is still undergoing complex
changes. The most important thing right now is to
ease tension, avoid more civilian casualties, intensify
diplomatic efforts and return as soon as possible to the
track of political settlement.
Russia and Ukraine have held two rounds of
direct dialogue and negotiations and have reached a
preliminary consensus on setting up a humanitarian
corridor. China welcomes this and hopes that it
can facilitate better protection of civilians and the
safe evacuation of all foreign nationals, including
Chinese nationals.
We encourage Russia and Ukraine to remain
committed to stick to the overall direction of a
political settlement and reach a negotiated solution
that accommodates the legitimate concerns of the
two parties and contributes to Europe’s lasting peace
and security. China welcomes all diplomatic efforts
conducive to political settlement and has played and
will continue to play a constructive role to this end.
The international community should stay coolheaded and rational and adopt a responsible, impartial
and objective approach to creating a sound atmosphere
and conditions for direct talks between the parties
concerned. Any action must contribute to de-escalation
and a diplomatic settlement, rather than add fuel to
12/16

I am almost embarrassed to reiterate that we
are facing unprecedented dire circumstances. Not
only are we witnessing an appalling humanitarian
catastrophe in Ukraine, but now we are also confronted
with the prospect of a nuclear incident of significant
dimensions due to the situation in the nuclear facility
in Zaporizhzhya. That is one more reason for the
international community to strenuously call for
an immediate and comprehensive cessation of all
hostilities in Ukraine.
We are under threat of a radioactive incident
of major proportions, which could have enormous
consequences not only for Ukraine but for all of Europe.
The complete de-escalation of military actions is past
due. The provisions of international humanitarian
law must be respected in their entirety. The safety of
millions of people is at stake and now also subjected a
nuclear threat.
In that regard, we appreciate Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for drawing the attention of the
Council to article 56 of the first Additional Protocol
to the Geneva Conventions, according to which nuclear
electrical generating stations
“shall not be made the object of attack, even
when those objects are military objectives, if
such an attack may cause the release of dangerous
forces and consequent severe losses among the
civilian population”.
Allow me to add that article 56 also applies to
“other military objectives located at or in the vicinity
of those works or installations”. The IAEA General
Conference has adopted a number of decisions on the
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

protection of nuclear installations devoted to peaceful
purposes against armed attacks, prohibition of attacks
and threat of attack thereto. Those decisions must be
respected at all times.
Brazil calls on all parties to refrain from any
measure or action that could jeopardize the security of
nuclear materials, as well as the safe operation of all
nuclear facilities in Ukraine, as any such incident could
have severe and enduring consequences for human
health and the environment.
While expressing grave concern over the recent
developments, we cannot turn a blind eye to the role
that the Council should play but is not playing in the
current situation. A number of meetings have been
held in this Chamber on the situation in Ukraine. It
seems that, no matter how many public meetings we
convene, a ceasefire and the end of hostilities remain
elusive. That is not a paradox, but rather a warning
on the failure of the Council to act constructively in
addressing the matter.
Brazil urges all members here to engage truly and
actively to promote dialogue and rebuild trust. The
General Assembly recently adopted resolution ES11/1, urging Russia and Ukraine to seek a peaceful
resolution of the conflict through political dialogue,
negotiations, mediation and other peaceful means. This
is the time not to further escalate the rhetoric, but to
engage in conversations towards peace. There is an
array of instruments available to the Council and to the
parties under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Security Council has — we have — the
responsibility to create an environment conducive to a
ceasefire and to lasting peace.
At this moment, we reiterate our appeal for a
ceasefire and, most of all, for diplomacy.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Director General Grossi for
their briefings.
Kenya is deeply concerned by the reports
made yesterday of a fire in the close vicinity of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in Ukraine. It is with
relief that we learned from the International Atomic
Energy Agency that the reactor’s safety systems have
not been affected and that radioactive material has not
been released.
There are few more dangerous installations
containing dangerous forces than nuclear plants

S/PV. 8986

as regards the catastrophic humanitarian and
environmental consequences of their destruction. On
this occasion, good fortune intervened to safeguard
the reactor. However, the fact that the armed conflict
is still under way and features extensive ground, air
and sea military operations means that the risk remains
unacceptably high.
Rarely has there been a more urgent need to observe
international conventions regulating the conduct of
armed conflict. We therefore call for adherence to
the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, relating to the protection of victims of
non-international armed conflicts, particularly part IV
of Protocol II, whose article 15 states:
“Works or installations containing dangerous
forces, namely dams, dykes and nuclear electrical
generating stations, shall not be made the object
of attack, even where these objects are military
objectives, if such attack may cause the release
of dangerous forces and consequent severe losses
among the civilian population.”
Kenya also recalls resolution 2573 (2021), adopted
in April 2021, the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population, which
highlights the significant effect that the destruction of
essential infrastructure in many conflicts across the
globe continues to have on civilians. Beyond the risk
to nuclear plants, we urge that due caution be taken in
any actions that may destroy civilian objects that are
critical to the survival of Ukrainians. Harm to them can
lead to an escalation of the armed conflict and make it
all the more difficult to resolve.
Kenya calls for the military leaderships of Ukraine
and the Russian Federation to establish mechanisms to
reduce the targeting and threat to critical infrastructure.
Such a mechanism can mirror the agreement made
yesterday by both sides to the conflict to establish a
humanitarian corridor, as well as a temporary local
ceasefire, to enable aid deliveries. We encourage the
continuation of that positive dialogue and call on the
Russian Federation to urgently enter into negotiations
to settle the conflict by peaceful means.
Finally, we take note of the resolution adopted
yesterday by the International Atomic Energy Agency
Board of Governors. We thank the Director General for
his regular updates and continuing efforts to ensure
safety and security in all facilities in the country.

22-2776913/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Director General Rafael Grossi for
their briefings.
My country too is following the situation at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant with deep concern.
The reports that we have received about fires affecting the
plant suggest a dangerous development in the conflict.
The humanitarian and environmental catastrophe
resulting from a serious nuclear incident would be hard
to contain and recovery would be difficult. We clearly
remember Fukushima and Chernobyl. The human
costs are indeed incalculable in terms of both human
health and the environment. We all must prevent such
accidents from happening again.
The parties must therefore ensure the safety of the
plant, as well as its reactors. They must also ensure
that the plant and the surrounding area are not a target
and remain protected from conflict, as damage to the
plant could lead to dire consequences for the entire
region. For that reason, we urge all the relevant parties
involved to cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) to ensure and protect the safety
of nuclear facilities in Ukraine and to establish a stable
framework on the ground.
There are clear reasons for having special
protections in place under international humanitarian
law for facilities such as nuclear power plants. We
again stress that any direct attack on a nuclear
facility has the potential to lead to catastrophic and
unimaginable consequences.
Nuclear safety is a critical issue for my country.
Our participation on the IAEA’s Board of Governors is
a recognition of that concern. We will continue to make
every possible effort to promote and maintain nuclear
safety, and we support the Director General of the
IAEA’s proposal for negotiations between the parties
around this matter and the implementation of agreed
procedures. We also welcome the second round of
bilateral talks between Ukraine and Russia yesterday.
The Security Council is responsible for
maintaining international peace and security. As we
know, nuclear threats are among the most devastating
threats to humankind. The Council must make every
possible effort to avoid a nuclear disaster, whether from
14/16

04/03/2022

direct attack on a nuclear facility or as an unintended
consequence of conflict. Such a disaster would have
grave ramifications for generations to come. With
regard to the conflict today, we again reiterate our call
for a cessation of hostilities, for de-escalation and for
dialogue mechanisms to be leveraged and supported by
all of us. The risks of a failure in diplomacy are too
grave to consider.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo to respond to any
comments and questions.
Ms. DiCarlo: I would like to respond to the
comment of the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, who referred to United Nations
vehicles being requisitioned in Kramatorsk. At present,
there are no United Nations staff in Kramatorsk.
Thirteen vehicles were left there. At 10.45 a.m. this
morning, the United Nations Department of Safety and
Security spoke with guards at the compound. They
confirmed that all 13 vehicles remain there.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to express my gratitude for the immediate reaction by
the Under-Secretary-General to the lies of the Russian
representative. We are all accustomed to the lies.
“We have survived the night that could have
stopped the history of Ukraine and Europe,” said the
President of Ukraine this morning. Indeed, every day
provides us with newer and newer evidence that it is not
only Ukraine under Russian attack; it is Europe; it is
the entire world; it is humankind; and, finally, it is the
future of the next generations.
Russia seems to be furious that its plans to quickly
invade Ukraine have already failed. Russia is furious
that the Ukrainian people continue to courageously fight
for its freedom. Russia is furious about the worldwide
solidarity with Ukraine. In retaliation, Russia has
resorted to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Russia does not even try to hide them. Residential
areas of Ukrainian cities and villages across the
country are being ruined by Russian bombs, shells and
missiles. Peaceful civilians are being killed. Critical
infrastructure is totally damaged. Just yesterday,
22-27769

04/03/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8986

Russian air strikes killed 47 peaceful residents of the
city of Chernihiv, including children. But that is not
enough for Russia, or terror Russia, as one may already
call it, because yesterday it committed an act of nuclear
terrorism while shelling and seizing the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant in the town of Energodar.

disturbed, that could cause radioactive damage across
large territories and have irreparable consequences for
the environment of the entire continent. Thousands of
people, including civilians, who are currently unable
to evacuate the area near the plant due to the ongoing
shelling and fighting, would be affected.

The lies of the Permanent Representative of Russia
are not surprising. He may not be properly informed by
his capital, and we saw that on many occasions in the
Security Council. He had no idea what his capital and
what the President were planning to do in the middle of
one of our recent meetings. I would therefore not really
rely on his words.

I turn now to a pair of lies by the Russian Ambassador
about the foreign students. This is an appalling example
of gaslighting and an example of what he probably
intended to present as almost an angelic message of
peace. But let me remind him and all of us that Satan
was also an angel — an angel that rebelled against God.
I would like to ask the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation if he is still able to communicate
with his capital, which is probably not the case. Who
knows? I ask the Russian representative to appeal to
the armed forces to ensure a safe corridor, to allow the
foreign students to leave the areas of concern and to
stop spreading lies. He knows very well what is going
on there if he is indeed in contact with his capital.

As a result of the shelling on the territory of the
nuclear power plant, a fire broke out, killing and
injuring several people. The Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant site, as well as the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant, is currently under the control of the
Russian Armed Forces. Employees of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant are monitoring the condition of the
power units and ensuring their operation, in accordance
with the requirements of the technical regulations for
safe operation.
It is alarming that several employees responsible for
maintaining nuclear security at the site were reportedly
killed by Russian soldiers. There has been no rotation
of personnel since yesterday morning. The building
of Unit 1 main building is damaged. The overpass of
the special building is damaged. The telephone line
connection is disrupted and not available at the moment.
The stage of the power units now is as follows.
Unit 1 is in outage. Its main building is damaged. The
overpass of the special building is damaged. Units 2
and 3 have been disconnected from the grid and the
cooldown of the nuclear installations is being carried
out. Unit 4 is in operation at 690 megawatts of power.
Units 5 and 6 are being cooled down.
State nuclear safety inspectors of the State
Nuclear Regulatory Inspectorate of Ukraine are not
allowed access to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant site. Changes in the radiation situation have not
been registered. Data from the automated radiation
monitoring system of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant do not work. The cooling of the nuclear fuel within
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power units is maintained
by dedicated systems of power units, in accordance
with the requirements of the technical regulations for
safe operation. If, at any point, the cooling process is

The result of a nuclear disaster on such a
scale — God forbid were it to happen — could
exceed all previous accidents at nuclear power plants,
including the Chernobyl and Fukushima nuclear power
plant disasters. Russia has deliberately undertaken an
armed attack against a nuclear power site — an action
that has violated all international agreements with the
IAEA, in particular the Agency’s Statute and Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear
Accident, the Convention on Assistance in the Case
of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency and
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and Nuclear Facilities.
The shelling of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant is also a gross violation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. We are disappointed by the reaction
of the IAEA, whose statement did not go as far as to
include any mention of the attacking side. We demand
clear and decisive action from the IAEA.
The international community must respond
adequately to the actions of the Russian Federation,
which could lead to an unprecedented nuclear
catastrophe. All Russian forces must be withdrawn
from the nuclear power plant. Today, I have sent a letter

22-2776915/16

S/PV.8986

Ukraine

to the President of the Security Council, recalling the
Council’s decisions on no-fly zones during previous
conflicts in order to prevent further civilian casualties,
protect the civilian population from air attacks,
including humanitarian personnel, and ensure access
for humanitarian assistance and evacuation.
In that regard, we ask the Council to consider the
issue of protection of nuclear power plants and other
critical infrastructure in Ukraine. Urgent discussion
on establishing a ban on all flights in the airspace
over Ukraine should be a top priority for the Security
Council. We would also like to recall that, on 30 March
2015, in a letter to the President of the Security Council,
contained in document S/2015/225, Ukraine requested
the deployment of an international peacekeeping and
security operation in the territory of Ukraine, with the
exact modalities to be defined in consultations with the
Ukrainian side, while taking into account that Russia’s
armed forces could not be a part of the peacekeeping
contingent because it is precisely the occupation armed
forces that should be separated to maintain a ceasefire
and peace. The failure of the Security Council to
act, especially owing to the position of the Russian
Federation as a party to the conflict, would be the
historical responsibility of the Security Council and the
entire Organization.
I should like to ask Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo to forward our request to Secretary-General

16/16

04/03/2022

Guterres to ensure that every single body of the United
Nations and every employee of the Secretariat respects
General Assembly resolution ES-11/1 of 2 March and
does not deviate from the language of the resolution or
substitute it with ambiguities or falsities like “special
military forces”, when it is called aggression against
Ukraine. A week of full-fledged Russian invasion has
already resulted in thousands of people killed, more
than 1 million refugees and destroyed infrastructure.
It is already the shared duty of the international
community to stop the Russian murderers and terrorists
by closing the skies over Ukraine, supporting Ukraine
in terms of security and humanitarian assistance and
expelling Russians from international institutions,
as they do not deserve to be among civilized and
responsible nations.
Einstein said that the world will not be destroyed
by those who do evil — the Ukrainians can deal
with evil — but by those who watch them without
doing anything. The people of Ukraine are doing
more than they can, including by paying the ultimate
price — paying with their lives. Yet still, shamefully,
there is a handful of those among us who do nothing.
We must act now or it may be too late, not only for
Ukraine, but for all of us.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

22-27769
