UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/9
6 April 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3869th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 April 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Afghanistan of 17 March 1998 (A/52/826S/1998/222).
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the continued
Afghan war, which is a serious threat to regional and international
security, and causes extensive human suffering, further destruction,
refugee flows and other forcible displacement of large numbers of people.
"The Security Council is concerned by the increasingly ethnic nature
of the conflict, by reports of ethnic-based persecution, and by the threat
this poses to the unity of the Afghan State.
"The Security Council urges all Afghan parties to stop the fighting,
to agree immediately on a ceasefire, and to engage without preconditions in
a political dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation, a lasting
political settlement of the conflict, which has no military solution, and
the formation of a broad-based fully representative government.
"The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and respect for its cultural and historical heritage.
"The Security Council deplores the fact that foreign interference in
Afghanistan continues unabated in the form of the supply of war-making
materials to the factions. It also deplores the active political and
military support from outside Afghanistan to the factions, thereby
reinforcing the reluctance of faction leaders to engage in serious
political dialogue with one another. The Council reiterates its call to
all States to stop such interference immediately.
"The Security Council notes with concern that all the Afghan parties
have been actively engaged in arms replenishment throughout the last
98-09680 (E)

060498

/...

S/PRST/1998/9
English
Page 2

months, warns the conflicting parties that the resumption of large-scale
fighting will seriously undermine the attempts of the international
community to assist them in finding a political solution to the conflict
and urges them to live up to their declared desire for such a solution.
"The Security Council reiterates its position that the United Nations,
as a universally recognized intermediary, must continue to play its central
and impartial role in international efforts towards a peaceful resolution
of the Afghan conflict and extends its full support for the activities of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, particularly in his current
mission in the region.
"The Security Council commends the consolidation of the process,
initiated by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
with the convening of the ’six plus two’ group, and calls upon all
countries involved in it to continue to participate in its work in good
faith, including in the discussion to devise effective and impartial ways
to curb the flow of arms and other war-making materials into Afghanistan.
The Security Council welcomes the support of other Member States for this
process.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the deteriorating
security conditions for United Nations and humanitarian personnel and calls
upon all Afghan factions, in particular the Taliban, to take necessary
steps to assure their safety.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing
discrimination against girls and women and other violations of human rights
as well as violations of international humanitarian law in Afghanistan.
"The Security Council supports the steps of the Secretary-General to
launch investigations into alleged mass killings of prisoners of war and
civilians in Afghanistan, the outcome of which will be submitted to the
General Assembly and the Security Council as soon as it becomes available.
"The Security Council is also concerned with the sharp deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in several areas in Central and Northern
Afghanistan, which is caused by the Taliban-imposed blockade of the Bamyan
region remaining in place despite appeals by the United Nations and several
of its Member States to lift it, as well as by the lack of supplies coming
in from the northern route owing to insecurity and looting. The Council
strongly urges the Taliban to let the humanitarian agencies attend to the
needs of the population.
"The Security Council reiterates that the continuation of the conflict
in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking which destabilize the region and beyond, and
calls upon the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to keep it regularly informed of the
situation in Afghanistan."
-----
