A /69/PV.65

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

65th plenary meeting

Monday, 8 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mnisi
(Swaziland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/315)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.32)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13
and its sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, and
adopted resolution 69/15, at its 51st plenary meeting, on
14 November 2014. Members will further recall that,
also at the 51st plenary meeting, the President of the
General Assembly informed delegations that a dedicated
meeting to consider the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development

Financing would take place at a later date. This meeting
is convened to consider that report.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia): I have the honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the 134 members of the Group of 77 and
China.
The Group of 77 and China wishes to thank the
President of the Assembly for convening this important
meeting today and for allowing Member States to express
their views and make statements on the contents of the
report of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts
on Sustainable Development Financing (A/69/315) and
its options for policies on sustainable development
financing. We expect these views and statements to be
reflected by the Secretariat as an integral part of the
draft resolution (A/69/L.32) to be adopted at the end of
this meeting.
In fulfilling the mandate of paragraph 257 of
the Rio+20 outcome document (resolution 66/288,
annex), the consideration of this report by the General
Assembly reaches out to all Member States and relevant
stakeholders, especially those that were not given an
opportunity to present their views during the drafting
of the report. Unfortunately, the rules of procedure
applied to participation in, and interactions with, the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts were far
more restrictive. We believe that the present General
Assembly meeting is a most timely occasion to make
up for the outreach deficit of the Intergovernmental
Committee.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-67770 (E)

*1467770*

A/69/PV.65

The Group regards the report of the experts not
as a document that galvanizes full agreement in every
detail, but as one input among others to build a common
and future agreement on the tools of financing and the
means of implementing the sustainable development
goals (SDGs).
The Group believes that the world economic
crisis is not yet over, that its effects are still being
felt in developing countries and that we need to see
an improvement in the international environment in
order to achieve the objective of promoting sustainable
development, globally and in every nation, and free
humankind from poverty and hunger.
The Group believes that the Monterrey Consensus
and the Doha Declaration provide the conceptual
framework, including in the context of the post-2015
development agenda, for the mobilization of resources
from a variety of sources and the effective use of the
financing required for the achievement of sustainable
development. Therefore, we should focus not only on
how to mobilize domestic resources, but also on how to
mobilize international financing and further strengthen
the systemic aspect of an enabling environment, such as
the importance of having a stable multilateral financial
and trading system that provide adequate policy space
and national ownership for developing countries in
their pursuit of international agreed development goals.
The Group recognizes at the outset the positive
recommendations of the report, such as giving due
consideration to the principle of the common but
differentiated responsibilities of developed and
developing countries and their respective capabilities,
as stated in principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development. On the road to Addis
Ababa, we must also take guidance from paragraph 247
of the Rio+20 outcome document, which underscores
that SDGs are universally applicable to all countries,
while taking into account different realities, capacities
and levels of development and respecting national
policies and priorities.
Also positive is the experts’ recognition of the
complementary and voluntary nature of South-South
cooperation vis-à-vis North-South cooperation, in
accordance with the Nairobi outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation
and decision 18/1 of the High-Level Committee on
South-South Cooperation and its recommendations. We
regret, however, the omission of references to the need

2/26

08/12/2014

to scale up the financial and human resources of the
United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation.
The Group regrets that core mandates of the
Rio+20 outcome document were not taken into
account by the experts, especially those related to the
SDGs, as adopted in resolution 68/309, and possible
arrangements on a facilitation mechanism on the
development, dissemination and transfer of clean and
environmentally sound technologies, as adopted in
resolution 68/310.
The Group is also concerned that the report departs
from the Monterrey and Doha conceptual framework
and does not address financing for sustainable
development according to the Rio+20 consensus. In
that regard, the concept of global public goods must
be highlighted as a concern, since it lays out the idea
of a balanced integration of the social, economic and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development
and their interlinkage. We understand that the concept
of global public goods may have acted as a quick-fix
solution to help the experts make do without the SDGs,
which were still in the making at that time. Therefore,
we must admit that welcoming resolution 68/309 has
filled a crucial gap and granted centrality to the report
of the Open Working Group on SDGs as the main basis
for mainstreaming sustainable development goals into
the post-2015 development agenda.
The importance of a United Nations institutional
follow-up framework has not been given due attention
in the report of the experts, and should therefore be
further discussed by Member States in the months
ahead.
Debating the follow-up process will also involve
assessing the relentless impact of the international
financial and economic crisis on the implementation
of the development agenda, as well as the remedies
and reforms expected to enable the international
community and its most vulnerable segments to put in
place effective sustainable development strategies to
free humankind from poverty and hunger by 2030.
The report of the experts presents to Member States
options yet to be discussed in the preparatory process
for the third International Conference on Financing for
Development. In the light of the consensus generated
by the SDGs and the existing common principles and
agreements achieved at the United Nations, the Group
presents the following additional remarks on the
experts’ report.

14-67770

08/12/2014

First, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities will continue to be pivotal in discussing
a strategy for financing for development.
Second, the basket of 115 options on policies
presented by the experts must be examined against the
background of the report of the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals and its 17 goals and
169 targets therein contained. We should retain the
centrality of the SDGs to ensure the holistic approach
to sustainable development mandated by the Monterrey
and Rio+20 processes.
Third, the global public goods suggested by the
experts must correspond to the 17 goals of the SDGs in
their entirety.
Fourth, the reform and mobilization of domestic
resources, including through partnerships and blended
financing, must not trump the centrality of international
trade and systemic issues for catalysing sustainable
development.
Fifth, the private sector is not a silver bullet for
sustainable development without scaling up official
development assistance (ODA) in favour of national
capacity-building and regulatory framework policies,
particularly in those countries with special needs.
Sixth, ODA must not be redefined so as to encompass
peace and security aspects that divert resources from
development-oriented initiatives. Ensuring peaceful
societies and empowering institutions must not be
used as conditioned assistance for Member States. Aid
effectiveness must continue to strictly apply to NorthSouth cooperation, since the follow-up processes of
the fourth High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness,
held in Busan, Korea, and its related initiatives refer to
plurilateral arrangements without an explicit mandate
from the General Assembly.
Seventh, the Group advocates the need to resume
the debate on a United Nations institutional follow-up
mechanism, as well as on a framework of accountability
for partnership initiatives with the private sector;
Eighth, some options suggested by experts
regarding the management of resources and energy
must be followed by corresponding leading initiatives
of developed countries in terms of granting improved
access to technology and its patents, especially
those related to clean and environmentally sound
technologies.

A/69/PV.65

Finally, let me congratulate the President once
again for convening this meeting. My Group also
thanks the co-facilitators of this process, which enters
its second substantive informal session tomorrow, for
their dedication and ultimate patience in bridging the
differences on such a sensitive and important issue.
The Group of 77 is a diverse Group, but one that
understands the value and importance of working
together around the importance of financing ambitious
and transformational sustainable development goals
with corresponding ambitious and transformational
means of implementation.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, on behalf of the European Union
and its member States, let me congratulate the experts
participating in the Intergovernmental Committee
of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing
for their hard work. We welcome the report of the
Intergovernmental Committee (A/69/315). It reinforces
the framework of the Monterrey Consensus and the
Doha Declaration in line with the changing global
context by giving a comprehensive, logically structured,
well-analysed view of the situation, the challenges
and the key areas of action, both at the country and
global levels. It acknowledges the new paradigm of
sustainable development that entails growing needs
and highlights the diversity of sources — from public
to private actors — that can be mobilized to finance
sustainable development.
The richness of the report needs to be taken into
account in the upcoming discussions. We welcome, for
example, the reiteration of the Monterrey principles of
the centrality of policies and action at the country level,
the need to look at all means of implementation together
and the supportive role that an enabling international
environment can play in implementation if all parties
do their part. We would also like to stress the need for
all parties to contribute their fair share.

14-677703/26

A/69/PV.65

To be relevant, the Addis Ababa Conference needs
to be forward-looking and reflect global trends. The
recommendations of the Intergovernmental Committee
report will help us in Addis Ababa to update the
Monterrey Consensus and Doha Declaration in the
same direction so as to take into account the challenge
of sustainable development.
The high quality of the report gives us a great
opportunity to base our upcoming political negotiations
on the facts and analysis of the experts, nominated by
all regional groups. The European Union will actively
participate in the negotiations to prepare a serious factbased outcome of the Addis Ababa Conference, while
proposing an ambitious and realistic framework on
the basis of which internationally agreed goals will be
implemented.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Let me express my
gratitude to the President of the General Assembly
for organizing this debate on the report of the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable
Development Financing (A/69/315). Being a member of
that Committee, I had the pleasure to work closely with
other experts and, as such, I very highly commend the
expertise, professionalism and drive of all members of
the Committee in looking for a solution that may help
us to address the global challenges we face.
Slovakia appreciates the reflection of the work of
the Committee in the synthesis report of the SecretaryGeneral, as presented last Thursday, 4 December.
The Committee had an ambitious mandate based
on the Rio+20 outcome (resolution 66/288, annex), that
is, to propose an options-based strategy for sustainable
financing of sustainable development. Indeed, in the
context of the world’s complexity, sustainability is the
first key word for the future we want.
The report is non-prescriptive and proposes
many policy options that can be easily tailored to
the needs of countries and suggests partnerships for
development financing. The report expanded the
Monterrey Consensus and incorporated a combination
of economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development.
Inclusivity is the second important element. The
report embodies the views of its members from various
geographical groups. The participation of experts from
all corners of the world and their contributions, as well
as regional consultations, enabled the Committee to

4/26

08/12/2014

take into consideration the particularities of regions
and countries. It took on board many suggestions from
other stakeholders, civil society and the business sector.
It is important to respect the fact that each country
has the primary responsibility for its own development.
Country ownership and leadership, along with a
supportive international environment, should be at
the forefront of development financing. Therefore, the
third key point is national ownership and responsibility.
The Rio+20 Conference underlined the need for
creative approaches to global financing for sustainable
development. This topic was carefully considered by
the Committee of Experts, which identified a new
long-term sustainable development financing strategy
by including all possible resources — domestic and
international, public and private, as well as modalities
for their blending. The Experts Committee identified
domestic resources as a key source for Governments in
designing their national financial plans and respecting
their sovereignty in preparing national strategies.
It is evident from the Committee’s report that
the private sector has an important role to play in
maximizing financial flows. Many developing countries
have developed over the past years an efficient system
of domestically mobilized resources and private capital.
That is a sign of progress and success.
Nevertheless, as was stated earlier, official
development assistance remains an important
and catalytic element in development financing,
particularly for least developed States. We have to pay
greater attention to the most vulnerable countries and
to the needs of countries in special situations, such
as least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States, which
face different and more challenging conditions with
respect to financing options. Aid allocations to such
countries should take into account national development
priorities, vulnerabilities and special needs.
We believe that the report will serve as an
important input to the preparations for the forthcoming
International Conference on Financing for Development.
It highlights the major changes in the global context
that will be relevant to a future financing framework,
including economic and environmental issues.
In order to mobilize large-scale financing for
development, we need, now more than ever, innovative
public-private partnerships. We need new partnerships
for new, innovative financing instruments, and we

14-67770

08/12/2014

endorse the dialogue between the United Nations
system and the relevant stakeholders as an important
tool for enhancing results-oriented cooperation in this
respect.
As has been mentioned in previous statements,
this is neither the end of the process nor its beginning.
There have been two reports of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals and the
Experts Committee, and many previous resolutions
and conferences have already defined the framework in
which we must work. Now, this year, it is important that
all Member States take decisive steps towards outlining
the framework for post-2015 sustainable development.
It is not only a challenge but may be a new beginning
replete with opportunities for the sustainability of our
planet.
I believe that the proposals presented in the
Committee’s report will provide a good basis for future
discussions on sustainable development financing. I
am sure that all of the Group experts who participated
in the preparation of the report are ready to provide
the necessary assistance if they are requested to do so
and to participate in the process of formulating new
documents and strategies.
Slovakia will stay actively engaged in discussions
on the sustainable development financing, bearing in
mind the importance of the new post-2015 agenda.
Mr. Versegi (Australia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you very much for having organized today’s
important meeting.
Australia welcomes the report (A/69/315) of
the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing, which we believe
provides a very sound basis for our forthcoming
discussions. The report provides us with a solid analysis
of the current development finance landscape and has
presented coherent policy options to consider. We are
very grateful for their hard work.
As mandated by the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts comprised experts representing
an equitable distribution from all regions. Two
thirds of the experts came from developing countries
and countries members of the Group of 77, and the
major emerging economies were represented on
the Committee. This meant that the perspectives of
experts from developed, emerging and developing

A/69/PV.65

economies — across all regions of the world — were
reflected in the report, which was agreed by consensus.
The experts’ report is an important input to next
year’s International Conference on Financing for
Development. It provides a coherent framework,
identifying opportunities and outlining a range of
policy options to ensure that finance strategies are
tailored to the needs of individual countries. Like at
Monterrey, the experts’ report rightly focuses on the
importance of empowering countries to take charge of
their sustainable development finance strategies.
The key message of the experts’ report is that
while the sustainable development financing needs
are large, the required finance already exists in the
international system. Existing financial flows need to
be harnessed by policies, investments and instruments
towards productive sustainable development outcomes.
However, we need a range of options in order to achieve
this, options that include all actors and all flows.
The experts’ report responded directly to the
Group’s mandate and sets out those policy options. It
tells us that the global context has changed dramatically
since Monterrey and that public and private domestic
resources now dominate development finance. National
policy environments are as important as finance
itself. It is through effective fiscal policies — tax and
spending — that Governments can address inequality
and poverty.
There are key areas that have made a transformative
difference to countries’ ability to mobilize resources
for sustainable development, including policies to
support domestic resource mobilization; policies to
develop domestic capital markets; and policies to
crowd in private-sector investment. The options listed
in the report will provide the finance flows to support
health, education, energy, provide growth and jobs, and
make a difference in people’s lives. We need to take
up these options and identify the positive and tailored
role that each country can play domestically, regionally
and globally. The report goes beyond just Member
States to include all actors: private-sector, civil society,
parliamentarians and citizens. If we want to make a
difference, we need to invest in the areas that count
most.
In recognizing that each country will be different
in its approach, the report provides a range of options
that countries can choose from on what their national
circumstances dictate. These options draw from

14-677705/26

A/69/PV.65

the existing work already being undertaken by all
actors. The report also recognizes that a strengthened
global partnership that delivers an adequate enabling
environment is needed to help countries deliver their
national strategies. This includes adopting trade
and investment rules that are fair and conducive to
development; enhancing international tax cooperation;
curbing illicit flows; and reforming the governance of
the international financial institutions.
Official development assistance (ODA), of course,
remains important, particularly for countries that are
unable to as readily access other sources of finance,
such as many small island developing, low-income and
fragile States. But we need to better direct ODA to help
countries generate the finance and investment needed
for their development.
The report puts evidence and options in our hands
and demonstrates that we can deliver. It is our role to
take up this excellent first step and, over the coming
months, work together to deliver on it.
Ms. Mamdani (Canada): Canada welcomes the
report of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts
on Sustainable Development Financing (A/69/315) and
its use of the Monterrey Consensus as the basis for its
analysis. We fully agree with the report’s observation
that the framework for financing for development
must be updated to reflect the changing landscape in
development finance.
The new framework must include new
private-sector parners in development, including
investors, philanthropists and businesses, and it must
welcome new public-sector donors such as China,
India and Brazil. Canada also agrees with the report’s
observation that official development assistance
remains very important, particularly where needs are
greatest and the capacity to raise resources is weakest.
But we must also recognize, as do the authors of
the report, that official development assistance as a
share of financial flows going to developing countries
is declining, while foreign direct investment and
remittances are growing ever more substantial. The
instruments used in development finance have also
expanded beyond grants and concessional loans to
include non-concessional loans, guarantees, equity
and innovative finance mechanisms that leverage
private-sector resources. The financing needs for
sustainable development are huge. Official development
assistance will clearly not be enough. We need to

6/26

08/12/2014

harness all resources, public and private, domestic and
international, and must make use of all financing flows
in a holistic manner.
Canada also agrees that each country has primary
responsibility for its own development, while the
global community is responsible for promoting an
enabling international environment. We agree with
the importance attached by the report to domesticresource mobilization. Domestic-resource mobilization
is the most important and stable source of financing
for developing countries. Canada will continue to
work, both through our bilateral programmes and with
multilateral organizations, to strengthen developing
countries’ ability to generate and manage revenues.
The report also provides a very useful and
comprehensive overview of the state of each category
of financial resources — domestic and public, domestic
and private, international and public and international
and private. We also welcome the policy options within
each of the four categories, and we commend the
authors of the report for recognizing the importance of
innovative financing models for blending official and
private resources and expertise.
Through innovative financing and partnerships, we
can work with the private sector to drive economic growth
and create jobs. Recent years have brought a dramatic
increase in market-based approaches to development,
but we still need more models to unlock additional
funding and expertise. We also need Governments to be
more imaginative and catalytic in providing assistance.
Canada, the International Finance Corporation, the
Comprehensive Economic Trade Agreement, the
United States Agency for International Development,
the Rockefeller Foundation and the Gates Foundation
are doing just that through the World Economic
Forum-Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development’s Redesigning Development Finance
Initiative. The Initiative aims to bring together
development finance institutions, providers of official
development assistance, foundations and private-sector
investors together to identify, test and scale more
public-private blended finance models in a more
systematic way. Canada’s Minister of International
Development, Mr. Christian Paradis, chairs its steering
group. Through the Initiative we will deliver two
things by the time of the time of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development to be held
in Addis Ababa: a portfolio of innovative financing

14-67770

08/12/2014

A/69/PV.65

models and new blended financing partnerships that
lead to concrete projects and real development results.

including the mobilization of sustainable development
financing from all sources.

To finance the sustainable development goals,
we should understand our new global context, the
constraints on public financing and the promise of
public-private partnerships for development. The
report has made a useful contribution to those efforts
by increasing our understanding of the financingfor-development landscape and by exploring new
opportunities for financing and partnerships for
development.

Secondly, effective implementation with country
ownership and leadership will require physically
existing global partnerships that can become a
permanent source of support and inspiration for all
implementation efforts. The new global partnership
should evolve into a home and clearing house for
all implementation and provide a mechanism for
monitoring and accountability.

Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland joins and supports the
common statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union and welcomes the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing report (A/69/315), which is a fundamental
contribution to the implementation of the upcoming
post-2015 agenda. The report is based on the universal
values of the Millennium Declaration, on the Rio+20
outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex), on the
Monterrey Consensus on comprehensive development
financing and on multi-stakeholder participation.
We congratulate and thank the experts of the
Committee, its two co-Chairs and the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs for
an action-oriented, evidence-based, innovative
and transformative report. We also underline the
Committee’s dual role as both an intergovernmental and
an expert committee, which was able to work in unison
towards the common goal of a high-quality report in
a very professional and constructive atmosphere. The
result reflects not only the Committee’s expertise but
also its understanding of the need to deal with difficult
and sensitive issues in a very balanced and productive
manner. In the face of the huge challenges facing
humankind in an era of great interdependence, which is
no longer a zero-sum game but where we all can become
winners, we wish to believe that the intergovernmental
negotiations will take place in a similar constructive
spirit of working together for a common goal. In the
end, implementation will remain the only measure for
the permanent value of our preparatory work.
First, effective implementation has to be built on
strong political will to agree on a new comprehensive and
transformative post-2015 agenda that integrates poverty
eradication with sustainable development, along with
its three dimensions and the means of implementation,

Mr. Minami (Japan): I should like to thank the
President for convening today’s debate.
Let me begin by expressing our deep appreciation
to every member of the Intergovernmental Committee
of Experts on Sustainable Development. Without their
contributions, dedication and spirit of professionalism,
we would not have received such valuable input from
the Committee as we have in front of us today. The
Committee’s report (A/69/315) provides a set of policy
options for policymakers to consider adopting in a
balanced manner. It is based on a thorough analysis
of the changes to the global landscapes surrounding
sustainable development in the developing world over
the past several years, including the rapid expansion
of domestic financing mobilization and South-South
cooperation. My delegation highly appreciates and
values the quality of the report. In particular, we
recognize that the report makes reference to several
issues that are important to our delegation, such as a
people-centred approach, an agenda perspective and
triangular cooperation.
Our challenge to achieve sustainable development
is daunting. The financing needed for the purpose is
huge; however, let me point out that the global savings
of $22 trillion a year is sufficient to meet the need. A
lack of financing resources is not the real challenge
before us. Rather, the challenge that lies ahead is how to
use those financing resources in the most efficient and
effective manner for those people who need it most. The
key is to mobilize domestic resources, which dominate
the main part of the financial flow for development.
Our approach should be based on the principle of
country ownership, supported by a strengthened global
partnership.
The report was produced based on the expertise
and analysis of a group of eminent experts. Since its
publication, the report has already been introduced and
referred to in a number of meetings of international

14-677707/26

A/69/PV.65

organizations and development-related think thanks
outside the United Nations. The report has also
provided a constructive basis for the discussions of
the preparatory process for the third International
Conference on Financing for Development. I should like
to remind the Assembly of the fact that the Committee
was intergovernmental in nature and that its work was
mandated by the Heads of State and Government at
the Rio+20 Conference, as was the report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals (see
A/68/970).
Geographic balance was also taken fully into
account for the formulation of the Committee.
In particular, we believe that without the active
participation of and the constructive contribution from
members from developing countries, including African
countries, the report could not have been completed.
The Heads of State and Government did not say that
the reports originating from Rio — namely, the Open
Working Group’s report and this report — should be
treated differently. We firmly believe that both reports
should be valued equally as inputs to the post-2015
development agenda. We also note that, at the final
session of the Committee, the report was adopted with
applause and without any reservations. We expect
that the discussions will continue in the ongoing
processes, in particular the preparatory process for
the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in Addis Ababa.
The Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration
provide a conceptual framework for the discussion,
while the valuable elements of this report should be
fully incorporated. My delegation is committed to
engaging in the discussion constructively.
Mrs. Rajaonarivelo (Madagascar): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group
of African States. The African Group associates itself
with the statement made earlier by the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
The African Group thanks the President for
convening this important meeting in order to fulfil the
mandate of paragraph 257 of the annex to resolution
66/288 — the outcome document of Rio+20 — and
to provide Member States an opportunity to express
their views on the content of the report of the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable
Development Financing (A/69/315). The Group also

8/26

08/12/2014

takes this opportunity to thank the Committee of
Experts for its work.
The Group would like to underscore that the
mobilization of domestic and external financing is
critical to success in obtaining resources for financing
the investment needed to meet the laudable objectives of
the post-2015 development agenda. The Group believes
that the implementation of the post-2015 development
agenda will certainly depend upon a global partnership
for sustainable development and the eradication of
poverty, as affirmed by the report. The Committee has
offered Member States useful options and strategies
for mobilizing financial resources from all sources,
including public and private domestic and international
ones. Those recommendations are merely intended to
stimulate discussions on the financing of the post-2015
development agenda.
The Group appreciates the mention of the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities in the
report. It is now incumbent upon us to formulate the
financing framework for the post-2015 development
agenda in line with the principles and objectives of the
Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration. It is
important, when undertaking that important endeavour,
that we take into account different national and regional
realities, capacities and levels of development. Africa,
for instance, is made up of 34 least developed countries
(LDCs) that experience high levels of poverty and
human resource and structural weaknesses, as well as
economic vulnerability. Many other African countries
are part of the LDC and small island developing States
groups. They must continue to be accorded preferential
treatment in trade, market access, technology and
capacity-building, among other areas.
Indeed, in Africa there are incipient signs
that economic dynamism, coupled with improved
macroeconomic fundamentals, for broadening the
scope of domestic resource mobilization. Furthermore,
the region has benefited from an expansion in the main
components of foreign financing, namely, official flows
of foreign direct investment, partly on account of the
intensification of South-South economic linkages. Yet
the bulk of international financial flows are typically
concentrated on a relatively small number of countries,
including a few subregional growth poles and some
natural-resource-rich economies. As a consequence,
most African countries have continued to rely mainly
on official development assistance to fill the resource
gap and sustain much-needed capital accumulation.

14-67770

08/12/2014

In that regard, the Group reaffirms that previous
commitments by developed countries on financing
for development — including, among others, through
Agenda 21 and its Programme for Implementation, the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development and the Doha Declaration
on Financing for Development — are indispensable for
achieving the full and effective translation of partners’
commitment into tangible sustainable development
outcomes.
As highlighted in the African Common Position
on the post-2015 development agenda, enhancing
the quality and predictability of external financing
will require, among many other things, the following
encouraging reinvestment of the proceeds from foreign
direct investment: promoting conducive policies to
encourage capital flows; holding external partners
accountable for their commitments, including the
allocation of 0.7 per cent of gross national income
for developing countries and 0.15-0.20 per cent to
least developed countries; and encouraging official
development assistance in short-, medium- and
long-term development. Therefore, it is critical that
development partners meet their commitments, and
even increase them, if we are to embark upon the post2015 development agenda.
We also want to emphasize the need to tackle the
extremely important issue of illicit financial flows,
which deprive Africa of important developmental
resources. They drain foreign-exchange reserves,
which limits the import-capacity of our countries. They
also negatively affect domestic-resource mobilization
by reducing the tax-collection base. Additionally, they
undermine the rule of law, stifle trade and worsen
countries’ macroeconomic conditions. Estimates from
various recent studies reveal that from 1970 to 2008
Africa lost between $854 billion and $1.8 trillion to
illicit financial flows. The latest progress report of the
High-Level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows from Africa
states that the annual average was between $50 billion
and $148 billion. Almost all illicit financial flows leave
the African continent entirely and go to other countries
around the world. We need to develop and improve an
international institutional framework that encourages
greater levels of transparency and accountability in the
private and public sectors.
Together we must also develop a mechanism to
effectively invest remittances, reduce remittance

A/69/PV.65

transfer costs, enhance their effective management
and strengthen long-term non-traditional financing
mechanisms. We also want to underline that advances
in public financial management, taxation, capital
markets and other areas cannot occur in the absence
of human and institutional capacity. Governments
pursuing reforms with a view to improving domestic
resource mobilization have generally had to invest in
improving human capacity and/or to acquire such skills
from outside their countries.
While recognizing the importance of financing
for development, we note that finance is a means to an
end, not an end in itself. Perhaps more fundamentally, a
number of studies have shown how regional integration
can be a powerful instrument to foster structural
transformation and promote more inclusive growth
patterns. Given the limited size of potential markets at
the level of single nations, as well as the fixed costs
associated with the setting up of adequate regulation
and surveillance mechanisms, there is scope for joining
efforts at the regional or subregional level to create
viable financing hubs within Africa. The African
Union has developed a wide range of initiatives on
their implementation and requires the support of the
international community.
The Group also hopes that debt relief will be used
to contribute to the post-2015 development agenda to
the same extent that it helped spur the implementation
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The experience of implementing the MDGs shows
that Africa has not been provided an opportunity
to capitalize on the benefits of global commons,
including trade financing and climate change, inter
alia. We therefore believe in the need for sustainable
management of global commons, which are important
for development.
The Group also highlights that a stable global
financial architecture that supports global systemic
economic risk management and that emphasizes the
importance of financial and investment flows, as
opposed to aid, as well as fair and inclusive multilateral
trading systems, is vital for financing development in
Africa.
The African Group believes that climate change
will have adverse effects on African countries, and in
that regard emphasizes once again that climate change
funding should be considered within the appropriate
track, which is the United Nations Framework

14-677709/26

A/69/PV.65

Convention on Climate Change, noting previous global
commitments to providing climate funding from new
and separate resources.
Mr. Ng (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Bolivia on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I would like to
make some additional points in my national capacity.
Singapore would like to thank the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing for its detailed and insightful report
(A/69/315). The report is an important contribution to
the discussion on the means of implementation for the
sustainable development goals as well as a useful input
in the third financing for development process.
On the topic of strengthening sovereign debt crisis
prevention and resolution, addressed in paragraphs 165
to 168 of the report, Singapore would like to express
once again our concerns that the United Nations may
not be the best forum for such negotiations. As stated in
the report, there are established international financial
institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), that are better placed to take these discussions
forward. The IMF has the mandate and necessary
expertise and is already engaged in serious work on
the technical issues needed to address and strengthen
sovereign debate restructuring. A good example is
the recently published work on potential changes to
international sovereign bond contracts focusing on
contractual reforms designed to address collective
action problems so as to achieve orderly sovereign debt
restructurings. We should all urge the IMF to continue
those deliberations in good faith.
We continue to hope that further deliberations will
proceed with all due care and consideration for the
complex and wide-ranging interests involved, including
the need for the contractual right of all creditors to be
taken into account in any debt restructuring. We look
forward to an amicable and durable solution to this
issue.
Mr. Joshi (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President of the General Assembly for
organizing today’s meeting to consider the report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing (A/69/315).
The debate today fulfils, although belatedly, the
mandate provided by paragraph 257 of the outcome
document of the Rio+20 Conference (resolution

10/26

08/12/2014

66/288, annex). We are happy that the draft resolution
to be adopted today (A/69/L.32) has noted the report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts with
appreciation while also taking note of the comments
made by Member States in today’s meeting. Since this
was an expert committee with limited membership, it
is important that the views of all Member States on its
work be taken due note of while going forward.
The establishment of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts was a key demand of developing
countries, and indeed one of the flagship decisions
of the Rio+20 Conference, alongside the decisions on
setting up the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals and the establishment of a
technology facilitation mechanism. We commend
the members of the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts for their painstaking and detailed deliberations,
which took into account the whole gamut of issues
relating to financing for sustainable development.
As we seek to adopt a new development agenda
for the coming decade and redouble our efforts to
sustainably finance development, the report of the
Committee of Experts, with its basket of options for
countries to choose from, is also very timely. In our
view, the report contains expert input from the members
represented in the Committee. Its outcome does not
therefore constitute an intergovernmental agreement.
The report of the intergovernmental Committee was
also not intended to, and does not, replace the framework
provided by the Monterrey Consensus.
The third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to which the report of the Committee of
Experts is an input, must provide a holistic and balanced
approach that reflects the needs, challenges and
developmental priorities of developing countries, while
also considering ways to provide new and additional
support to finance their sustainable development
trajectories. The report of the Committee of Experts
contains broad recommendations. Consequently, they
need to be streamlined through international dialogue,
taking into account national circumstances and the level
of socioeconomic development of developing countries
before making more detailed and concrete proposals for
financing for development.
In several areas of relevance, the recommendations
and options suggested by the Committee of Experts are
important. The report recognizes poverty eradication as
the overriding objective of the post-2015 development

14-67770

08/12/2014

agenda. That topic must remain the central focus of
the Financing for Development Conference too. The
concerns of the over 1.3 billion people living in poverty
must be foremost in our endeavours.
The report also underscores the centrality of the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
in the context of financing sustainable development.
That is an important affirmation. As we have
emphasized before, the notion of universality is not
in contradiction to the principle of differentiation.
In fact, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities encapsulates both ideas.
The report acknowledges the dual challenges
that developing countries face — of lack of investor
enthusiasm for investments in sustainable development,
on the one hand, and the limits of domestic public
financing on account of competing demands on
public resources, on the other. It therefore emphasizes
the central importance of international support
for developing countries to enable them to follow
sustainable development pathways.
Unfortunately, the report of the Committee of
Experts could not take into account the sustainable
development goals that were developed in parallel with
its work. The sustainable development goals that have
been agreed to, constitute, in the words of the Open
Working Group, “an integrated, indivisible set of global
priorities for sustainable development”. As such, the
preparatory process for the Financing for Development
Conference should therefore aim to update not only the
Monterrey and Doha frameworks but also the options
proposed by the Committee of Experts, so as to achieve
a cohesive and comprehensive financing strategy to
finance the sustainable development goals.
The concept of sustainable development can be
understood only in terms of a balanced emphasis on
all three of its pillars — the economic, social and
environmental. Our work on financing development
must also recognize that imperative and not overstress
climate financing, for which we have, in any case, a
separate track of discussions.
Ambitious efforts on our part to find solutions
for financing development are a prerequisite for an
ambitious post-2015 development agenda. We hope
that the proposed set of options set out in the Expert
Committee report will provide useful input for our
deliberations at the third International Conference on
Financing for Development.

A/69/PV.65

Mr. Momeni (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
first thank the President of the General Assembly for
having convened this meeting and for providing us this
opportunity to express our views as a State Member of the
United Nations on the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing (A/69/315).
I would like to associate myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
and to add some points in my national capacity.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
of the work of the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts and its outcome, which is indeed the result of
almost 12 months of deep discussion among the most
relevant experts on financing for development. Having
considered the report of the Committee of Experts, I
would like to make a few comments on its contents and
the options proposed therein.
I would like to reiterate our belief that, as has
already been said at this meeting, the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration continue to
provide the conceptual framework for the mobilization
of resources and the effective use of financing needed
to achieve the development agenda.
There is little semantic linkage between the various
parts of the report — for example, between the global
context and the options for integrated sustainable
development financing. Countries have proved that they
will fall short of prioritization until they have utilized
domestic resources based on their own circumstances,
and, if external and internal circumstances are not
favourable, domestic prioritization will also be affected.
There is no doubt that domestic resource mobilization
should be placed high in this process. This issue, which
is the main subject of part VI, should be linked with
part IV, on the global context, with part V, on strategic
approach, and especially with part VII, on global
governance.
With this framework in the report, much of the
burden falls on developing countries, as if they were
able to shoulder it but had simply neglected to do so. We
believe that the proper linkage between the various parts
of the report would have solved this misunderstanding
and put the onus on the relevant players. To give an
example, we might refer to paragraph 13 of the report,
the sense of which, in our view, is not well taken in
other parts of the report.

14-6777011/26

A/69/PV.65

Likewise, in explaining the scope of financing
needs, the report raises the issue of global public goods
and relates it to the protection of the global environment
and combating climate change. For my delegation,
two points are very important in that regard: first,
environmental issues, including related financing, have
their own integral process and should not be mixed
with the process of financing for development so as not
to overshadow this process; secondly, the World Bank,
when referring to the issue of global public goods,
brings up five categories of issues, all of which are very
interesting and important to address. In addition, in
paragraph 66, when referring to illicit financial flows,
the report acknowledges in footnote 40 that there is no
agreed definition of illicit flows, while, in paragraph
163, it states that, in that regard, best use should be made
of existing international standards and instruments,
even referring to the Financial Action Task Force and
its network of regional bodies as an example of such a
standard and instrument.
Although the report acknowledges the need for a
stable financial system, the importance of systemic
issues and the possible negative impacts of the
international economic and financial situation are not
duly addressed. Even when it focuses on such issues,
the roles of developing and developed countries are not
well captured. Moreover, there is also a good reference
in part 7 to the role that the United Nations system may
be able to play in global governance. However, it falls
short of setting out any options or proposals, in contrast
to the preceding part of the report.
To conclude, over the past year there have been a
couple of joint meetings of the Open Working Group
and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts.
However, it seems that the outcome of neither was
aligned with the other. It is the sincere hope of my
delegation that the intergovernmental consultation
process for the third International Conference on
Financing for Development will include more robust
coherence with the intergovernmental consultation
process for the post-2015 development agenda so that
the approach taken by one will be reflected by the other.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly for having organized today’s
event. I would also like to thank all of the experts who
participated in the Intergovernmental Committee of

12/26

08/12/2014

Experts on Sustainable Development Financing for
their hard work and to congratulate them on the positive
outcome. Estonia had the honour to be a member of the
Committee of Experts and therefore felt obliged to take
the floor today in our national capacity.
Estonia welcomes the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing (A/69/315). The report builds on the
Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration, taking
into account the changing global context. The report
provides a comprehensive, logical and well-analysed
view of the current situation and challenges. The
Committee acknowledges that the needs for financing
the social, economic and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development are vast. However, we
currently lack both transparency and sufficient data.
We must have a better understanding of how large the
gap is — environmentally, socially and economically.
To meet the financing needs for sustainable
development, we will need to tap into all funds — public
and private, national and international. While public
financing should benefit mainly the poorest and most
vulnerable, private financing is increasingly important
and needs to be allocated to sustainable development.
The analysis in the report shows that national
Governments have a key role to play in raising domestic
revenue for core economic and social functions and in
creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of all
potential partners to ensure sustainable development.
Collecting taxes and fighting corruption more
effectively is important, but having the right policies
and well-allocated public spending is vital to achieving
lasting results in the development of societies. We
must improve governance of public resources at both
the country and the international levels. We must also
improve accountability and transparency. I would
like to stress that we know, from our own national
experience, that the rule of law and good governance
form the best conditions for achieving efficiency and
for bringing about the desired results.
The International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in Addis Ababa, will focus
on these important issues. We have high expectations
for the outcome of the Conference. It needs to be
forward-looking and reflect global trends. It should
be ambitious but also realistic. The Group of Experts
has already done extensive work in collecting facts and
analysing current trends. We believe, therefore, that the

14-67770

08/12/2014

report should serve as the main basis for the upcoming
political discussions.
Ms. Von Steiger Weber (Switzerland) (spoke
in French): Switzerland would like to thank the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing for its excellent
work and for the presentation of its report (A/69/315).
This high-quality report’s adoption through a standalone resolution of the General Assembly means that
it will receive the attention and appreciation that it
deserves, as it forms the intellectual underpinning of
the debates leading up to the Addis Ababa Conference.
Switzerland thus fully supports the adoption of the
draft resolution (A/69/L.32).
We are convinced that the report of the
Intergovernmental Committee meets the high
expectations that Member States expressed prior
to its issuance. We all witnessed, during the first
thematic debate on financing for development held in
November, the critical and constructive discussions
based on the report. Delegations, whether or not they
were represented in the Intergovernmental Committee
by an expert, based their substantial interventions on
the report of the Expert Committee. It is precisely such
critical discussions that are needed now. If we can
openly discuss the report and its options from various
perspectives, that will lead us to a better and more
substantial outcome.
Financing the new post-2015 universal agenda
for sustainable development requires that we develop
a comprehensive framework for development
assistance, financing the fight against climate change,
private-sector flows and all other sources of finance for
sustainable development. These different flows are not
substitutes for one another, but instead can reinforce
and catalyse one another if the right incentives, policies
and international agreements are put in place. This is the
main conclusion of the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts, and Switzerland fully shares
that view. The report is based on a solid analysis of
the requirements for the financing of the ambitious
universal post-2015 agenda, and proposes a set of policy
options that will guide the discussions in the process
leading up to the third International Conference on
Financing for Development, to be held in Addis Ababa.
The report has three qualities that we appreciate
in particular. First, the report reveals the decentralized
structure within which decisions on financing are taken

A/69/PV.65

in today’s globalized and interconnected world. The
challenge for policymakers is to channel and incentivize
more of these diverse and decentralized sources of
financing into the desired investments in sustainable
development. For the Addis Ababa Conference, it
is therefore important that we keep in mind that no
single decision-making body or policy alone can do the
job; we need to strengthen the economic relevance of
sustainability across the board and ensure that funding
is systematically mobilized and allocated to the shaping
of a sustainable future for all.
Secondly, the report makes clear that financing
for sustainable development is as much about policies
promoting investment in sustainable development as
it is about increasing financial flows. Crucial policy
challenges must be faced in that regard, including the
relationship between official development assistance
and other sources of financing; tackling the issue of
illicit financial flows; enhancing the transparency of
financial allocations; leveraging domestic resources
effectively and equitably; and creating financial vehicles
to the benefit of small and medium-sized enterprises, in
particular in the least developed countries, so that they
can provide jobs and livelihoods to the poor.
Thirdly, the report integrates the missing link of
Monterrey and Doha — the environmental component
of sustainable development financing — in a systematic
manner across all categories of financing, domestic
and international, public and private. Environmental
finance, including climate finance, needs to be taken
on board in the discussions. The systematic integration
of all three dimensions of sustainable development
will help to maximize synergies and to properly
address trade-offs between the different priorities,
thereby greatly improving the overall effectiveness and
efficiency of financing efforts.
Of course, the report did not resolve all the issues
related to sustainable development financing. While it
highlighted a large number of strategic options, it is
now up to Member States to set priorities and translate
them into action. In further discussions, we also need
to take into account how financing affects different
groups of people, in particular women. There can be no
sustainable development without gender equality, and
discussions on financing needs must reflect this reality.
Investing in women, in particular girls, will benefit
society, the economy and the environment as a whole.

14-6777013/26

A/69/PV.65

08/12/2014

The challenge is now ours. Between now and
mid-July in Addis Ababa, Member States will have to
use the excellent report of the Committee of Experts
and move from a vast number of policy options to
concrete recommendations in the Conference’s outcome
document. The task is daunting: financing needs are
huge and time is short. However, the Committee of
Experts also put the most important message right
at the beginning of its report, in paragraph 22: that
“needs are huge and the challenges in meeting them are
enormous — but surmountable”. We could not agree
more.

below those prevailing before the global financial and
economic crisis, as has also been evident in the drop
in net portfolio inflows to those countries and in the
increasing gap in per capita gross domestic product
between developed and developing countries. Those
challenges must be addressed if we are to achieve
sustainable development. It is also important to note the
need for addressing systemic issues if we are to create
a pro-development international enabling environment
that empowers developing countries. That should be
the strategic and ultimate objective of the post-2015
development agenda.

Let me say in conclusion that Switzerland looks
forward to participating in this week’s informal
substantive thematic sessions and in the rest of the
preparatory process for the Addis Ababa Conference.

My delegation notes with appreciation that the report
identifies the important role of official development
assistance (ODA) in providing essential financial and
technical cooperation to many developing countries,
and the fact that such assistance will continue to be
critical to implementing sustainable development.

Mr. Mostafa (Egypt): I would like to associate my
remarks with the statements made by the Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to
the United Nations on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and by the representative of Madagascar on
behalf of the African Group.
At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the President for his efforts in holding
this meeting, which enables us to fulfil the mandate
of the outcome document of the 2012 United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (resolution
66/288, annex) while also giving Member States that
were not members of the Intergovernmental Committee
of Exeperts on Sustainable Development Financing an
opportunity to comment on its report (A/69/315).
My delegation would like to welcome the work of
the Intergovernmental Committee and takes note of its
report, which provides Member States with a wide array
of options for policy decisions on financing sustainable
development, and which we believe will provide valuable
input for the discussions at the third International
Conference on Financing for Development. We reiterate
our position that the Monterey Consensus and the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development represent
a conceptual framework for mobilizing the financial
resources needed for sustainable development.
While recognizing that there have been positive
developments in the global context, particularly in the
increase in developing countries’ contributions to the
global economy, we realize that it is equally important
to highlight the continuing related challenges facing
developing countries, since growth rates remain

14/26

We also applaud the report’s recognition of the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
as specified in the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development. We acknowledge that, while the
task of achieving sustainable development falls mainly
to Member States, there is a global responsibility
for providing the necessary financial resources for
that achievement, and that arriving at an effective
sustainable-development financing strategy for
facilitating the mobilization of resources and their
effective use in achieving such sustainable development
cannot be placed solely on the shoulders of developing
countries without consideration for the realities of the
situation. In that regard, we would like to make the
following comments.
While the role of domestic resources in financing
for sustainable development is evident, that of
international financial resources, especially ODA,
is equally important, and is crucial to the fulfilment
of international commitments in that regard. It is
also important to highlight that advocacy of the
necessity of improving tax regimes must also take into
consideration the reality of low per capita incomes in
developing countries. Some of the options given in
the report, specifically those associated with tighter
public spending, do not take into account the realities
that necessitate such spending in countries such as
those that are net food importers, or in developing
countries that cannot acquire the means necessary to
generate energy through clean and environmentally
sound technologies. The private cross-border transfers

14-67770

08/12/2014

from individuals and households referred to in the
report are another way of describing remittances,
which we believe should not be bundled in as a source
of international financing, due to their unique nature
and their focus on sustaining immigrants’ families
in their country of origin. References to improved
utilization of remittances should include a discussion
of the need for a better and fairer international trading
system, which would result in lowering international
commodity prices and thus enable a larger proportion
of remittances to be channeled to investment.
The report also addresses some issues on which
no agreement has been reached among Member States,
such as the outcome of the four meetings of the Highlevel Forum on Aid Effectiveness and the concept of
global public goods. It also addresses the issue of climate
financing, which is currently being considered within
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and should not be tackled within the financingfor-development process, taking into consideration that
climate-change funding should be new and additional
to ODA and development financing, since it targets a
specific purpose and objective, the alleviation of the
additional costs and suffering that will be borne by
developing countries in their adaptation and mitigation
activities for dealing with the adverse effects of climate
change.
The report also addresses the issues of transparency
and accountability. In dealing with them, it is important
to highlight that they do not fall within the scope or
the mandate of either the Monterrey Consensus or
the Doha Declaration. That said, it is important to
note that, in addressing those two issues, the report
identifies a need for improved data collection and
strengthened monitoring, while not answering the
question of how such accountability will be mutually
achieved — specifically with regard to monitoring the
fulfilment of their commitments by developed partners
and private entities — or providing concrete measures
for eliciting financial flows and the recovery of stolen
assets.
In conclusion, I would like once again to express
our interest in working with the President on this issue.
Ms. Engelbrecht Schadtler (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
the President for convening this meeting aimed at
analysing the report (A/69/315) of the Intergovernmental

A/69/PV.65

Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
My country believes that financing is a key element
in the process of defining our post-2015 goals. For
that reason it is essential to transform and implement
through concrete means the commitments made in the
Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration on
Financing for Development. In that regard, Venezuela
has been a participant in the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts tasked with analysing policy
options for an effective strategy for financing for
sustainable development. The discussion process
was lengthy and interesting, and its nature required
reflection on the various visions of and positions
on development financing, making for an important
contribution to the forthcoming third International
Conference on Financing for Development, to be held
in Addis Ababa. We are grateful to the facilitators,
Ambassadors Mansur Muhtar and Pertti Majanen,
as well as the Committee’s team, for their hard work
during the process.
In addition to what has already been said in the
statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
during the Committee’s work our country expressed its
concern about the reference to the Global Partnership
for Effective Development Cooperation, which may
be being used as a substitute for the principles of
shared responsibility and mutual accountability. This
ignores the asymmetric relationship between donors
and recipients and assumes that ineffectiveness
in reducing poverty and social inequalities within
States is due solely to a State’s poor functioning, for
which the solutions are technical. At the same time, it
ignores the most important policy areas that official
development assistance (ODA) can provide help for,
such as foreign investment and trade, as well as access
to technology, among other things, on which it can
have a decisive influence. The report also discusses the
need for eliminating fossil-fuel subsidies, on which we
expressed reservations because of the potential impact
on States’ public policies.
Financing for development must be implemented
from a perspective that understands that there is no one
criterion or single model for assistance that is equally
applicable to every country. It must be adjusted flexibly

14-6777015/26

A/69/PV.65

to the needs and specifics of each nation on the basis of
its national strategies, priorities and development plans.
This should also incorporate other cross-cutting issues
that have an impact on States’ capacity to respond
financially to problems such as debt, trade imbalances
and technology transfers, among other things.
It is crucially important to ensure that donor
countries honour their ODA commitments so as to
guarantee the permanence, stability and predictability
of the resources necessary for operationalizing
development activities. ODA cannot be subject to
evaluation and conditions laid down by developed
countries or multilateral financial institutions seeking
to interfere with States’ sovereign right to determine
their political, economic, social and cultural models.
While my country values the voluntary contributions
of all interested actors, including the participation of
organized social movements, we nevertheless believe
that States have the main responsibility in designing
and implementing development policies, including
those related to financing. Therefore, an alliance with
these actors will always have to be forged within these
parameters.
In conclusion, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment
to participating actively and constructively in the
forthcoming phases of the post-2015 development
agenda. We stress the need for States to act jointly in
reaching agreements to strengthen the strategies to
eliminate poverty and social exclusion, including their
means of implementation and financing.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Sir, and the President of the General Assembly for
convening today’s meeting on this important subject.
At the outset, the United Kingdom should like to
align itself with the statement delivered by the observer
of the European Union.
The United Kingdom welcomes the report of the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable
Development Financing (A/69/315). It is an important
and informative piece of work by intergovernmental
experts that effectively combines the intergovernmental
perspective with technical strength and a wide range
of expertise. The report of the Intergovernmental
Committee builds on the Monterrey Consensus and the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development in the
light of the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, “The future
we want” (resolution 66/288, annex). It integrates the

16/26

08/12/2014

economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development, and it considers how all forms
of financing and all actors contribute to sustainable
development. The United Kingdom welcomes the fact
that the report reiterates that eradicating poverty is the
greatest global challenge facing the world today and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development.
We welcome the report’s analysis of resources for
financing development. While the needs are huge, the
necessary resources are available. However, they need
to be unlocked and channelled towards sustainable
development objectives.
The United Kingdom welcomes the fact that the
report includes a clear message on official development
assistance (ODA). The United Kingdom believes
that ODA commitments should be met and that ODA
should be targeted where needs are greatest and where
capacity to self-finance is lowest. We also recognize
the relevance of less concessional international public
finance, particularly for middle-income countries. We
welcome also the fact that the report sets out clearly the
importance of national ownership, of domestic resource
mobilization and of private-sector flows and that, in
addition to the important issue of finance flows, the
report is clear that the enabling environment and policy
choices at all levels, national and international, are
essential. This is a strong endorsement of an ambitious
and broad approach to the means of implementation in
the financing for development process.
The United Kingdom would like to reiterate the
call of others here this morning that the upcoming
discussions should utilize and build on the solid expert
analysis and proposals contained in the report. We
welcome the road map set out by the co-facilitators of
the financing for development process in that regard.
We look forward to the third International Conference
on Financing for Development, to be held in Addis
Ababa next year. Over the coming months, we will
collectively have an opportunity to work further on the
policy options presented in the report. The Addis Ababa
Conference will make a significant contribution to the
mobilization and effective use of all financial flows
for development — private and public, national and
international. If we are to deliver an ambitious post2015 development agenda, we cannot afford to ignore
any of the available resources.
The United Kingdom is committed to playing its
part to make the Addis Ababa Conference a success,

14-67770

08/12/2014

A/69/PV.65

and we look forward to working constructively with all
partners in the coming months.

investment agreements, which could be appropriate in
some countries.

Mrs. Robl (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak on the report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing (A/69/315).

Finally, as we have said in other conversations,
we share the view that economic realities need to be
reflected in decision-making. It is indisputable that
developing countries are a major and increasingly
important part of the global economy. Considerable
strides have been made in promoting more inclusive and
consultative processes, and the United States remains
committed to implementing the reforms agreed in that
regard. Nonetheless, the General Assembly needs to
remain scrupulously conscious of the mandates of other
organizations, their autonomy and the reform processes
or discussions happening as internal matters in those
venues.

We are pleased to see that the Intergovernmental
Committee grappled ably and ambitiously with the
complex issues at the core of its mandate, which is a
real credit to the work of the Committee and its two
co-Chairs, Mr. Muhtar and Ambassador Majanen.
As others have noted, these are potentially highly
contentious issues, but all participants appear to have
taken to heart the directive that the effort be guided
by evidence and subject-matter experts. Specific issues
in the report reflect positive evolutions in financing
for development. Broadly, there is appropriately
heavy emphasis on policy and enabling environments
to stimulate finance and investment flows of all
sorts. There is also a strong emphasis on national
responsibility in that regard.
More specifically, we note, among other concepts,
the emphasis on sustainable debt-management
strategies; the importance of fiscal transparency, good
planning and execution of budgets; and the importance
of data to all of these. The basic precepts reflected in
section V of the report, entitled “Strategic approach”,
are consonant with discussions and venues such as
the Global Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation, as well as in the Monterrey Consensus
on Financing for Development, and have enjoyed broad
international support. The report makes a strong overall
contribution to the post-2015 development agenda and
to the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in Addis Ababa in July 2015.
We would have, in some cases, liked to have seen a
more nuanced approach on some topics. For example, we
question the treatment of all or most global public goods
as developmental in nature and the seeming equation
of sustainable development with climate change. The
discussion of innovative financing mechanisms seems
to move too quickly towards coordinated or global
tax mechanisms. The United States believes that any
source of revenue should remain under the control
of national authorities, and for this reason we do not
support global mandatory tariffs or taxes. We also
find the text unduly critical of bilateral international

We will not try here to enumerate all of our
perspectives on this ambitious product. Rather, we are
reminded of resolution 68/279, in which all Member
States agreed that the report would be an important input
to the third International Conference on Financing for
Development and to the post-2015 development agenda.
We look forward to continuing to engage on it on that
basis. We would like to conclude by reiterating our
sincere thanks to Mr. Muhtar, Ambassador Majanen
and all members of the Committee for their work.
Mr. Peek (Germany): At the outset, Germany would
like to associate itself with the statement delivered this
morning by the observer of the European Union.
We all recognize the imperative of sustainable
development and its economic, social and environmental
dimensions. The conclusion and implementation of the
upcoming post-2015 development agenda face a number
of challenges. With the discussions on financing for
development and the post-2015 agenda well under
way, it is already obvious that a financing framework
primarily geared towards mobilizing additional
official development assistance alone cannot achieve
the financing needs of the envisaged transformative
post-2015 agenda. Recognizing that, the discourse has
already moved beyond the traditional focus to a broader
approach that includes the increased use of an extensive
range of different types of financing, a more efficient
use of available resources, and the important role of
non-financial means of implementing the post-2015
agenda.
The report of the Intergovernmental Committee
of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing
(A/69/315) before us today is one very important

14-6777017/26

A/69/PV.65

document that we should build on for our upcoming
discussions. Germany welcomes and supports the
report, which will provide valuable guidance for the
upcoming third International Conference on Financing
for Development in Addis Ababa.
One of the findings of the Committee’s report is
that global financial savings exceed the financial means
required to achieve sustainable development for all. In
other words, the resources are available in principle;
we just need to mobilize and to effectively use them.
The key to mobilizing those resources will be to create
a policy environment conducive to attracting financial
resources that are geared towards investment in
sustainable development. That can be achieved through
an improved regulatory and policy framework at both
the national and international levels. The focus should
therefore be on generating the policy environment to
mobilize financing for sustainable development from
all sources. Apart from official development assistance,
those are domestic public resources, international and
national private capital flows, to be also complemented
by South-South cooperation. Those will have important
roles in contributing to all dimensions of sustainable
development.
The Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing report can provide
guidance for us in reaching a policy framework for
sustainable development financing that could adapt the
Monterrey Consensus to the challenges of a sustainable
path of development. We would like to sincerely
thank the experts from all regions of the world who
contributed to that important Committee’s report.
Ms. Chen Yingzhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this meeting and
associates itself with the statement delivered by
representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China. China wishes to state the following views
with regard to the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing (A/69/315).
First, with regard to the nature of the report, as
a follow-up of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20), the report sets out
the options for financing for development, but it reflects
the views of only certain experts and cannot represent
the widespread views of all Member States. The options
contained in the report can serve as a reference for
Member States in formulating a post-2015 development

18/26

08/12/2014

agenda, but the relevant contents should be fully
discussed by Member States in the General Assembly
and cannot prejudge the post-2015 development agenda.
Secondly, with regard to the relationship between
sustainable development financing and development
financing, sustainable development financing is
the follow-up process to Rio+20, while the third
International Conference on Financing for Development
is the follow-up to the processes of the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration, with a view to
facilitating the cause of global development financing.
The third International Conference should be based
on the Monterrey Consensus and take the relevant
recommendations contained in the report into due
consideration. However, the mandates and processes of
both are distinct from one another and should not be
conflated.
Thirdly, with regard to its contents, the report
states that our work should be guide by the Rio
principles, including that of common but differentiated
responsibilities. It emphasizes that poverty eradication
is the biggest challenge facing the global community
and a prerequisite for sustainable development. It
recommends that national Governments choose
the appropriate financing modes according to their
national realities. It highlights the role of official
development assistance and recognizes that SouthSouth cooperation, as a voluntary intergovernmental
act, is a complement to North-South cooperation. China
supports those views.
However, the report fails to recognize the status
of official development assistance as the main
channel for development financing and the assistance
responsibility of the developed countries. It places
too much emphasis on domestic financing, private
capital and the participation of multiple stakeholders,
highlights the role of emerging economies, and applies
principles for North-South cooperation, such as that on
aid effectiveness, to South-South cooperation. Those
issues remain controversial among Member States and
should not be introduced into the intergovernmental
negotiations for the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): The delegation
of Brazil thanks you, Sir, for convening this special
meeting in time for a resolution to be adopted today that
will contain the views and statements of Member States
on the contents of the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development

14-67770

08/12/2014

Financing (A/69/315) and the recommended policy
options contained therein.
The following remarks are made in Brazil’s
national capacity as a complement to the Group of 77
and China’s position, to which we fully adhere.
As we prepare for the third International
Conference on Financing for Development in Addis
Ababa in July 2015, we must consider the Committee of
Experts document as an input in support of discussions.
It is not, however, an expression of consensus of the
United Nations membership, for the simple reason that
it is not an agreed intergovernmental outcome. In fact,
members of the Committee worked mostly in their
personal, technical capacity, not as representatives of
the official position of their countries.
The report’s contents are mixed. We can agree with
some analysis and recommendations, but we disagree
with others. Positively, the report has not ignored the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
of developed and developing countries and their
respective capabilities. That is in keeping with paragraph
247 of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20) outcome document, entitled
“The future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex),
which underscores that sustainable development goals
are universally applicable to all countries, while taking
into account different national realities, capacities,
level of development and respecting national policies
and priorities.
The experts have duly recognized the
complementary role of South-South cooperation to
North-South cooperation, in accordance with the
Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation of
2009, endorsed by resolution 64/222. We appreciate
the reference to decision 18/1 (2014) of the HighLevel Committee on South-South Cooperation, whose
recommendations strengthen South-South cooperation
within the United Nations system and contribute to
implementing the post-2015 development agenda.
An opportunity was lost, however, for the report to
build upon issues on which we believe common ground
was and remains possible. I refer in particular to the
outstanding mandates of the Rio+20 outcome document
relating to the sustainable development goals and to
possible arrangements on a technology facilitation
mechanism for the development, dissemination
and transfer of clean and environmentally sound

A/69/PV.65

technologies. The report of the Committee of Experts
predates the outcomes of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals, with its 17 goals and
169 targets, subsequently considered and adopted by the
General Assembly as the main basis for mainstreaming
the sustainable development goals (SDGs) into the post2015 development agenda, in accordance with resolution
68/309. It is now clear to us that financing the post-2015
development agenda will basically amount to financing
the set of SDG goals and targets, in accordance with the
outcome of the Open Working Group.
We need to clarify the means of implementation for
all goals transversally and for Goal 17, in particular,
starting with official development assistance, but not
limiting ourselves to it. The Monterrey/Doha framework
must be updated for this ambitious, transformational and
universal endeavour that is thematically much broader
than the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and,
of course, different in nature. The task at hand is to
pair the Monterrey/Doha framework with the Rio+20
vision for sustainable development. We need to realign
international financing for development to meet the
overarching goals of poverty reduction and eradication,
fighting inequality and promoting growth that is
socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable.
In its attempt to establish a hierarchical relationship
between the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development, as illustrated
in figures 5 and 6 of the report of the Committee of
Experts, the suggested concept of global public goods
(GPGs) does not provide enough conceptual clarity
or operational functionality to assist us with the
mobilization of resources. Therefore, we would consider
it premature to endorse it at the third International
Conference on Financing for Development. There is an
inherent lack of precision that will need to be addressed
if in the future we would like to revisit this issue.
Global public goods are a concept never before
discussed or defined in the United Nations at the
intergovernmental level, and the experts themselves
did not provide us with an explanation of the term that
we could consider working with. In order to effectively
contribute to the implementation of the post-2015
development agenda, the Addis process should focus
on the SDGs, which are clear, concrete and selfexplanatory, and better translate the holistic definition
of sustainable development that was extensively laid
out in all detail and at the highest level in the Rio+20
Conference.

14-6777019/26

A/69/PV.65

It must be said that by prioritizing climate change
over other dimensions, global public goods contradict
the decision in 2012 to establish poverty eradication as
the greatest global challenge facing the world today.
Poverty eradication and fighting inequality were placed
at the forefront of sustainable development alongside
such other important agreed objectives as changing
unsustainable patterns of consumption and production,
with developing countries taking the lead and protecting
and managing the natural-resource base of economic
and social development.
The road to Addis Ababa is not an exercise in
mobilizing resources for financing climate change
activities. Climate change has its own track under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), with new commitments expected
to be agreed in Paris by the end of 2015. Climate
finance, as a result, must continue to be accounted
for as new and additional resources in relation to
mobilizing for a broader package of objectives related
to the three dimensions of sustainable development
articulated in a set of SDGs and targets ranging
from poverty eradication to combating inequality
to promoting education, health and gender balance.
Climate change is only one of 17 goals in the report of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals, in fact singled out with an asterisk stating that
the UNFCCC is the premier forum for dealing with
climate change issues.
On the technology side, however, there is
opportunity to draw greater attention to adaptation
finance and financing transfer of clean and
environmentally sound technologies, including through
intellectual property flexibilities and those stemming
from the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights Agreement as enablers of access to clean and
environmentally sound technologies for sustainable
development and as accelerators of more sustainable
patterns of consumption and production.
Any attempt to rewrite the Monterrey/Doha
framework will be counterproductive, since all
members generally accept it as the given conceptual
framework for the third International Conference on
Financing for Development. In this regard, the structure
provided by the report of the Committee of Experts and
reflected in the facilitators’ road map must be adjusted
to support an outcome document in July 2015 more
closely reflecting and resembling the six fundamental

20/26

08/12/2014

chapters of the Monterrey/Doha outcome documents,
their overall structure and table of contents.
We are particularly concerned that the experts
have attached far greater importance to reform and
mobilization of resources at the domestic level,
including through partnerships and blended finances,
than they have to international trade and systemic issues
that, in our view, are truly key enablers of sustainable
development. The prescriptive nature of more than a
hundred options for policymakers is retrograde and out
of step with the current trend of recognizing national
ownership, local participatory democratic processes
and policy space as effective national sustainable
development strategies. This was demonstrated over
and over again during the 2008-2009 international
financial and economic crisis and its aftermath,
including in developed countries.
The private sector is not a panacea for
sustainable development in the absence of stronger
national institutions, policies and programmes, and
international cooperation for capacity-building and
adequate regulatory frameworks. The strategic role
of public policies and the positive macroeconomic
impact of social policies and conditional cash transfer
programmes in developing countries have shown
the effectiveness of a more multifaceted approach to
addressing development challenges.
The experts gave us little to work with in terms
of a Monterrey-Doha-Addis follow-up process, an
issue that is highlighted in paragraphs 68 to 73 of the
Monterrey Consensus (A/CONF.198/11, annex), under
its third section, entitled “Staying engaged”. The
preparatory process must provide room for constructive
discussions on a clear United Nations institutional
follow-up mechanism, the International Financing for
Development Conference being the only major United
Nations conference still devoid of one, as well as an
indispensable framework of accountability to States
Members of the United Nations for actions taken in
partnership with the private sector. As Member States,
we cannot seriously conceive of the United Nations
scaling up its partnerships with private entities in
financing for sustainable development without an
effective framework of accountability, which currently
simply does not exist.
In contrast with the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development, the Committee of Experts
did not allow for significant participation of civil

14-67770

08/12/2014

society and other stakeholders in its deliberations.
This needs to be corrected in the preparatory process
for the third International Conference on Financing
for Development as well as at the Conference itself
so as to ensure that sufficient attention is paid to the
social, human rights and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development that non-governmental groups
cater to. Civil society must be ensured effective equality
of participation in comparison with the business sector,
because we are dealing with different constituencies
that are very asymmetrical in their respective capacities
to influence, to gain access to decision-making and to
self-finance.
I would like to thank you again, Sir, for giving
us this opportunity today. My delegation reiterates
its commitment to working in close cooperation with
all delegations, civil society and other partners, as we
today lay this important foundation in our preparatory
process for crafting effective means of implementation
of an ambitious transformational and universal post2015 development agenda.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): I thank you, Sir,
for providing this opportunity to discuss the report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing (A/69/315). Given
the nature of the Committee, we consider the discussion
in this larger forum to be very pertinent.
In this connection, we fully subscribe to what
the representative of Bolivia has said on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. I will emphasize a few points
in our national capacity.
The report under consideration is an outcome of
the long 12 months of serious work of distinguished
experts. We are happy that the General Assembly has
taken due note of the report. In our view, it represents
an important input to the forthcoming financing for
development discourse and to our consideration of the
financing for sustainable development agenda. Many
recommendations made therein are indeed very apt
for our broader discussion. However, we continue to
believe that the Monterrey Consensus remains the most
fundamental framework for advancing the financing
for development debate. The six broad areas identified
in Monterrey, complemented by the seventh in Doha,
represent the most comprehensive global action plan to
financing for development. The world would have been
a far better place today had all the recommendations
made therein been implemented fully. As we embark on

A/69/PV.65

the third round of financing for development exercises,
we must recommit ourselves to Monterrey, review the
progress achieved and strengthen our efforts where
there have been weaknesses.
Domestic-resource mobilization is emphasized
over and over as the principal source of financing.
There cannot be any denial of the fact that the primary
responsibility for development rests with national
authorities and international cooperation should only
supplement national actions. However, it is equally
true that without an enabling environment, domesticresource mobilization may not be satisfactory. A few
notable challenges of domestic resource mobilization
are illicit financial flows, tax avoidance and tax evasion.
These are often capacity and governance issues, but the
lack of a common agenda of nations in tax matters is
also partly to blame for this unhelpful situation. It is
obvious that without the cooperation of our nations,
these challenges cannot be effectively overcome.
Despite the many reports of the gradual global
erosion of the significance of official development
assistance (ODA), it remains the most important public
source of financing for development. It is particularly
crucial for the least developed countries (LDCs),
which still depend heavily on ODA. It is a matter of
frustration that so many years after the commitment
made at Monterrey, the target of providing of 0.7 per
cent of gross national income to developing countries
and, of that, 0.15 to 0.2 per cent to the LDCs remains
unachieved. Though some progress has been made,
ODA still stands at 0.2 per cent of the gross national
income of developed countries, which is less than half
of the Monterrey target. With the ambitious sustainable
development goal framework in sight, which will
necessitate even greater ODA, the developed countries
should set some timeline themselves to meet the target.
Alongside quantity, equally important will be the
quality of the ODA. The Monterrey Consensus called
on donors to make ODA more effective, and the Doha
Declaration encouraged all donors to improve the
quality of aid and untie aid to the maximum extent
possible. This is far from being a reality. It is true
that the sustainable development agenda cannot be
implemented fully only depending on ODA. Foreign
direct investment (FDI) and other sources of finance,
including private finance, should also be looked into.
These flows have the potential to create decent jobs,
facilitate technology transfers and generate domestic
resources through taxes. Unfortunately, most of the

14-6777021/26

A/69/PV.65

08/12/2014

FDI flows to upper-middle-income countries. It hardly
reaches low-income countries, which need it the most.

carried out on the report on sustainable development
financing (A/69/315).

On the other hand, poorly managed private
financial flows can lead to financial instability
and adversely impact the marginalized and the
environment. The terms and conditions of contracts
are often unfavourable to the host country and lead to
an outflow of resources through profit repatriation. In
the absence of global norms for responsible business
practices, big companies, investors and transnational
companies can easily get away with rights violations
and environmental degradation. We need to look into
this matter in the course of our upcoming discussions
on sustainable development. In our view, a better
solution to much-needed additional resources should
be sought preferably through innovative public-finance
mechanisms for the sake of predictability and the
sustainability of the development process.

The eradication of poverty continues to be the
greatest challenge facing us today, so it should be
viewed not only from an economic perspective, but also
from a political one. We can achieve true sustainable
and inclusive development only with real commitment.

Against the backdrop of insufficient ODA
and FDI flows, trade can play a pivotal role in
meeting the shortfall of development financing.
However, the current trade regime is unfavourable to
developing countries. Frustratingly enough, the Doha
Development Round is nearly concluded. As such, one
of the important undertakings critical to affording
LDC products duty-free and quota-free access to
developed markets still remains elusive. In a nutshell,
we have to address the systemic issues of financing
our development in our current exercise. Reform of
the global economic, financial and trade institutions to
give developing countries fair and equitable positions
in the decision-making process is the call of the time,
and it should be in line with the Monterrey Consensus,
the Doha Declaration and numerous United Nations
resolutions and documents.
Finally, on the issue of climate change, it is clear that
traditional development financing cannot and should
not be merged with climate finance, as the latter would
require huge resources for mitigation and adaptation
purposes. Climate finance should be adequate, new and
additional. We look forward to engaging in all those
processes constructively in the coming days.
Mr. Shcherbakov (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I associate myself with the statement made by the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I want to
thank the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts
on Sustainable Development Financing for the work

22/26

It is important to define sources for financing for
development and to establish effective and efficient
means of implementation to achieve the global goals. It
is therefore important to not only review the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration, but also to
strengthen and revitalize the follow-up processes of
financing for development, defining the obstacles to
achieving the goals and the actions to overcome those
limitations, as well as support the implementation of
the post-2015 development agenda.
The report of the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts on Sustainable Development Financing should
recognize the various challenges and the heterogeneity
of our countries. Ecuador, like many middle-income
countries, has to grapple with inequalities and, as such,
we believe that the report should take into account
social exclusion, in addition to poverty, from an income
standpoint.
ODA continues to be a key instrument in helping
to achieve national development goals. It is therefore
important for developed countries to carry out in good
faith the commitments they have undertaken, that is,
an ODA of 0.7 per cent for developing countries and
0.15 to 0.20 per cent for least developed countries.
Financing for development is a fundamental agenda
for cooperation for development as such and, therefore,
must continue to be an independent framework after
the development of the post-2015 agenda.
The report should not only mention some of the
ways and means of cooperation, but refer to each one
depending on the importance of each case. South-South
cooperation is a supplement, but not a substitute for,
North-South cooperation. South-South cooperation
is a collective effort of developed countries, based on
the principle of solidarity, specific to the historical
and political context of developing countries and their
needs and expectations.
With regard to the private sector, we must continue
to discuss and exchange views because of the different

14-67770

08/12/2014

degrees of participation and roles that the private
sector carries out in our national contexts. The State
will always be the focus and main actor in the design
and implementation of its own development policies.
Therefore, Member States must analyse the report,
which, while it may contribute to the Conference, was
not completely negotiated at the intergovernmental
level. Nor is it the only document available; although
the report is an important document, a strong
preparation process must be carried out productively
and dynamically with full participation and taking into
account the contributions of all Member States and
not only of a small group, as the third Conference will
be the perfect opportunity to intensify and renew the
efforts of all States to eradicate poverty and generate
growth and sustainable development. We must therefore
increase consistency and coordination in order to create
synergies with other intergovernmental processes in the
United Nations and avoid duplication of efforts, which
does not mean that other processes that contribute to
the cause should be halted.
The next generation will judge us on the results we
hand over next year, which is crucial for all of us who are
part of the United Nations system, since this will design
the development agenda for the next 15 years. Ecuador
reaffirms its commitment to work productively during
the negotiation process leading us to Addis Ababa. We
hope that major results will come out of that process.
Mr. Gave (France) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
important meeting. France fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to underscore three points.
First, the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing (A/69/315), mandated by the outcome
document (resolution 66/288, annex) of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20), brought together experts from all regions
of the North and the South. Through intensive work,
they arrived at a consensus on the report and the many,
reality-based proposals. The report suggested 115
recommendations that each country could use in its
own particular situation.
Secondly, the report recalls the centrality of
official development assistance (ODA), in particular for
least developed countries. However, it emphasizes that
ODA will never be sufficient to respond to the volume

A/69/PV.65

of needs in sustainable development. To that end, the
report indicates a large range of public and private,
domestic and international resources that would
complement ODA, and that it is possible to mobilize
these resources to finance sustainable development.
The main challenge is therefore to focus the various
sources of financing on sustainable development needs.
Similarly, the report underscores, for example, the fact
that public resources could be used to leverage private
flows in financing sustainable development in the
framework of blended financing.
Thirdly, the report is based on the achievements of
the Rio+20 outcome document to promote an approach
founded on sustainable development financing, that is,
development financing that would not compromise the
future for future generations.
The report recalls the centrality of the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration, while proposing
to adapt these achievements to the current realities.
In that regard, the report shares and completes the
vision laid out in the report of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970)
and is in full agreement with those works. That is why
we welcome this report and hope that it will be an
important contribution to our work in preparing for the
Addis Ababa conference.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having organized this meeting,
which has allowed us to learn about the report of
the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing (A/69/315).
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the least developed countries (LDCs). The
group aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
The Group of LDCs commends you, Sir, for giving
it an opportunity to express its position on the report
of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing. The Committee
of Experts’ report indicates that $22 trillion in annual
global savings can be made to meet the large financing
needs for sustainable development. However, most
resources are not allocated where they are needed most,
and even a small shift in the way resources are allocated
would have an enormous impact.

14-6777023/26

A/69/PV.65

The report emphasizes the need to revitalize the
global partnership for sustainable development. The
report recognizes that in many developing countries,
particularly in least developed countries, public
international finance remains crucial. In addition,
the report recognizes that gross domestic savings
rates in many of the least developed countries remain
significantly below the amount necessary to drive
sustainable domestic investment.
On foreign direct investment (FDI), the report
acknowledges that least developed countries receive
only a small fraction — less than 2 per cent — of the
FDI flows. We would specifically like to refer to the
recommendations of the report that States Members of
the United Nations should honour their commitments in
full and in a timely manner and never ignore or dilute
them. Member States should in particular acknowledge
the large financing gaps in least developed countries
and other vulnerable countries, for further efforts are
needed to maintain and increase the official development
assistance (ODA) allocated to least developed countries
and those most in need. The LDCs should get at least
50 per cent of global ODA disbursement.
Despite some positive elements in the report, we
wanted many more concrete recommendations on
all areas of the means of implementation. The report
indicates two valuable sources of finance, but has not
articulated how to access to them. We would need to
work on that in the context of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, scheduled
to take place in Addis Ababa in July 2015. The LDCs
expect concrete decisions in the area of ODA, trade, debt
relief, FDI, technology transfers and global economic
governance, and we will articulate our position in due
course.
The LDCs would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to the commitments taken in the Istanbul
Programme of Action to help half of the LDCs reach
the level of graduation by 2020. The LDCs would
also like to draw attention to the Cotonou Agenda for
capacity-building in the LDCs, which was adopted by
the ministerial conference of LDCs and their partners,
held in Benin in July. It contains clear indications of the
needs of LDCs in the field of financing for productive
capacity-building.
We call on the international community to lift the
institutional obstacles preventing the access of LDCs to
global financial markets for funding their infrastructure

24/26

08/12/2014

projects to end poverty and promote sustainable
development. We call for an improvement of the
cooperation framework for fighting illicit flows and for
the recovery of assets diverted through illicit channels.
We urge the Assembly to take up the issue related to the
regulation of the activities of rating agencies, so that
they promote the stability of the countries and are held
accountable for judgement and assessment errors.
The LDCs need targeted support to activate their
national resource endowments, which would accelerate
their economic and social transformation and help
them reach internationally agreed development goals.
The financial needs of LDCs should be given a higher
order of priority in the global decision-making bodies
for more equity and the reduction of inequalities among
States.
(spoke in French)
Particular attention must be paid to the question of
the LDCs’ access to financing facilities implemented
in the context of the fight against climate change.
That is why we call on United Nations funds, agencies
and programmes to facilitate the implementation of
mechanisms to help LDCs to access the resources
available in the context of financing in combatting
climate change. At stake is the inclusivity of the
international community’s efforts to place all LDCs
on the path of sustainable development and shared
prosperity, with dignity for all.
Mr. Pico (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Argentina
supports the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
At the outset, we wish to congratulate the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing for its work carried
out in the preparation of the report under consideration
(A/69/315). We acknowledge the value of the report as
a contribution that could be useful for the discussions
which to be held in the context of the third international
conference on sustainable development financing.
We would also like to welcome the convening of this
very important debate. As indicated in the statement
delivered on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, we
believe that this meeting will add value to the report
because it will take into account the opinions and
observations of the Member States that were unable to
present their views when the report was being prepared,
which was one of the Group’s concerns.

14-67770

08/12/2014

Financing for development plays a key role in
the implementation of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the sustainable
development goals and the post-2015 agenda. Though
we hope that the third conference for financing for
development will achieve ambitious results beyond
those achieved in Monterrey and Doha, we believe
it is crucial to revitalize the follow-up processes for
financing for development and identify the obstacles
and actions needed to achieve the goals and support
the post-2015 development agenda. On the other hand,
although the post-2015 agenda must acknowledge
our countries’ diverse challenges and heterogeneity,
Argentina believes it important that the eradication
of extreme poverty and the promotion of social and
economic inclusion be central themes of the agenda.
As stated by others, we believe that the Monterrey
Consensus and the Doha Declaration constitute the
conceptual framework of the post-2015 development
agenda for the mobilization of resources on the basis
of different sources and the effective use of financing
needed to achieve sustainable development. With regard
to domestic financing, the United Nations efforts must
focus on issues of international cooperation, striking a
balance in the mobilization of national resources while
focusing on international resources. With regard to the
private sector, we must continue to discuss and exchange
views because of the different levels of participation
and roles that it plays in our national contexts.

A/69/PV.65

On the other hand, the document makes just one
mention of triangular cooperation. In developing
countries, such cooperation is being promoted on
the understanding that it is a crossroads between
two paradigms of cooperation and a meeting
point among other development stakeholders. It
leads to the challenge of integrating North-South
cooperation — joining its human and financial resources
and its capabilities — without merging or losing sight
of the principles that constitute the defining features
of South-South cooperation, which are solidarity,
mutual benefit, flexibility and horizontality, respect
for sovereignty and the non-interference in the internal
affairs of countries, consensus and equity.
With regard to the report’s emphasis on the
possibility of moving forward towards innovative
financing mechanisms, Argentina would like to
underscore that mechanisms of that kind must be
agreed at an intergovernmental level, without imposing
conditions. While there are many references to
efficiency and accountability in the report, they are
balanced between the commitments that developing
countries have assumed and those that developed
countries have assumed. In that connection, our country
believes that those processes must be determined by
national authorities, rather than by using standardized
guidelines, which are foreign to the diverse nature of
international cooperation.

Argentina acknowledges in particular the
incorporation in the report of South-South cooperation,
which supplements rather than substitutes official
development assistance (ODA). Argentina also agrees
with the report’s characterization of South-South
cooperation as voluntary, intergovernmental and
diverse. In fact, it is a collective effort by developing
countries on the basis of the principles of solidarity,
and it is specific, in accordance with the historic and
political context of the developing countries and their
needs and expectations.

Furthermore, we note that the report gives equal
weight to ongoing discussions on the topic in the
framework of the Development Cooperation Forum
of the Economic and Social Council and the Global
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation,
which is the offspring of the Busan process launched
by the Development Assistance Committee of
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. However, the Argentine delegation does
not agree with that, as the former is a multilateral in
which where all States participate, while the latter is
not.

However, we must also stress the fact that we saw
with some concern certain quantifications in the report,
such as the affirmation that South-South cooperation
would be estimated to be 10 per cent of ODA. In
that regard, we would like to say that South-South
cooperation has not yet been assessed nor defined
exhaustively by developing countries. Therefore, this
calculation is questionable and should not lead to any
conclusions or binding commitments.

Argentina welcomes the report’s reference to the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
but we are concerned about the less than rigorous
application of that principle throughout the report. That
is clear, for example, in terms of climate issues, where
policy options are based on the reality of the developed
countries, whereas they should meet the specific needs
and priorities of developing countries. It is suggested that
developing countries adopt the measures undertaken by

14-6777025/26

A/69/PV.65

some developed countries, such as imposing a carbon
tax, restricting investments that contribute to direct
emissions, and promoting research stipends and the
development of clean energies, which few developing
countries can implement, as well as payments for certain
ecosystem services and environmental accountability,
among others.
In conclusion, Argentina reaffirms its commitment
to actively and constructively participating in the
coming phase of preparing the post-2015 development
agenda, with a focus on the design and implementation
of strategies aimed at ending poverty and social
exclusion.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.32, entitled
“Report of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts
on Sustainable Development Financing established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 66/288”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/69/L.32?
Draft resolution A/69/L.32 was adopted (resolution
69/108).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 13 and of agenda item 115.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to the date of recess of the current

26/26

08/12/2014

session. Members will recall that at its 2nd plenary
meeting, on 19 September 2014, the General Assembly
decided that the sixty-ninth session would recess on
Tuesday, 16 December 2014. However, in view of the
work that remains to be completed for this part of the
session, I would like to propose to the Assembly that it
postpone the date of recess to Wednesday, 24 December
2014. If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to postpone the date of recess to
Wednesday, 24 December 2014?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should also like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Fifth Committee. Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the General
Assembly approved the recommendation of the General
Committee that the Fifth Committee complete its work
by Friday, 12 December 2014. However, I have been
informed by the Chairman of the Fifth Committee that
the Committee requests an extension of its work to
Tuesday, 23 December 2014, in view of the fact that
such an extension would facilitate reaching consensus
on the pending draft resolutions before it. May I
therefore take it that the General Assembly agrees to
extend the work of the Fifth Committee until Tuesday,
23 December 2014?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

14-67770
