S/2017/89

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2017
Original: English

Final progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2284 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) for a final period, until
30 June 2017, and requested me to provide, by 31 January 2017, an update on the
implementation of the mandate of UNOCI and its phased drawdown, including the
continued transition of its security responsibilities to the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire. The present report contains major developments since my special report of
31 March 2016 (S/2016/297) and an update on the ongoing drawdown and transition
of UNOCI, with a view to completing its mandate as provided for in resolution 2284
(2016).

II. Major developments
2.
Preparations for and the conduct of the constitutional referendum on
30 October and the legislative election on 18 December were the key developments
in Côte d’Ivoire. Dialogue between the Government and the opposition advanced,
leading to the introduction, on 6 April, by the Government of a bill in the National
Assembly on the status of a “Leader of the opposition”. In the bill, it was stipulated
that the position should be given to the candidate or the leader of the party that
finishes second in a presidential election. On the basis of the results of the
presidential election of 2015, the position would therefore be given to the president
of the Front populaire ivoirien (FPI) opposition party, P ascal Affi N’Guessan, who
came in second in that election. Other opposition leaders agreed in principle to the
creation of such a position, but rejected the proposed criteria and modalities of
appointment. The National Assembly began consideration of the b ill on 4 July;
however, as the opposition became increasingly hostile towards the constitutional
reform process, five parliamentary caucuses affiliated with the Rassemblement des
républicains (RDR) and the Parti démocratique de Côte d’Ivoire (PDCI) asked t o
suspend consideration of the bill, which is pending approval in the Assembly.
3.
The period leading up to the constitutional referendum was dominated by
antagonism between the ruling majority party supporting the constitutional reform
initiative of the President, Alassane Ouattara, and the opposition, which rejected it.

17-01282 (E)

020217

*1701282*

S/2017/89

Some media outlets disseminated inflammatory rhetoric, hate speech and incitement
to violence and called for a boycott of the referendum. On 30 May, the President
established a committee of experts tasked with elaborating a new constitution. From
7 to 13 June, the President and the committee consulted separately with opposition
political parties of the Cadre permanent de dialogue, followed by traditional chiefs,
religious leaders and civil society organizations, and concluding with the ruling
coalition, the Rassemblement des houphouëtistes pour la démocratie et la paix
(RHDP). The draft new constitution developed by the committee, which contains
important new provisions addressing the root causes of the past civil war, including
land tenure, nationality and identity, was officially presented to the President on
24 September and endorsed by the Government on 28 September and by the
National Assembly on 5 October.
4.
The political opposition, including FPI, challenged the legitimacy of the
committee of experts. On 30 June, a group of 23 small opposition political parties
led by Mr. N’Guessan, under the banner of the Collectif des partis de l’opposition
démocratique, issued a statement rejecting the constitutional review process as
“undemocratic and unilateral”. From August to 30 October, the opposition’s protests
against that process consolidated around two groups, the “Coalition du non” and the
“Front du refus”, both comprised of FPI dissidents. The latter group was led by
Aboudramane Sangaré and included hardline elements of FPI and other smaller
opposition parties and politicians, including the president of the Liberté et
démocratie pour la république (LIDER) party, Mamadou Koulibaly, and a fo rmer
presidential candidate, Konan Bertin. They argued that the referendum was neither
legal nor legitimate and that Côte d’Ivoire had first to make progress towards
national reconciliation before embarking on institutional reforms. They also
criticized the process for not being sufficiently participatory. Nevertheless, they
indicated that, once all conditions were met, Ivorians might meet to discuss issues
facing the nation through an expanded national dialogue, including all segments of
society. RHDP rejected the proposal.
5.
A nationwide voter registration exercise conducted by the Independent
Electoral Commission from 25 June to 24 July registered 375,352 new voters,
increasing the total number of eligible voters to 6,439,876, of whom 49 per cent
were women. Upon the publication of the final electoral roll on 12 October, the
umbrella civil society organization Plateforme des organizations de la société civile
pour l’observation des élections en Côte d’Ivoire observed that the transparent voter
registration process had been transparent but criticized the low rate of young people
registered. From 15 to 27 October, the Commission shared the electoral roll with all
political parties and distributed voter cards and related materials for the referendum
and legislative election.
6.
With a view to encouraging the opposition and the Government to resume
dialogue, my Special Representative for Côte d’Ivoire and Head of UNOCI met the
FPI-led Alliance des forces démocratiques on 1 September and the Minister -incharge of Political Dialogue on 5 September. This led to the Government initiating
conciliatory gestures, including unfreezing 12 bank accounts and releasing nine
more detainees, both of which had been major demands of the opposition. As a
result, dialogue between the Government and FPI resumed on 8 September. FPI also
discussed the proposed constitutional reform with the committee of experts. My
Special Representative also met representatives of the Plateforme des organizations

2/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

de la société civile pour l’observation des élections en Côte d’Ivoire and the civil
society organization the West African Network for Peacebuilding — Côte d’Ivoire,
given their concerns about inclusivity and the participation of civil society in public
awareness-raising activities on the constitutional reform. On 17 September,
however, the opposition launched a campaign against the reform and called for a
constitutional commission to decide whether the Constitution should be amended.
Similarly, a group of 18 civil society organizations called upon the Government to
undertake a “more inclusive and transparent” process. Furthermore, on 13 October,
the president of FPI called for a boycott of the forthcoming referendum and, on
20 October, the Front du refus organized a march to protest against the reform.
Police used tear gas to disperse the demonstrators, and a few opposition leaders
were detained briefly.
7.
The official referendum campaign was conducted from 22 to 28 October
without incident. On 30 October, the referendum was held in a peaceful atmosphere
and without any major incidents, notwithstanding minor disruptions in some 100
polling stations of the 20,024 nationwide. The Minister of Justice stated that charges
would be brought against individuals involved in those disturbances. As a result,
between 4 and 6 November, a few opposition figures of the Front du refus,
including the president of LIDER and Mr. Sangaré, were questioned in court for a
few hours. On 4 November, the Constitutional Council validated the results of the
referendum announced by the Independent Electoral Commission, with 93.42 per
cent voting in favour of the revised Constitution. Of 6,318,311 registered voters, a
total of 2,678,601 cast their ballot, resulting in a voter turnout of 42.42 per cent. On
8 November, the President promulgated the new Constitution.
8.
The referendum was observed by several organizations, including the
Commission nationale des droits de l’homme, the West African Network for
Peacebuilding and the Plateforme des organizations de la société civile pour
l’observation des élections en Côte d’Ivoire. The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) provided support to civil society to carry out awareness -raising
of the right to vote and of peaceful participation. All observers stated that, overall,
the referendum had been conducted in a peaceful and satisfactory manner. However,
the Commission underscored a few cases of violations of the right to freedom of
expression and equitable access to information and the media, while the West
African Network for Peacebuilding noted some disturbances at a number of the
polling stations on the day of the referendum, which did not taint the fairness of the
process.
9.
Preparations for the legislative election began immediately after the
referendum, with intensified forging of alliances by political parties. On
7 December, the Constitutional Court validated the final list of 1,337 candidates,
including 740 independent candidates, of whom only 166 (12.4 per cent) were
women. On 18 December, the country voted peacefully in the legislative e lection.
No serious security incidents were reported. Of the 6,318,311 registered voters, a
total of 2,027,078 cast their ballots, resulting in a voter participation rate of 34.1 per
cent, which was slightly lower than in the previous legislative poll, hel d in 2011
(37 per cent). In line with the new Constitution, members of the legislature were
elected for an exceptional four-year term instead of five years, until 2020, when all
provisions of the new Constitution will come into force. Of the 254 newly elec ted
members of the National Assembly, 225 are men and 29 are women (11.42 per cent).

17-01282

3/18

S/2017/89

10. RHDP, the Union pour la démocratie et la paix en Côte d’Ivoire (UDPCI) and
the Union pour la Côte d’Ivoire (UPCI) won 167, 6 and 3 seats, respectively, while
FPI secured 3 seats and the independent candidates the remaining 76 seats (75 of
which had previously been associated with the ruling coalition). The number of
seats won by independent candidates (29.53 per cent) is significantly higher than in
the 2001 and 2011 legislative elections.
11. While voter turnout was, in general, higher in the northern regions, with up to
95 per cent turnout, there was lower participation in the southern and central
regions, including the Abidjan district (15.7 per cent), Bouakét (16.99 per cent) and
Yamoussoukro (18.57 per cent). Within RHDP, RDR remains the strongest partner,
with 99 seats, followed by PDCI, with 67 seats. The significantly low achievement
of three seats secured by FPI, of 187 fielded candidates, fell short of its decl ared
ambition to gain at least 30 seats. In that regard, on 26 December, president of FPI,
commenting on the party’s poor result in the legislative election, recognized that
FPI had to detach itself from the former President, Laurent Gbagbo, who “became a
stumbling block” for the party.
12. On 9 January, Guillaume Soro was re-elected president of the National
Assembly, while the Government of the Prime Minister, Daniel Kablan Duncan,
resigned. On 10 January, in accordance with the new Constitution, the Pre sident
appointed the former Prime Minister as First Vice-President of Côte d’Ivoire and
Amadou Gon Coulibaly as Prime Minister. On 11 January, the new 28 -member
Government was formed: 19 returning ministers, 6 of whom were women, and
9 new ministers. The Ministries for Human Rights and Public Liberties were
dissolved and 12 others were merged into 6 ministries.
National and international justice
13. On 27 October, the Government took stock of the residual challenges in the
field of transitional justice in Côte d’Ivoire during a high-level conference
organized by the International Centre for Transitional Justice, in partnership with
UNDP, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) and UNOCI. The conference attendees recommended ensuring
accountability and redress in an equitable and inclusive manner. On 31 October, the
President announced that Côte d’Ivoire had no intention of withdrawing from the
International Criminal Court. Since June 2016, the hearings in the trial of
Mr. Gbagbo and the former Minister of Youth, Blé Goudé, before the Court have
been closed to the media in order to protect witnesses.
14. With respect to national proceedings, on 31 May, the trial of the former First
Lady, Simone Gbagbo, for crimes against humanity and war crimes committed
during the post-election crisis of 2010 and 2011 began before the Criminal Court of
Abidjan and has been open to the public and the media. The trial was suspended
from 8 to 18 July owing to the hospitalization of the defe ndant and from 1 August to
10 October owing to the court’s recess. Since 2 November, the trial has adjourned
several times following the decision of Mrs. Gbagbo’s defence counsel to suspend
its participation in the trial owing to the refusal of the preside nt of the Court to
subpoena five senior public officials, including the president of the National
Assembly.

4/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

National reconciliation and social cohesion
15. On 25 October, the final report and recommendations of the Dialogue, Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, presented to the President on 15 December 2014,
were officially released during a public ceremony in Abidjan. On 19 October, the
mandate of the successor to the Commission, the National Commission for
Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims, ended with the presentation of the
final report to the President. The report, which is yet to be made public, includes a
consolidated list of victims of crises in Côte d’Ivoire from 1990 to 2012, a proposal
for national reparations and a draft reconciliation action plan. Civil society and
victims’ groups criticized the current reparations process as non -inclusive and called
for the establishment of an appeals mechanism for those applicants denied the status
of “victim”.
16. Alongside efforts towards national reconciliation and social cohesion, the
Government continued with the restitution of illegally occupied properties. To date,
1,204 of 1,731 claims received by the established State committee on this issue have
been returned to their rightful owners, mainly properties of the associates of
Mr. Gbagbo in Abidjan, while 189 are under consideration. A further 338 claims
remain to be processed.
17. The UNOCI partnership with the United Nations country team, the
Government and local administrators to ensure a timely and effective response to
reported incidents of intercommunal violence continued. The Government has
enhanced its awareness of and response to latent threats, including the
implementation of the national social cohesion programme. From 6 to 8 Decemb er,
in Bouna, the Government, in coordination with the office of the Ivorian
ombudsman and with support from UNDP and UNOCI, organized a high -level
workshop to identify and find solutions to obstacles to social cohesion further to the
intercommunal violence of March 2016 in the area. Participants agreed on a
12-point commitment, including action to restore confidence between the population
and security forces, efforts to combat impunity for crimes committed during the
violence and establish early warning mechanisms. The implementation of the
commitments will be monitored by a committee comprising representatives of all
communities.
18. From 1 April to 30 August, UNOCI, in partnership with the United Nations
country team, supported 10 capacity-building workshops on conflict prevention for
sous-préfets and traditional chiefs as part of a nationally owned early warning
initiative involving some 450 participants, including young people and women,
from 31 regions of Côte d’Ivoire. In addition, UNOCI and the Gover nment
developed a transition framework for a social cohesion strategy for conflict
prevention and trained 584 government administrators, including 190 women, at the
National School of Administration on mediation and conflict prevention. They will
be deployed throughout the country at the conclusion of their programme in 2017.
Security situation
19. The security situation remained stable and continued to show signs of
improvement, with an overall downward trend of security incidents since the
beginning of 2016. Intercommunal conflicts, armed robberies, sexual and gender -

17-01282

5/18

S/2017/89

based violence and violence against minors, as well as other criminal activities, still
contribute to insecurity in some parts of the country. While armed attacks in the
south-west declined, tensions over land disputes have increased with the resumption
of the voluntary repatriation of refugees from Liberia to western regions of Côte
d’Ivoire. In the east, sporadic armed robberies and clashes between the local
population and security forces are still reported. Social unrest, primarily in the form
of public demonstrations and protests, occurred. There were violent demonstrations
in July triggered by hikes in electricity tariffs, protests by university students in
April and July over campus tertiary education conditions, a strike by university
lecturers in August regarding their remuneration, strikes by primary and secondary
schoolteachers in September and October and in January 2017 over salaries and
pension reforms, and protests by students in January. The Government addressed
those situations without any serious security incident. Following t he negotiations
with the schoolteachers that the Government had held in mid-January, the protesters
announced the end of the strike on 23 January.
20. Following the terrorist attack in Grand-Bassam on 13 March, the Government
stepped up preventive measures and strengthened border controls to counter terrorist
threats. On 6 April, it adopted an action plan on the fight against terrorism. On
13 April, the Minister of the Interior and Security announced that 83 people had
been arrested in connection with the attack. According to the Government, some of
the suspects participated in that attack and in ones carried out in Ouagadougou and
Bamako. On 9 January, the French forces deployed under “Operation Barkhane” in
Mali reportedly arrested another suspect, Mimi Ould Baba Ould Cheikh, near Gao,
Mali. He allegedly admitted to having masterminded and supervised the attack in
Grand-Bassam.
21. Land disputes tended to concentrate in areas along the country’s western and
eastern borders and in some northern areas. On 11 May, 61 persons were arrested in
connection with the intercommunal violence of 24 March in Bouna allegedly over
disputed grazing areas and skirmishes for control of traditional power in the area,
which left more than 30 persons dead, 52 wounded and some 2,900 internally
displaced, while another 2,000 fled to neighbouring Burkina Faso. The presence of
armed, non-integrated former combatants and dozo elements complicated the
situation. UNOCI deployed a 105-strong quick reaction force to Bouna to protect
civilians, while the armed forces of Côte d’Ivoire established a temporary command
post in the area to restore calm and enhance border control.
22. Rumours of attacks and the presence of armed individuals continued in areas
near the border with Liberia, in particular in Tabou, owing to the suspected presence
of a large number of former combatants. On 29 March, two soldiers were wounded
in an attack by unidentified assailants against an army post near the Liberian border
village of Nero in the Tabou area. Skirmishes along the border with Mali in April, in
particular in the villages of Ouelli and Débété, Tengrela region, raised concern. To
counter cross-border insecurity, including terrorist activities, the Governments of
Côte d’Ivoire and Mali are coordinating efforts.
23. The mutiny on 6 and 7 January 2017 by Ivorian soldiers was similar to the
protests of 18 November 2014 by the military over unresolved griev ances, such as
unpaid allowances, promotions and housing subsidies. It occurred at a critical
political juncture, with the renewal of institutions and changes in the Government

6/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

following the promulgation of the new Constitution and the legislative election . The
mutiny, which began in Bouaké, spread quickly to Daloa, Daoukro, Ferkessédougou
and Korhogo, reaching Abidjan on 7 January. The protest ended without any serious
incidents following an agreement reached by the Minister-in-charge of Defence with
the mutineers. The Government began paying the soldiers their pending allowances
on 13 January. However, on 17 January, gendarmes and other personnel from the
military training centre in Zambakro initiated another protest, demanding the
payment of compensation packages. Such protests were also reported in Abidjan,
Bondoukou, Bouaké, Daloa, Ferkessédougou, Gagnoa and Man. On the same day,
four soldiers were killed in Yamoussoukro as a group of disgruntled soldiers were
attempting to seize arms and ammunition from the depot guarded by the Republican
Guard. Following further negotiations, the Government reached an agreement with
the new group of mutineers and the situation calmed down in full by 21 January.
Regional issues
24. Bilateral relations between Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso improved after the
Burkinabé judicial authorities withdrew charges against the president of the
National Assembly on 6 June. However, the international arrest warrant issued on
15 December 2015 by the Burkinabé prosecutor against fo rmer the President of
Burkina Faso, Blaise Compaoré, for his alleged role in the killing of another former
President, Thomas Sankara, in October 1987 remains in force.
25. Strengthening regional cooperation to combat terrorism was at the heart of
several events. From 10 to 13 May, the Mano River Union held a series of meetings
in Côte d’Ivoire to finalize a memorandum of understanding on maritime security
and a framework for counter-terrorism. On 27 May, a summit of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union considered fostering collective regional security.
Regional cooperation on maritime security improved following the signing on
1 June of a bilateral agreement between Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana on border control
and on settling their maritime boundary dispute through dialogue.
26. On 8 September, Côte d’Ivoire reopened its borders with Guinea and Liberia
following the end of the international health emergency surrounding the Ebola virus
disease. Local community-based conflict prevention mechanisms under the Mano
River Union joint border security and confidence-building units in the ZwedruToulépleu and the Tabou-Harper axes were reactivated in June and August 2016,
respectively. Current efforts are focused on improving information -sharing and
confidence-building between the population, local authorities and security forces on
both sides of the borders.
Reform of security institutions
27. The Ministry of Defence and other related institutions are working to ensure the
implementation and operationalization of the military programming law (2016-2020)
and the law on the organization of armed forces. These arrangements are intended to
be implemented over the coming five years and entail the operationalization of a new
organizational structure for the Ministry, the reorganization of human resources, the
adjustment of the command and control structure and the strengthening of
operational capabilities. In addition, under the law on the organization of the armed

17-01282

7/18

S/2017/89

forces, the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire were officially renamed the Forces
armées de Côte d’Ivoire on 14 November 2016.
28. However, as shown by the protests by soldiers in January, serious challenges
remain with regard to the status of security sector reform, including cohesion,
discipline, training and conditions of service in the army. There is also a need to
enhance the operational capacity of the police and gendarmerie through the
provision of adequate equipment. These deficiencies are to be addressed in part
through the implementation of the internal security planning law.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
29. As reported by the national authority for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, a total of 69,506 former combatants, including 6,105 women, en tered
the national programme for disarmament and demobilization that had been
implemented from 2012 to 2015, including 66,216 who were reinserted with the
support of UNOCI. As at 30 May, the reinsertion of an outstanding caseload of
4,769 ex-combatants remained, out of which 3,015 ex-combatants had not been
processed because they had stable jobs or were employed, already enrolled in
training activities, not interested in the programme or unreachable. According to the
Government, the remaining 1,754 ex-combatants awaiting reinsertion received a
reinsertion package in July. From 1 April to 30 June, the implementation of the
Government’s resocialization programme, payment of transitional safety allowances
and support for the vocational training component of the programme, with UNOCI
assistance, contributed to an increase in the number of former combatants in
reinsertion initiatives. Some 2,000 former combatants in Liberia are yet to join the
national programme.
30. A total of 43,510 armaments, including 14,121 weapons, were collected
throughout the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration period from 2012 to
2015. The low number of collected weapons and items of explosive ordnance can be
explained by the significant number of weapons still hidden within com munities.
The national commission for the fight against small arms and light weapons
continued community weapons collections, offering benefits to civilians in
exchange for weapons and ammunition, involving local and traditional authorities in
raising the awareness of target groups.
Human rights situation
31. The human rights situation in Côte d’Ivoire is, in general, improving. Human
rights violations decreased from the post-election crisis of 2010 and 2011, from
1,726 cases noted in my report of 30 March 2011 (S/2011/211) to 88 documented
between 1 April 2016 and 15 January 2017. Those cases comprised the following:
13 violations of the right to life against 31 people, including 4 women; 24 violations
of the right to physical integrity against 25 people, including 2 women; 33 cases of
illegal and arbitrary arrest and detention against 188 people, including 1 woman;
3 violations of the right to peaceful assembly; and 15 violations of the right to
property. Only one alleged perpetrator in those cases was convicted to three years’
imprisonment, while two others were arrested and remain in pretrial detention.
32. UNOCI investigated the human rights abuses that had been committed during
the March intercommunal violence in Bouna. It established the circumstances

8/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

surrounding the killing of at least 27 persons, including 4 women and 2 boys,
allegedly by dozos, with most of the victims belonging to the Fulani, Koulango and
Malinké ethnic groups. At least 117 people, primarily dozos, have been arrested and
the investigation is continuing.
33. UNOCI continued to provide technical assistance to strengthen the capacity
and effectiveness of the National Human Rights Commission, of the joint human
rights mechanism of the army, the Commission and UNOCI and of local human
rights civil society organizations, focusing on strengthening their human rights
monitoring and reporting skills. Seven capacity-building activities were conducted
with the Commission from 29 September to 29 November for the staff of its
31 regional offices, funded by the Government of Canada. In September and
October, four capacity-building workshops were jointly organized for newly
appointed army focal points of the joint human rights mechanism, representing the
four military regions of Côte d’Ivoire.
34. UNOCI supported the National Human Rights Commission in developing its
complaints management manual and its strategic plan for the period 2017 -2020. On
11 November, the Commission presented its 2015 annual report to the President. It
was made public on 9 December. In it, the Commission noted human rights
violations committed in the context of the presidential election of 2015, the
situation of children in conflict with the law and child education and stressed the
importance of the resumption of political dialogue between the Government and the
opposition.
35. UNOCI continued to support human rights mainstreaming with the mapping of
the human rights education needs of the police and gendarmerie academies. On
12 and 13 May, a training session on basic human rights norms and principles and
their application in the civil service was conducted for students of the National
School of Administration.
36. On 1 July, the Human Rights Council adopted a resolution extend ing, for a
final one-year period, the mandate of the Independent Expert on the enhancement of
capacity-building and technical cooperation with Côte d’Ivoire in the field of human
rights (A/HRC/RES/32/30). Referring to his fourth mission to Côte d’Ivoire in May,
the Independent Expert highlighted the need to strengthen the judicial system,
prevent community tensions, step up efforts to combat terrorism while complying
with human rights standards and consolidate the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
Sexual violence
37. The number of reported cases of sexual and gender-based violence has
progressively decreased, owing in part to the concerted awareness -raising efforts by
UNOCI and United Nations partners with the Ivorian military, communities and
schools. Compared with 180 cases noted in my report of 12 December 2014
(S/2014/892), during the period under review UNOCI documented 34 cases, which
comprise the following: 25 cases of rape and 9 cases of other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, including 2 forced marriages and 2 cases of female genital
mutilation, perpetrated against 14 girls and 1 woman. At least 23 perpetrators were
arrested; 9 of them were tried and sentenced to prison terms ranging from one
month to five years. In the remaining cases, the suspects were either acquitted for

17-01282

9/18

S/2017/89

lack of evidence, failure to attend court or the victim’s withdrawal of the complaint
for fear of retaliation. Progress has been slow, however, in the investigation and
prosecution of cases of sexual violence in connection with the post -election crisis of
2010 and 2011.
38. On 3 June, the President signed a decree on the creation of a national
committee to combat conflict-related sexual violence, which is mandated to
coordinate the Government’s efforts to prevent and respond to such violence. On
11 July, UNOCI and OHCHR released a joint report on crimes of rape and their
prosecution in Côte d’Ivoire, following which two ministerial circulars were
adopted on the prosecution of rape and the registration of complaints for gender based violence. On 19 and 20 July, to ensure the effective implementation of the
action plan of the armed forces on conflict-related sexual violence, UNOCI and the
army conducted a high-level advocacy session for army leadership, which resulted
in the signing of undertakings by 30 army and 8 national gendarmerie commanders
to combat conflict-related sexual violence.
39. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict visited Côte
d’Ivoire in May and November 2016 and discussed with the Prime Minister and
members of the Government the support under her mandate for addressing
remaining challenges in the light of the impending withdrawal of UNOCI. In line
with a United Nations workshop held in Abidjan from 14 to 22 September, my
Special Representative urged the Government to implement the national programme
on gender-based violence launched in June.
Child protection
40. UNOCI recorded the lowest number of cases of violations against children,
from 1 April 2016 to 15 January 2017. There were 10 violations against children,
including 3violations of the right to life against three boys; 3 cases of rape and other
sexual violence by State agents, including 2 by army elements, against three girls;
3 violations of the right to liberty and security against six boys; and 1 violation of
the right to a fair trial against one boy.
41. UNOCI continued to work on strengthening the juvenile justice system, in
particular for the national judiciary to implement decisions consistent with the
principle of the “best interest of the child”. A national judicial protection policy for
minors and youth, drafted with UNOCI support, remains to be adopted by the
Ministry of Justice. Modules on child protection were also incorporated into the
military academy’s training curricula.
Gender
42. UNOCI continued to support the convening of platforms that allow women in
politics and in civil society organizations to discuss political issues, such as gender
equality and women’s rights provisions in the new Constitution, as well as the
selection of candidates for the legislative election. To encourage and enhance
women’s participation in social cohesion efforts and confidence-building in
identified hotspots, three quick-impact projects implemented in 2015 and 2016 were
inaugurated, including the rehabilitation of women’s market spaces and women’s
and young people’s meeting spaces and the construction of a local food production
facility. UNOCI also supported the establishment of focal points for gender and

10/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

security sector reform in the armed forces and began 12 quick-impact projects to
establish gender desks in nine police and three gendarmerie stati ons, which are
intended to assist victims of sexual and gender-based violence. Awareness-raising
on gender and women and peace and security concerns continued for uniformed and
civilian personnel of UNOCI.
Economic situation
43. The Ivorian economy continued to experience solid growth and a controlled
fiscal and external balance. As a result, the country is expected to achieve a real
growth rate of gross domestic product of approximately 8.7 per cent in 2016 (which
is below the 8.9 per cent achieved in 2015). The Government adopted a draft budget
that has increased by 11.2 per cent since 2015. Budget implementation was
satisfactory, with revenues exceeding objectives and higher expenses than expected
due to an acceleration of the implementation of public investment projects.
Spending to reduce poverty increased by 10.5 per cent on average (since 2015) in
the context of the significant progress made in the implementation of structural
reforms. The budget deficit is expected to stand at 3.5 per cent of gro ss domestic
product in 2016 (against 3.7 per cent in 2015). The external accounts continued to
improve and the level of external debt (36 per cent of gross domestic product)
remains sustainable, notwithstanding a further increase in public spending. Inflat ion
remained moderate, or less than 2.5 per cent, in 2016. Notwithstanding the progress
made in these areas, economic growth still needs to become more inclusive, with
continued efforts to combat inequality.
44. Côte d’Ivoire continues to assist private sector development by promoting
business opportunities in the agriculture, industry, mining and services sectors. The
Government has placed specific emphasis on improving the business environment.
In November 2012, it had enacted an investment code. Four years later, it resulted in
businesses being given a total exemption from the value added tax, a 40 per cent
reduction in customs duties and tax exemption on profits, and continues to create a
window for investment and foreign trade.
Humanitarian situation
45. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes helped the Government to
meet the humanitarian needs of some 3,500 people displaced by the intercommunal
violence in Bouna in March, most of whom had returned to their places of origin by
July.
46. By 31 July, the last of the some 25,000 illegal occupants of the Mont Péko
National Park were moved from their settlements, completing a government -led
evacuation. Notwithstanding a year-long awareness-raising campaign, the
evacuation created humanitarian needs for those displaced, including 18,300
children and 24,000 people from receiving communities. Joint assessments revealed
acute needs in food security, health, water, sanitation and shelter. The response was
well coordinated through the enlarged coordination committee and a specific local
committee established in Duékoué. In early September, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator approved a grant of $2.1 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund targeting 20,000 beneficiaries with food, non -food-items, shelter and direct
assistance in water and sanitation, health and protection sectors. Given that the

17-01282

11/18

S/2017/89

affected population is predominantly Burkinabé, the Government, supported by the
International Organization for Migration, is exploring options to assist the v oluntary
repatriation of those willing to return to Burkina Faso. A Burkina Faso -Côte
d’Ivoire joint commission was established in October to discuss the repatriation.
47. On 8 September, the Minister of Health announced the lifting of Ebola -related
prevention measures, including an end to the closure of the border with Guinea and
Liberia (see para. 26 above). Consequently, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was able to resume the voluntary repatriation
process of Ivoirian refugees from the Nzérékoré region of Guinea. Notwithstanding
the closure of the border, repatriations from Liberia had been continuing through a
humanitarian corridor since December 2015. Overall, the repatriation process
continues mainly from the camps and host communities in Liberia. From December
2015 to 15 January 2017, UNHCR facilitated the return of 20,376 refugees, mainly
from Liberia. Some 20,000 Ivorian refugees remain in Liberia.
48. On 9 September, the Prime Minister signed a national action plan on disaster
risk reduction for the period 2017-2020, which is part of the Government’s
commitment to implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030 in order to demonstrate its support for durable development goals.

III. Deployment of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Military component
49. Given the overall improved security conditions on the ground and the progress
made by Côte d’Ivoire in assuming its security responsibilities, pursuant to
resolution 2284 (2016), UNOCI continued its incremental troop drawdown. By
31 August, UNOCI had withdrawn 1,969 military personnel, reaching its authorized
strength of 2,000 personnel. This comprises one infantry battalion deployed in the
southwest (650), the quick reaction force (650), a headquarters protection unit (300)
and associated enablers, specifically aviation (176) and signals (66), as well as
58 staff officers and 100 military observers, consolidated at nine team sites
primarily in the south-west.
50. The final withdrawal of the UNOCI military component is continuing and
scheduled to be completed by mid-February 2017. The Senegalese quick reaction
force with the associated aviation unit are scheduled to deploy to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Arrangements to deploy an advance party of up to 250 military personnel directly
from UNOCI to MINUSMA are under way. The rest of the contingent will repatriate
to Senegal for reconfiguration and training and deploy to MINUSMA by
mid-August. The remaining military headquarters personnel will leave Côte d’Ivoire
by 30 April.
Police component
51. UNOCI police prioritized efforts to enhance the capacity of national law
enforcement agencies, with a focus on operational-level support for the national
police, gendarmerie and the transnational crime unit. Pursuant to resolution 2284

12/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

(2016), UNOCI repatriated three formed police units and 250 individual police
officers, reaching the authorized strength of 670 police personnel by December
2016, including three 140-strong formed police units deployed to Abidjan, Bouaké
and Daloa, as well as 250 individual police officers. In order to complete the
withdrawal of all UNOCI police by April 2017, the repatriation of the remaining
three formed units has been brought forward to mid -February. Team sites decreased
from 23 to 12 as of December 2016 and, by February, only those in Abidj an, Bouaké
and Daloa will remain, with the latter two closing in March.
Civilian component
52. UNOCI is implementing a phased drawdown of its civilian staff on the basis of
a plan that prioritizes the requirements for mandate implementation through
30 April 2017 and completion of the transition and the closure of UNOCI by
30 June. In June, September and December 2016, 154, 48 and 360 civilian staff,
respectively, left UNOCI. Further reductions in civilian staff will be effected on a
monthly basis through 30 April, at which point only 159 personnel will remain,
including 148 associated with the liquidation of UNOCI and 11 supporting my
Special Representative in fulfilling the mandate relating to political facilitation in
accordance with paragraph 18 of resolution 2284 (2016). The efforts of UNOCI to
assist national staff in finding employment has resulted in some being recruited by
the Government, the United Nations country team, other peacekeeping operations,
international and non-governmental organizations and the private sector. The
Fondation Félix Houphouët-Boigny pour la recherche de la paix also recruited
19 former staff of the UNOCI FM radio station to progressively take over and begin
operating the Operation’s broadcasting services by 28 February.
Safety and security of personnel
53. Criminality and traffic accidents remained the main concern for staff. From
15 March 2016 to 15 January 2017, five criminal acts were perpetrated against
United Nations personnel. Sixteen cases of road accidents were registered involving
United Nations vehicles, of which none was fatal. Five United Nations vehicles
were stoned during various incidents.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
54. UNOCI continued to work towards full compliance with my zero tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and other misconduct. Preventive measures
recommended in my report on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse (A/70/729) were implemented, such as an
improvement in living conditions in barracks, the regular inspection of camps and
the strict enforcement of conduct-related directives. From 1 April to 15 January
2017, 7 category 1 and 14 category 2 allegations were reported, including
5 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse that are under investigation.

IV. Transition of the United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire
55. Together with the Government, the United Nations country team, bilateral and
multilateral partners, UNOCI mapped the international community’s support for

17-01282

13/18

S/2017/89

Côte d’Ivoire with regard to challenges remaining in key tasks t hat would continue
after its withdrawal. Six thematic technical committees were established to discuss
social cohesion; human rights and transitional justice; security sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, weapons management and civ ilian
disarmament; defence, security and law enforcement; and communications,
specifically the operation of the ONUCI FM radio station. The result was the
development of a handover plan for UNOCI signed on 17 October by all
stakeholders. In it, key residual functions and implementation partners, together
with the resource requirements necessary, are identified.
56. To support the implementation of the handover plan, the United Nations
country team developed a $50 million joint programme for peace consolidat ion in
the post-UNOCI period, which took into account the existing “One UN”
programmatic framework for Côte d’Ivoire and the new national devel opment plan
for the period 2016-2020. In addition, the United Nations country team developed
proposals for programmatic activities, which are aligned with the Operation’s
mandate and supported by assessed contributions from its 2016/17 budget. These
activities are in the areas of social cohesion and national reconciliation, community
disarmament, cross-border stabilization, security sector reform and human rights,
with a focus on sexual and gender-based violence. In parallel, options were explored
for the Peacebuilding Fund to support the transition process. Since 2015, the Fund
has provided $12 million in support of peace consolidation.
57. Further cross-border initiatives have been mainstreamed into a project on
cross-border cooperation between Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia for sustainable peace
and social cohesion, supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, UNOCI and the Unit ed
Nations Mission in Liberia, to be implemented in the southern area of the border
between the two countries. From 1 to 4 November, UNOCI hosted a mission of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and UNDP
conflict prevention experts to consider options for continued support for the
Governments concerned and the Mano River Union joint border security and
confidence-building units in the western border areas with Liberia. The mission
identified a number of challenges that continue to be faced by Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia in the border areas, including the unemployment of young people, the
marginalization of border communities, poor infrastructure, drugs, weapons and
ammunition trafficking and the illegal occupation of land. Recommen dations were
made to address them, including strengthening the capacity of the Mano River
Union. Following the departure of UNOCI, UNOWAS will continue to monitor
developments in the country within the context of its regional mandate.
58. The Ivorian National Security Council will continue the overall coordination
and monitoring of the security sector reform strategy, with the support of a
consultative group comprising national institutions and international partners. It is
also in the process of assuming activities with regard to weapons management, the
residual caseload of former combatants and linking reinsertion to reintegration.
Social cohesion and intercommunal dialogue initiatives were transferred to the
Government and the United Nations country team. UNOCI continues to transfer its
human rights monitoring, reporting and investigation activities to the National
Human Rights Commission. Technical support for the armed forces and
gendarmerie has shifted to donor partners, while that for law enforcement agencies
will be delegated to the United Nations country team and donors. A joint technical

14/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

committee has been working on the transfer of the ONUCI FM radio station to the
Government. A memorandum of understanding has been concluded and the
broadcasting studio has been set up at the Fondation Félix Houphouët-Boigny pour
la recherche de la paix, while the Government has taken charge of the 24 transmitter
sites.

V. Financial aspects
59. The General Assembly, by its resolutions 71/271, appropriated the amount of
$171.9 million for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July 2016
to 30 June 2017, inclusive of the amount $153.0 million previously authorized for
the Operation for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2016 under the terms of
the resolution of its resolution 70/272.
60. As at 4 January 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNOCI Special
Account amounted to $25.4 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to $1,801.7 million.
61. Reimbursement of troop/formed police costs has been made for the period up
to 31 October 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2016 in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations
62. Côte d’Ivoire saw the further extension of State authority and the deployment
of public services, the strengthening of democratic institutions, progress in security
sector reform and steady economic development. The peaceful, transparent and
credible presidential elections of 2015, the constitutional referendum in October and
the legislative election in December have demonstrated the maturity of the Ivorian
democratic process and the will of the people to articulate political differences
within the institutional framework. While the wounds of the past will take time to
heal, I am encouraged to see that Ivorians are progressively developing a common
sense of nation and shared national pride, which has the potential to break down
political, ethnic and religious barriers. Efforts to pursue a meaningful national
reconciliation process must continue with the full engagement of all stakeholders to
prevent violence and conflict in the future, including with the assistance of the
United Nations country team through the implementation of the handover plan (see
para. 55 above). These efforts should be support by an increased drive by the
Government to distribute national wealth more equitably for the benefit of all
Ivorians.
63. In 2016, Côte d’Ivoire peacefully adopted its new Constitution through a
popular referendum. In underscoring the ethnic, cultural and religious diversity of
Côte d’Ivoire and putting an emphasis on the importance tolerance and dialogue, the
new Constitution could serve as an instrument of reconciliation and stability. It
provides the Government with an important means of addres sing the root causes of
the past civil war, including land tenure, nationality and identity. At the same time,
continued instability triggered by issues relating to land and belonging still require

17-01282

15/18

S/2017/89

decisive action, including in achieving social cohesion. I urge the Government to
address the outstanding caseload of former combatants, while ensuring that they all
have reintegration opportunities to be able to constructively contribute to Ivorian
society. Concrete measures need to be put in place to link short -term reinsertion to
the longer-term reintegration of former combatants in order to consolidate
achievements.
64. I commend all political actors, the electoral authorities and the Ivorian
population for holding peaceful legislative elections on 18 Decembe r with no
serious security incidents reported. The resumed participation of the opposition in
them marks a promising change after years of boycott. The incoming multiparty
National Assembly has the potential to promote parliamentary cooperation. I urge
opposition leaders to continue to constructively engage in dialogue that the
President and his Government have extended to them since 2012. I am encouraged
to see that forward looking elements of the opposition have begun a serious
rethinking of their role and place in the new Ivorian reality in an attempt to break
free of the anchors holding them to the past.
65. The security situation throughout Côte d’Ivoire has improved significantly.
The Government is addressing security challenges, in particular in the west.
Notwithstanding isolated incidents, the decreasing trend in armed attacks gives
reason for optimism. The holding of the referendum and legislative election also
attests to the capacity of its security sector to provide a stable security environment.
However, the protests in January 2017 by Ivorian soldiers, who were followed by
gendarmes and other related personnel, demonstrated the remaining fragility of the
Ivorian security sector. While the Government managed to reach an agreement with
the protesters without any security incident, those protests showed an institutional
gap in terms of training and discipline within the armed forces, which remains one
of the key challenges for the security sector. There is also a continued need to
enhance the cohesion and operationalization of the security agencies, especially of
the gendarmerie and police, while improving their equipment and addressing
conditions of service. In addition, the legitimacy and accountability of security
institutions remain crucial to improving the confidence of the population, which has
yet to improve. Their transformation will require concerted efforts to implement the
military programming and internal security planning laws, as well as the law on the
organization of the armed forces. Finally, strong democratic control and oversight of
the security sector needs to be established and an increased compliance by security
providers with good governance standards ensured.
66. I remain concerned about continuing perceptions of one -sided justice and
impunity for human rights violations. In this regard, I reiterate my call that all
perpetrators of such violations, irrespective of their political affiliation, must be
held accountable. Persistent human rights violations, including sexual and gender based violence, are also deeply concerning. Urgent action is required to fight
impunity for such crimes and to ensure the protection of civilians, in particular
women and children. The development of the capacity of national institutions to
promote and protect human rights must remain a priority if peace in Côte d’Ivoire is
to be sustained. This would require the continued strengthening of the National
Human Rights Commission and raising the awareness of and training on sexual
violence and gender-based violence for law institutions and service providers. The

16/18

17-01282

S/2017/89

United Nations remains committed to promoting and protecting human rights in
Côte d’Ivoire, in close collaboration with the Government.
67. The attack in Grand-Bassam in March 2016 confirmed that no country in West
Africa is immune to the scourge of terrorism. Efforts since undertaken by the
Ivorian authorities, in close cooperation with neighbouring countries, to step up
measures to tackle the growing threat of terrorism and violent extremism in the
subregion and cross-border insecurity are encouraging and must continue. The
United Nations remains committed to helping to strengthen such regional
collaboration and support the development of comprehensive strategies for
addressing this threat.
68. The completion of the peacekeeping phase of the United Nations engagement
is a turning point for both Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations. As the Government
vigorously pursues its ambitious political and economic development agenda,
UNOCI is in the process of delegating to the United Nations country team
challenges that will remain after its withdrawal. An agreement to this effect was
signed between all stakeholders concerned on 17 October. I welcome this transition,
which will mark the most recent successful completion of a peacekeeping operation
in West Africa since the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone in 2005. However,
additional resources are required to enable the Government and/or the United
Nations country team to perform critical tasks to ensure the s ustainability of the
gains achieved. I therefore reiterate my call upon all stakeholders, in particular
bilateral partners and donors, to provide the resources needed to facilitate the
transformation of the United Nations engagement in Côte d’Ivoire.
69. In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to all past and present
civilian and military personnel of UNOCI, as well as to my Special Representative,
Aïchatou Mindaoudou, and all previous leaders of the Operation, who have made
the successful completion of UNOCI’s mandate and the Organization’s
peacekeeping presence possible. My appreciation also goes to the troop -contributing
and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and multilateral
organizations and non-governmental organizations that continue to provide
invaluable support to Côte d’Ivoire. I wish to pay special tribute to the essential role
played by the African Union and the Economic Community of West Africa States
throughout the Ivorian peace process, which facilitated the ac hievements attained by
UNOCI. The Government and people of Côte d’Ivoire deserve commendation for
their remarkable resilience and for making excellent use of the support offered by
international partners to restore peace and stability in their country.

17-01282

17/18

S/2017/89

Annex

18/18

17-01282
