UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/795
14 October 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 13 October 1997 which
I have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee
established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Attached to the letter is the fifth periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1125 (1997) of 6 August 1997. I should be grateful if you would bring the
letter and its enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

(Signed)

97-27143 (E)

151097

151097

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 13 October 1997 from the Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee addressed to the
Secretary-General
[Original:

French]

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the fifth report, covering
the period from 1 to 15 October 1997, requested by the Security Council in
paragraph 6 of resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation in the Central
African Republic.

(Signed)

General Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 3

Enclosure
[Original:

French]

Fifth report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(13 October 1997)

INTRODUCTION
1.
This is the fifth report which the Security Council requested the Member
States participating in MISAB to provide pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1125 (1997).
2.
This report describes developments in the situation in the Central African
Republic from 1 to 15 October 1997.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
3.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Amadou Toumani Touré, is the body
which directs the actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political
guidance directly from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the
President of the Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International
Mediation Committee.
4.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action which
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Bangui Agreements in the form of
a timetable, which can be outlined as follows:
-

Formation of a government of national union;

-

Adoption of an amnesty law covering those who committed offences in
the context of the third rebellion;

-

Disarmament (surrender of weapons by the former rebels in honour and
dignity, and recovery of weapons by MISAB from militias and civilian
populations);

-

Implementation of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence;

-

Situation of former heads of State;

-

Suspension of the parliamentary audit;

-

Final phase of national reconciliation through a number of actions
aimed at consolidating peace and security (organization of regional
/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 4

and sectoral awareness-raising seminars, organization of a National
Reconciliation Conference, elaboration of an electoral code, access by
political parties to the State media and other measures).
5.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BANGUI AGREEMENTS
Implementation of the amnesty act covering offences relating to the third
rebellion and the misappropriation of public funds under investigation
6.
As indicated in earlier reports, the amnesty act, which was promulgated on
15 March 1997, was implemented with a great deal of pragmatism and understanding
as regards the sanctions to be taken against citizens who might have been
illegally in possession of weapons following the 15-day deadline established by
the law. This pragmatism enabled the International Monitoring Committee to
negotiate with the former rebels and to persuade them to hand over their weapons
with honour and dignity. It also facilitated the organization and operation of
the awareness-raising and weapons recovery campaign among the civilian
population between 12 August and 3 October 1997 under the direction of the
Technical Commission on Disarmament, headed by the Minister to the Office of the
Minister for Territorial Administration, who is responsible for public security
and disarmament.
Disarmament
7.
This is, without a doubt, the most delicate phase of the national
reconciliation process. The operation has two major components which have made
it possible to carry out this operation effectively: (a) the awareness-raising
and voluntary participation phase and (b) the investigation, intervention and
implementation-of-the-law phase. The voluntary participation phase was the
preliminary period which ended on 30 September 1997 as stipulated in the
ministerial order of 5 September 1997. Its purpose was to raise the awareness
of the Central African people by a campaign conducted on the radio, television
and in the written press and also by putting up banners and posters bearing
slogans supporting peace, national unity, national reconciliation and
disarmament on the main roads of Bangui. Any patriotic citizens who turned in
their weapons of their own accord were rewarded for doing so, in order to
encourage all the other ones to return any weapons they might have had in their
possession. It should be pointed out here that this was in no way a weapons
buy-back operation.
8.
After recovery of the weapons of the former rebels, the second phase of
disarmament involved collecting weapons from civilians, militias and illegal
holders of weapons. For this purpose the International Monitoring Committee, in
agreement with the Government of the Central African Republic, recruited 10
resource staff (deputies, neighbourhood leaders, former rebels, opinion leaders)
as chairmen of local disarmament committees in their respective zones. This
/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 5

staff, following deployment to districts, established disarmament committees in
each neighbourhood. Their role was to inform the local population through
neighbourhood meetings, rallies, talks, discussions and small gatherings and
neighbourhood visits, so as to convince the population of the need to turn in
illegally held weapons.
9.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), thanks to the constantly
expressed commitment of its Resident Representative in Bangui,
Mr. Pierre Etienne Ly, established funding in the amount of 40,000 United States
dollars (using funds from project CAF/97/001) for the 10 resource staff,
dignitaries, neighbourhood leaders and opinion leaders. People voluntarily
turning in weapons or helping in their collection received a token reward. The
reward, in the amount of 2,500 to 5,000 CFA francs ($5 to $10) according to the
type of weapon, was intended primarily to exonerate civilians turning in
weapons. There were special terms for heavy weapons: CFAF 15,000 to
CFAF 75,000 ($30 to $150), depending on the type of weapon.
10. The investigations, intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase began
immediately after the first one. It involves collaborating with informers
compensated according to the quality of their information. This will make it
possible to locate any weapons caches. During this second period, which
actually began on 3 October 1997 after the head of State granted an extension,
anyone found to be illegally in possession of a weapon is to be handed over to
the authorities. In addition, MISAB will conduct searches, together with the
national defence and security forces other than the presidential security force.
11. Political parties of every persuasion signed a declaration and issued a
joint appeal to the Central African people on 30 September 1997, calling on the
people to commit themselves resolutely to the way of peace and national
reconciliation while surrendering any military weapons they might possess
illegally. This marked the first time since January 1997 that the political
parties of the presidential majority and those of the moderate and radical
opposition have managed to endorse jointly a document of such importance.
12. Since the signing of the truce agreement on 28 June 1997 and the ceasefire
agreement of 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been turned over to MISAB:

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 6

Heavy weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(29 September13 October 1997)

120 mm mortars

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 4

81 mm mortars

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 15

4

60 mm mortars

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 19

1

14.5 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

6 out of a total of 6

12.7 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 3

75 mm recoilless guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 2

73 mm anti-tank rocket
launchers

surrendered:

66 out of a total of 67

Rocket-propelled grenades

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 11

surrendered:

111 out of a total of 127

Total

(weapons recovered:

87.40 per cent)

5
3.93 per cent

Light weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(29 September13 October 1997)

Hand-guns (misc.)

surrendered:

15 out of a total of 111

4

Submachine-guns

surrendered:

297 out of a total of 459

46

Assault rifles

surrendered:

256 out of a total of 541

15

MAS 36-49/56-M14
rifles + muskets

surrendered:

650 out of a total of 1,181

45

Light machine-guns

surrendered:

52 out of a total of 80

1

.30-calibre machine-guns

surrendered:

15 out of a total of 17

2

surrendered:

1,285 out of a total of 2,389

83

Total

(weapons recovered:

53.78 per cent)

3.47 per cent

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 7

13. The relatively low rate of recovery of light weapons can be explained as
follows:
(a) These are light personal weapons that are easily transported and have
been taken out of Bangui;
(b) Some of these weapons were probably buried: efforts to dig them up
are continuing as information is provided, with varying degrees of success;
(c) Others, particularly hand-guns (automatic pistols), are easily
camouflaged and may have been sold to as yet unidentified persons;
(d) Still others may have been taken from the State arsenal during the
second rebellion (May 1996) and were never returned before the outbreak of the
third rebellion;
(e) An indeterminate number of light weapons that have not yet been found
may have been thrown into the Ubangi River or into the forest by former rebels
fleeing in June 1997 after encounters with MISAB;
(f) It should be noted that some former rebels, roughly comprising a
company (132 men) and all armed with light weapons, never returned to their
barracks. According to knowledgeable sources, many of these may have left the
Central African Republic taking their weapons with them.
14. The recovery of light weapons is thus slow, despite intensive efforts by
the neighbourhood disarmament units and the active collaboration of many upright
citizens.
15. A quantity of munitions of various types was recovered and packaged.
status of these munitions as at 13 October 1997 is set out below:

The

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 8

Designation

Quantity

Remarks

5.56 mm rounds

69 084

+468

7.5 mm SLC rounds

14 000

7.5 mm S/B rounds

117 347

7.5 mm X rounds

34 000

+12 452

7.5 mm X S/B rounds

135

7.62 mm rounds, NATO

15 962

7.62 mm Kalashnikov rounds

39 007

+25 145

7.62 mm long rounds

121 260

+763

7.62 mm Tokarev rounds

2 810

+1 910

9 mm Para rounds

5 299

+1 815

.12-calibre riot control rounds

711

12.7 mm rounds

728

+457

14.5 mm rounds

15 322

+1 130

37 fragmentation hand grenades

1 847

+97

Fragmentation hand grenades, China

2 898

+228

16

+13

RPG 7 rockets

1 131

+691

.37 stun hand grenades

1 043

+59

FL LAC F4 hand grenades

1 300

+18

GR FLG AP34

F4 hand grenades

316

Russian grenades

1

60 mm mortars

1 713

+8

81 mm mortars

834

+167

120 mm mortars

102

+45

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, US

168

+2

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, China

223

No weapons in inventory

M79 40 mm rounds, US

6 060

No weapons in inventory

Time fuses (inactive)

2 325

7.5 mm grenade cartridges
Pyro detonator

755

No rifle grenades

6 100

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 9

Munitions, various
types
Explosives and
detonators

Results of the
fourth report

Results of the
fifth report

Increase

228 758

317 138

+38.63 per cent

9 895

17 321

+75.04 per cent

A significant quantity of miscellaneous munitions, handed over loose, not
suitable for firing, will be destroyed by the competent weapons and munitions
units. An analysis will be made available in due course.
Recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence
16. It appears that quite a few of the claims made by the former rebels could
be answered by responsible implementation of the 282 recommendations made at the
General Meeting on National Defence which was held in August 1996 at Bangui.
That is why the International Monitoring Committee, true to the spirit of the
Bangui Agreements, proceeded, in April 1997, to set up an ad hoc committee to
examine the said recommendations carefully and to set up a schedule for their
implementation, breaking them down into categories according to what could be
applicable in the short, medium and long terms, based on the sensitivity of the
areas to which the recommendations relate and, above all, the financial
resources that would have to be mobilized. The results of the work of the
ad hoc committee, which was chaired by a leader of the opposition,
General Timothée Malendoma, a former prime minister, have already been
transmitted by the International Monitoring Committee to the Ministry of Defence
for implementation at the various relevant levels. Since the International
Monitoring Committee is merely a mediating body, it must leave the decisions on
these matters to the relevant Central African authorities, while remaining ready
to serve as arbitrator should the need arise.
Situation of former heads of State
17. A revised bill was submitted by the Government to the National Assembly.
Assurances were given to the International Monitoring Committee delegation by
the expanded bureau of the National Assembly at the meeting on 4 September 1997
that the bill would be considered during the first weeks of the current session
of the Assembly, which began on 1 October 1997.
Suspension of the parliamentary audit
18. The Bangui Agreements call for the suspension, then the abandonment "of the
judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit" opened in respect of persons
presumed to have misappropriated public funds under the previous regime, for it
was understood that the audit had been conducted in a very selective manner and
was creating more problems than it was resolving. The International Monitoring
Committee, respecting the spirit of the Bangui Agreements, proposed that the
Central African Republic should, by a legislative act, formally renounce
/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 10

proceedings against authors of offences identified by the parliamentary audit.
It was generally agreed that such an act would undoubtedly be taken in the
context of the next session of the National Assembly.
National reconciliation
19. Each of the points mentioned above constitutes as many phases on the road
leading towards national reconciliation. The present section therefore concerns
the final phase of this exciting process.
20. The International Monitoring Committee, supported by UNDP, is already
engaged in making preparations for awareness-raising seminars, symposia and
meetings; the first phase will take place at the provincial level and be
targeted at specific groups (such as trade unions, women's organizations and
youth movements), and the second phase will take place nationally, in the form
of a national reconciliation conference, as recommended by the Bangui
Agreements. For this purpose, the Committee is working in close cooperation
with the Minister for Human Rights, National Reconciliation and Promotion of a
Democratic Culture, who chairs the technical commission on awareness-raising
under the patronage of the Prime Minister. At the weekly meeting, held on
27 August 1997, the participants appraised the cost of each of the activities in
question and targeted potential sources of funding. In this regard, the Central
African Government, the International Monitoring Committee and UNDP are
determined to involve the backers closely in the activities scheduled to be
carried out under the process of national reconciliation.
21. A timetable of activities covering the period 1 October to 1 December 1997
(the national holiday of the Central African Republic) was prepared jointly by
the Minister for National Reconciliation, the UNDP Resident Representative and
the International Monitoring Committee. This will be useful in coordinating the
many activities to be carried out in this last phase of the process that began
with the signing of the Bangui Agreements.
22. In the context of the restructuring of the Central African Armed Forces,
the International Monitoring Committee had requested UNDP to set up a fund to
assist military personnel wishing to leave active service in returning to
civilian life, and UNDP had agreed to do so. UNDP launched a project on
demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the Central African Armed
Forces, which would enable 1,000 soldiers to return to civilian life in decent
conditions and make it possible to reduce the cost of operating the armed forces
and facilitate their restructuring. All Member States and international
organizations may make contributions to the fund in question, which will
initially be for an amount of approximately $2 million. The official signing of
the project is planned for Monday, 13 October 1997, and activities are expected
to get under way two weeks later, with the arrival of the international experts.
23. A first estimate indicates that 1,000 or more soldiers will be involved in
this project. UNDP has proposed Mr. Gustave Fernando González Gasques as head
of the project. A national of Argentina, he has solid experience in the area of
demobilization and reintegration of former soldiers into civilian life. He has
managed this type of activity in Nicaragua, Mozambique, Liberia and Angola. His
candidature has been accepted by the Central African Government.
/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 11

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
24. An important meeting was held on 30 September 1997 between the
International Monitoring Committee and the Group of 11 Opposition Parties at the
latter's request. The items included in the agenda of the meeting related
mainly to various aspects of the Bangui Agreements which have not yet been
implemented or are still pending, such as the situation of the former heads of
State, the surrender of weapons by "the ex-rebels, militias and all other
unlawfully armed individuals", the drawing up of an electoral code and other
issues of current concern. On that occasion, the Group of 11 Opposition
Political Parties reaffirmed its desire to see the Bangui Agreements "fully
implemented" and reaffirmed its support for the mediation efforts of the
International Monitoring Committee.
25. The Group of 11 Opposition Political Parties met once again with the
International Monitoring Committee on 9 October 1997 to discuss a number of
matters, the most important of which were the new electoral code, the future of
MISAB in the event of a possible withdrawal by the French Operational Assistance
Personnel (EFAO) and the social problem.
26. The new electoral code recently produced by a national commission that
included representatives of all political viewpoints has given rise to a
disagreement over the presidency of the National Electoral Commission. The
Group of Eleven has requested the International Monitoring Committee to
arbitrate in the matter. The next report will include information on the
outcome of the contacts which the Committee has had with the various parties
concerned.
27. Both the national and international press have recently given prominent
coverage to reports of the imminent withdrawal from Bouar and Bangui of the
EFAO, i.e., the French troops. This information is the subject of active
discussion in political circles in the capital of the Central African Republic,
including the Group of Eleven. Many people here believe that the withdrawal of
the EFAO based in Bangui would mean the de facto elimination of the logistical
support which France has provided to MISAB since its deployment in the Central
African Republic, and they call upon the International Monitoring Committee to
use its influence to bring about a satisfactory solution of the problem. The
great concern felt in political circles is that they will be powerless to
prevent the sudden departure of MISAB owing to a lack of logistical support.
28. In spite of a statement issued on 9 October by the spokesman for the
President of the Republic, which was intended to reassure public opinion in the
country, the matter is so serious that the National Assembly at a meeting held
on Friday, 10 October 1997, posed a parliamentary question to the Government of
Action in Defence of Democracy. The impression which emerges from the lively
discussion in the National Assembly is that the Central African political
community does not understand why it should be necessary for President Patassé
to demand the sudden withdrawal of the EFAO. The various diplomatic steps taken
parallel to the parliamentary question have helped to make a start on solving
the problem. In any event it has become clear that the logistical support of

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 12

France for MISAB will not be wanting. The consensus which has emerged between
the majority and the opposition on this issue bears mentioning.
29. At the same meeting on 9 October, the Group of Eleven drew the attention of
the International Monitoring Committee to the social problem. The Group of
Eleven fears that the strike movement which began in the public schools last
week may have a ripple effect on other sectors, since no solution has yet been
found to the dramatic problem of outstanding back wages owed to workers in the
public sector.
30. The International Monitoring Committee and MISAB were invited to
participate in a special commission, beginning on 5 October, in seeking a viable
and satisfactory solution to the transfer of the school for the children being
raised by the Army to an appropriate site with a view to settling the delicate
question of this group of young people in the Central African Republic, which is
a breeding ground for future members of the Armed Forces. It should be
mentioned that some of the children attending the school had joined the ranks of
the rebels. The school building which accommodated the children was virtually
destroyed during the rebellion and the children have since become ripe for
recruitment into a life of crime. Police reports even indicate that some of
them have fallen in with the gangsters who not long ago were riding roughshod
over the city of Bangui.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE
INTERNATIONAL MONITORING COMMITTEE
31. As indicated in paragraph 40 of the fourth report (S/1997/759, annex),
project CAF/97/001, through which UNDP contributes its logistical and technical
support, was originally to be terminated at the end of September 1997 for lack
of funds. However, the Resident Representative of UNDP in Bangui has just
notified the International Monitoring Committee that additional resources
($130,000) have been allocated by the Emergency Response Division of UNDP and
that consequently UNDP had decided to continue providing its logistical and
technical support to the International Monitoring Committee so that it could
carry out its mission until 31 December 1997.
32. The International Monitoring Committee welcomes this decision by UNDP,
which will enable it to initiate and continue its activities in the new stage it
has entered in the implementation of its plan of action:
-

Political monitoring of the pursuit of operations to disarm the former
rebels first in Bangui and later in other parts of the country;

-

Consideration of the situation of the former heads of States;

-

Abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit;

-

Coordination of activities relating to the organization and conduct of
various seminars and conferences provided for in the context of
national reconciliation;

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 13

-

Solving of problems arising in the execution of the project on
demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the Central African
armed forces.

Obviously, if, as is highly likely, the activities of the International
Monitoring Committee extend beyond 31 December, additional financial assistance
will be necessary.
33. As pointed out in paragraph 4 of this report, with a view to the systematic
and consistent implementation of the Bangui Agreements the International
Monitoring Committee drew up a kind of plan of action to be carried out
according to a timetable originally intended to cover the month of June.
Various events, in particular those of 22 and 23 March 1997, 30 April to
2 May 1997, and 20 to 24 June 1997, seriously disrupted the course of the
mediation by creating a climate of mistrust and suspicion which the Committee is
called upon to manage with respect to the political aspects and which MISAB has
become responsible for monitoring with respect to the security aspects. This
state of affairs is the main reason for the delay that is now evident in the
implementation of the other actions provided for in the timetable, all of which
are aimed at strengthening the newly restored peace and helping democracy to
become firmly rooted in the country. Undeniable progress has been made in
implementing the Bangui Agreements, but there is still a long way to go in
carrying out all the main provisions of the Agreements.
34. At this time, most of the weapons taken from the state armouries during the
third rebellion have been returned, but suspicions remain that other weapons
illegally imported by the political parties are present in the territory of the
Central African Republic. Only the International Monitoring Committee with its
neutral and impartial status can resolve the situation in order to pave the way
for the peaceful conduct of the electoral campaigns and the elections.
35. The social situation in the country remains tense. Students at the
University of Bangui have been going on strike from time to time because the
Government is six months behind in the payment of study grants. The academic
year did not begin, as scheduled, on Monday, 6 October, because teachers are
demanding the payment of back wages before they return to work. Some trade
union groups are threatening to go on strike if "nothing is done" to pay them
"six months' back wages", wages which have gone unpaid since January 1996.
36. While the mediation efforts have achieved encouraging results in the
political, military and security areas, the situation in the social sphere
remains problematical and may set everything back to square one. It is well not
to lose sight of the origin of the crisis which broke out in April 1996 with
purely corporatist demands being made. Everybody knows what happened after
that.
37. The analysis of the situation by the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB coincides with the views expressed by the population of Bangui in general
and those of the political community (across the board) in particular. Indeed
there is unanimous support for the maintenance of the International Monitoring
Committee and MISAB for a further three-month period, beyond the final date set
by the United Nations Security Council in resolution 1125 (1997). It is to be
/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 14

noted that this is also the wish of the central authorities of the Central
African Republic, namely, the President of the Republic and the Government of
Action in Defence of Democracy.
38. The International Monitoring Committee stands ready to provide, in an
impartial and neutral manner, any information and clarifications which the
Security Council or the United Nations Secretariat might wish to receive.
39. MISAB, which is deployed throughout the city of Bangui, is ensuring
security in all neighbourhoods of the Central African capital by occupying 20
surveillance posts, and is carrying out patrols nightly in each of the city's
eight districts. The activities of MISAB have been extended, with the agreement
of the parties concerned, to operations to maintain security in the various
neighbourhoods. Since the signing of the Ceasefire Agreement on 2 July 1997,
MISAB has participated, on the basis of a consensus, in joint security patrols
with approximately 120 men, consisting of MISAB personnel and Central African
security and defence forces in all districts of Bangui. Apart from the security
patrols, which have brought peace and quiet to Bangui, MISAB is the only force
to receive requests for assistance from all neighbourhoods in the city.
40. In spite of the re-establishment of peace, in order to be absolutely sure
of the situation, MISAB continues to provide security and escorts for convoys to
supply fuel, a strategic product to be delivered to all the stations of PETROCA,
the national petroleum products distribution company, from the Kolongo fuel
depot, which is located in an area previously controlled by the former rebels.
41. It should be noted that the crime rate in Bangui and the surrounding area
has continued to fall. There has been a distinct improvement in the security
situation with the deployment of MISAB. There has been a considerable
relaxation of tension, and Bangui is looking more and more like a peaceful city.
Economic and cultural life and organized sports are resuming, as are
international contacts.

LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION
42. As indicated in the previous reports, MISAB receives logistical support
from the participating States, France, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Government of the Central African Republic.

CONCLUSIONS
43. The current experience with the Central African crisis is unique and is all
the more stimulating in that it is unlike any previous experience.
44. It is fortunate that UNDP has been understanding enough to maintain its
logistical and technical support for the International Monitoring Committee so
that it may continue to fulfil its mission. The Committee pays tribute to UNDP
for its willingness to cooperate, without which the current experience would
have been only an illusion.

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 15

45. It is strongly recommended that the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements be extended for a further
two- or three-month period, beginning on 6 November 1997, the date on which the
current mandate given by the Security Council in its resolution 1125 (1997)
expires, in order to continue to ensure security and consolidate peace until the
elections are held in 1998. It would be desirable to consider, at the current
stage, changes in the size of MISAB and the possibility of giving it a new
status as a United Nations observer mission.
46. It must be pointed out that, owing to the insufficiency of the African
countries' own resources, logistical support from the international community,
along the lines of the support which France has provided to MISAB and which
remains open to contributions from all other States, is still needed. The
International Monitoring Committee and MISAB welcome the understanding of this
issue expressed by the Security Council after its consideration of the previous
reports. They hope that the appeal made to the international community by the
President of the Council will be met with action.
47. It is fitting to mention here the ways in which life in Bangui and the rest
of the country has returned to normal (or nearly so); yet one major problem
remains, namely, the failure to pay back wages, pensions and study grants, and
it is, in some ways, undermining the successes achieved so far. The result has
been to create an ugly social mood in the country. In this connection, it must
be recognized that the Government has, come what may, managed for some time now
to pay a month's wages each month, even though it is not yet in a position to
solve the sensitive issue of back pay.
48. All these factors demonstrate how difficult it is in the present
circumstances for the Central African Republic to honour both its domestic
commitments (payment of wages, pensions and student grants) and its external
obligations, in particular the arrears owed to the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. Special one-time assistance from one or another
country to pay off these arrears, which could reach more than 6 billion CFA
francs (or more than US$ 120 million) by 31 December 1997, would give a great
boost to the Treasury of the Central African Republic. And it would have a
positive effect on peace-building in the Central African Republic. In the
meantime, further efforts are needed to reform the various tax collection
agencies through the establishment of a mechanism for more rigorous oversight.
Technical assistance from abroad could effectively help the Central African
Republic to bring about significant improvements in the situation in this area.
49. Bangui has entered a new era with determination, an era marked by a gradual
rebuilding of confidence and the resumption of activities in numerous spheres,
which is a sign that peace has been restored. That peace must now be
consolidated, by taking into account all the suggestions put forward in this
report in the form of conclusions. The International Monitoring Committee, for
its part, will continue to spare no effort in urging all the parties to the
Central African crisis to work for the effective implementation of the Bangui
Agreements, as required by its mandate and as regularly called for by the
Security Council.

/...

S/1997/795
English
Page 16

50. For practical reasons, it is respectfully requested that the Security
Council authorize the International Monitoring Committee for the Bangui
Agreements to draw up periodic reports on a monthly basis, beginning in
November 1997.

-----
