S/PV.8941

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8941st meeting

Wednesday, 22 December 2021, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Abbas
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Syed
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Mark
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-41316 (E)
*2141316*

S/PV.8941

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2021/1080, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
Security Council has a critical role to play in helping to
address the suffering of the Afghan people and provide
reassurance to United Nations and non-governmental
organization implementers who are working hard to
tackle the worsening humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan.
An estimated 24 million vulnerable Afghans are facing
increasing food insecurity, in particular with the onset
of winter. This is unfortunately not a new situation for
the people of Afghanistan, but their suffering is even
more acute this year, and the humanitarian community
believes that they will require ongoing assistance.
The United States appreciates the dialogue with
Member States, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and a wide range of other
aid organizations on the importance of, and challenges
associated with, delivering critical humanitarian
assistance to the people of Afghanistan since 15 August
2021. That is a dialogue that we hope will continue.
We fully understand that some donors, aid
organizations and financial institutions are still hesitant
to deliver humanitarian assistance and undertake other
activities to meet basic human needs in Afghanistan
due to the risks associated with providing direct or
indirect benefits to United Nations-listed individuals
who now control certain ministries. They have rightly
assessed that the provision of such assistance could
run afoul of United Nations sanctions against members
of the Taliban and associated persons and entities.
2/7

22/12/2021

Through the draft resolution we have proposed today
(S/2021/1080), the Security Council can decide to exempt
humanitarian assistance to enable more life-saving aid
and other activities to meet the basic human needs
of the people of Afghanistan. Specifically, the draft
resolution provides an exemption from the Security
Council assets freeze against listed members of the
Taliban and associated entities, solely for the provision
of humanitarian assistance and other activities that
support basic human needs in Afghanistan, which the
Council will review in one year. We should be clear that
this humanitarian exception is to facilitate aid to the
people of Afghanistan, but it is not a blank check for any
organization to disregard its international obligations.
Because of the uncertainty in Afghanistan, the
draft resolution also requests the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to periodically brief the security Council
on the delivery of such assistance, including any
obstacles. Specifically, the text requests the Emergency
Relief Coordinator to brief the Council on humanitarian
assistance-related payments to designated parties,
any diversion of funds by the same and any other
obstacles to the provision of that critically important
assistance. That will be critically important as the
Council continuously assesses whether modifications
are necessary, including when the Security Council
reviews the adopted resolution next December.
We hope everyone on the Council will support
the draft resolution, and through it the people of
Afghanistan. We have done our best to take into
account the varying views expressed by members of
the security Council during the course of negotiations.
We are confident that the draft resolution will enable
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and other
assistance to meet basic human needs in Afghanistan,
where sanctions remain a critical component of the
international community’s efforts to address the
ongoing challenges to security and stability. We ask
that members vote to support it.
The President (spoke in French): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, Niger, Norway, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
21-41316

22/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2615 (2021).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of resolution
2615 (2021), which will enable the international
community to move forward with a broad range of
critical humanitarian assistance and other activities
to meet basic human needs of the Afghan people.
This carve-out covers urgently needed humanitarian
assistance and other activities that support basic human
needs in Afghanistan, such as those that primarily
benefit poor or at-risk populations, or otherwise relieve
human suffering, including activities related to shelter
and settlement assistance, food security, education,
livelihood support, energy, water, sanitation, health,
including assistance related to the coronavirus disease,
nutrition and hygiene among, others. The carve-out
for humanitarian assistance and other activities that
support basic human needs provided by the resolution
is intended to cover the activities contemplated in the
United Nations transitional engagement framework
for Afghanistan.
The resolution also includes important reporting
requirements for humanitarian assistance providers
and for periodic updates by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to be provided to the security Council. It
is essential for the Security Council to receive regular
updates on the implementation of the resolution. Such
information is critical to enabling sufficient oversight
to ensure that assistance is reaching the intended
beneficiaries by mitigating diversion. The reporting
requirements will also ensure any future adjustments
to the carve-out are based on realities on the ground.
The Security Council calls on humanitarian
assistance providers and those undertaking activities to
meet basic human needs to employ risk management
and due diligence processes and to make all reasonable
efforts to ensure that assistance is not diverted to
United Nations-listed individuals or otherwise misused
or misappropriated. The adoption of the resolution
highlights how United Nations sanctions regimes can
be flexible and adjusted to address urgent issues, such
as humanitarian crises, while remaining viable tools to
address threats to international security.

S/PV. 8941

We believe the role of the United Nations in
coordinating humanitarian operations in Afghanistan is
more critical than ever. The United States will continue
to do its part to support the Afghan people, while also
holding the Taliban accountable for following through
on its commitments.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We welcome this
morning’s adoption of resolution 2615 (2021), which
provides a much-needed and unequivocal exemption
to the sanctions imposed under the resolution 1988
(2011) Taliban sanctions regime. It provides clarity
and will facilitate and accelerate the provision of vital
life-saving and life-sustaining. humanitarian assistance
into Afghanistan.
The dire humanitarian need in Afghanistan has
been the shared focus of the Security Council for
some months. We have been repeatedly warned of the
magnitude and gravity of the humanitarian crisis by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons,
by United Nations agencies and, most importantly, by
the people of Afghanistan. They have been clear that
winter has arrived and millions are now facing acute
hunger. Women-led households have been particularly
impacted, and children are facing malnutrition
and starvation.
While the Taliban continues to bear the primary
responsibility for the conditions facing the people of
Afghanistan, the international community and the
Council had to take action in the face of one of the
world’s worst humanitarian crises. Today the Council
has stepped up and finally delivered on our obligation
to facilitate the urgent and very necessary humanitarian
response. The next step is to ensure that humanitarian
assistance, which is now required at unprecedented
levels, be delivered to every person in need. We reiterate
our call — clearly stated in the resolution — that all
actors must ensure full, safe and unhindered access to
all humanitarian workers regardless of gender.
In welcoming the adoption of this text this
morning, Ireland remains clear-eyed as to what must
yet be done. We recognize that this text could — and
should — be stronger in acknowledging and addressing
the plight of women and girls in Afghanistan. We know,
from the first-hand testimonies of Afghan women,
that they have been disproportionately affected by the
economic and humanitarian crises and face greater
barriers to obtaining food and accessing health-care
services. Their burdens and the risks they take to raise

21-413163/7

S/PV.8941

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

their voices will remain Ireland’s focus as the Council
continues to respond to the situation in Afghanistan.
I want to be clear that, in our view, the one-year
timeline for the review of the humanitarian exemption
is not intended in any way as one year of license to the
Taliban, and neither is this one year when we will not
insist that they be held to account. Their actions to date
have shown open disregard for the norms and values
we uphold, in particular in relation to human rights
and gender equality. This exemption is to immediately
provide support to the people of Afghanistan, who
are in dire need — nothing more. We will continue to
consider our next steps in the light of the ongoing needs
of the Afghan people. And we will remain vigilant in
relation to the actions, not the words, of the Taliban.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
current situation in Afghanistan is at a critical stage,
facing multiple, arduous and complex challenges. The
most urgent task is to help Afghanistan mitigate the
humanitarian crisis as soon as possible and to stabilize
and restore its economy.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China has
always been highly concerned about its well-being and
has been working actively to help the Afghan people.
We also commend and appreciate the work done by the
United Nations and the various humanitarian agencies.
China has stressed time and again that it supports the
United Nations in playing a greater coordinating role
and calls on all international partners to increase aid
to Afghanistan.
We recently learned that, due to the existing
international
sanctions,
some
international
humanitarian aid agencies are not sure if they will be
able to continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan in the new circumstances. We find such
concerns warranted, because humanitarian assistance
should have no strings attached to it and should not
be politicized in any circumstances. The sanctions
imposed by the Security Council target only certain
individuals and entities, not the Afghan people at large.
Nevertheless, as long as the appropriate actions of the
Security Council help to clarify doubts and facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan
in a timely, smooth and unfettered manner, China will
certainly consider them favourably.
However, it bares highlighting that the original
draft text deviated from the right track. Not only did
it not facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
4/7

22/12/2021

to Afghanistan, but it also added to the obstacles.
Resolution 2615 (2021) posits that of all aid activities,
only those carried out within a certain period of time
do not violate Security Council sanctions. It also sets
up an onerous reporting mechanism for humanitarian
aid agencies and incorporates many other irrelevant
provisions that may restrict economic cooperation
with Afghanistan.
We believe that any action of the Security Council
should genuinely promote and facilitate humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan, instead of setting arbitrary
restrictions and conditions. In particular, the resolution
stipulates that humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan
will not violate the relevant Security Council resolutions
only if it falls within the time limit set by the Security
Council. This is a most problematic position from the
legal, political and logical point of view.
China is convinced that humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan should stay committed to the right track
and direction. To that end, China was constructively
involved in the consultations by putting forward specific
amendments. We are very pleased that the final text
incorporates the views of the Chinese side and clarifies
some key issues. The resolution expresses appreciation
for the efforts of the international community to
provide humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people
since 15 August. It explicitly states that its intention is
to provide clarity to ensure the continued provision of
assistance in the future, that humanitarian assistance
and other activities that support basic humanitarian
needs in Afghanistan are not in violation of the sanctions
resolutions of the Council, and that all related financial
activities and the provision of goods and services
are permitted. We trust that with the adoption of the
resolution, the confusion surrounding humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan and the obstacles to its
continued delivery will be cleared up once and for all.
To borrow an analogy, the resolution only fixes
a blocked faucet, but if the pipeline is to be filled
with water, responsibility-sharing on the part of
the international community is still needed. The
United Nations appeal for humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan for next year has reached a historical high
of $4.5 billion dollars, but there is great uncertainty
about its materialization. We call on the international
community, especially major donor countries, to step
up assistance by actively providing financial support.
The countries that caused the current dilemma in
21-41316

22/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8941

Afghanistan are more obliged than others to take the
lead and assume the primary responsibilities.

people, what we need is leadership and guidance in
action rather than in words.

Moreover, compared with the humanitarian
crisis, the economic crisis facing Afghanistan is a
more fundamental problem. At present, Afghanistan’s
economy is seriously short of liquidity and on the
verge of collapse. In such circumstances, unilateral
sanctions — especially the freezing of overseas
assets — have become a bottleneck problem that cannot
be ignored. The countries concerned cannot continue
to freeze substantial Afghan overseas assets while
claiming to promote humanitarian aid to Afghanistan.
We call once again for the unfreezing of Afghanistan’s
overseas assets as soon as possible. Those assets should
be returned to their real owners and cannot be used as a
bargaining chip for threat or coercion.

Mr. Tirumurti (India): India supported the adoption
of resolution 2615 (2021) to grant exemption from
sanctions for humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan,
and I would like to submit our explanation of vote.

Humanitarian assistance should be used only to
address urgent needs, whereas helping Afghanistan
to revitalize its economy and development is the
fundamental solution. The international community
should maintain contact and actively guide the
Afghan Taliban, help the interim Afghan Government
structures to maintain the normal operation of its
agencies, maintain security and stability, and promote
economic and social recovery and reconstruction. In the
face of fundamental changes in Afghanistan’s domestic
situation, the Council should seriously reconsider the
existing sanctions regime against the Afghan Taliban
so as to prevent any negative impact on Afghanistan’s
economic and social development.
As a friendly neighbour and sincere friend of
Afghanistan, China has been providing support,
within its capacities, for Afghanistan’s peaceful
reconstruction and economic development. China’s
assistance in terms of food, livelihoods, medical care
and other overwintering materials and coronavirus
disease vaccines is being continuously transported
to Afghanistan. Furthermore, China has effectively
helped the Afghan people by expanding bilateral trade.
Over the past two months, thousands of tons of Afghan
pine nuts have been marketed to China through a pine
nut air corridor, generating more than $16 million
for the Afghan people. Going forward, China will
continue to promote the export of Afghan agricultural
products, such as saffron, to China and play a greater
role in helping Afghanistan’s economic reconstruction
through concrete action.
With respect to advancing peace and development
in Afghanistan and providing assistance to the Afghan

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
dire. We have seen reports that suggest that over half
the population is facing crisis or emergency levels
of acute food insecurity. Humanitarian assistance is
required urgently to meet the basic food needs of the
people, and most of the country is falling below the
poverty threshold. The winter is already upon us. It is
important that assistance be scaled up urgently and that
unhindered access be provided to the United Nations
and other agencies.
In that context, India has supported the call of the
international community that access to humanitarian
assistance for Afghanistan should be direct and without
any hindrance. Humanitarian assistance should be
based on the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
independence. The aid should be accessible to all and
must be distributed in a non-discriminatory manner,
irrespective of ethnicity, religion or political belief. In
particular, assistance should reach the most vulnerable
first, including women, children and minorities. The
Council should also oversee its delivery and guard
against the diversion of funds. That is essential since
any diversion or misuse can be counterproductive. In
that regard, we welcome the provision in the resolution
that calls for a review of the implementation of the
humanitarian carve-out after one year.
Over the past two decades, India has contributed
significantly to the development of Afghanistan. We
recently airlifted half a million doses of vaccines and
1.6 metric tons of life-saving medicines. We are also
in the process of sending more medicines and food
grains. India is ready to deliver urgent humanitarian
aid — consisting of food grains and medicines — to
the people of Afghanistan. We remain steadfast in our
commitment to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people of Afghanistan. We call on the international
community and the countries of the region to come
together and rise above partisan interests. As the largest
regional development partner of Afghanistan, India is
willing to coordinate with other stakeholders to work
towards enabling the expeditious provision of muchneeded assistance to the people of Afghanistan.

21-413165/7

S/PV.8941

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

While the situation of Afghanistan is in flux, the
expectations of the international community vis-à-vis
the country were set out clearly in resolution 2593
(2021), which lays down the requirement in terms of the
fight against terrorism, where it notes the commitment
of the Taliban not to allow the use of Afghan soil for
terrorism, including from terrorists and terrorist groups,
as designated under resolution 1267 (1999). It also set
forth the expectations of the international community
with regard to an inclusive and representative political
set-up, with the participation of diverse political and
ethnic groups in the country, and the importance of
upholding human rights, including those of women,
children and minorities. Going forward, even as we
cater to the immediate humanitarian needs of the people
of Afghanistan, our approach to Afghanistan will be
guided by the commitments expected from resolution
2593 (2021) and our long-standing friendship with the
people of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): France voted
in favour of resolution 2615 (2021) because it seeks to
respond to the needs of the Afghan population, which
are immense. We are doing our part in the humanitarian
response for Afghanistan, pledging €100 million at the
Geneva Conference on Afghanistan. We will continue
to be mobilized on the humanitarian front.
But the Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that humanitarian assistance will be delivered
to all those in need in accordance with humanitarian
principles and without any diversion towards the Taliban.
We must also ensure that the Taliban will guarantee the
security of humanitarian assistance and uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including with regard
to women and girls.
The idea is not to restrict or condition humanitarian
assistance, but rather to be sensible in the light of
decades of armed combat and Taliban collusion with
Al-Qaida. The Taliban must show their readiness to
meet the expectations of the Security Council under
resolution 2593 (2021). We cannot let them profit from
the suffering of the people of Afghanistan.
That is why we believe that it was a mistake to
remove the time limit for humanitarian exemptions
in the text negotiated in full transparency among
the members of the Security Council. We regret that
important modifications such as these, on a subject
under consideration for several weeks, were made
at the last minute by the United States without any
6/7

22/12/2021

consultation, and they were then presented as a cosmetic
change. The provision for review of the resolution one
year after adoption is critical, and the Security Council
should review its decision on the basis of the situation
on the ground.
Lastly, I want to clarify that this humanitarian
exemption excludes development activities and covers
only humanitarian assistance and other activities
to meet basic human needs. The Taliban, who bear
the responsibility for exacerbating the humanitarian
situation and elevating the risk of economic collapse,
should not benefit from direct financial support.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
2615 (2021), on providing humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan in the context of the sanctions regime of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011).
We note that agreeing on this resolution was
not an easy process. In the course of working on the
text, we were guided by a single goal — to help the
Afghan people to receive immediate humanitarian
assistance, which is essential to preventing disaster
in the country. Our premise was that the text of the
document should be brief, but its contents should be
pithy. Most important — and this is ultimately spelled
out in the resolution — providing humanitarian
assistance is not a violation of the 1988 sanctions
regime. Humanitarian agents and donors can continue
to provide assistance without fearing restrictions, and
humanitarian assistance can flow through all channels
to Afghanistan. For us, that was obvious even before.
However, even a shadow of a doubt could have led to
limiting the volume of assistance and to additional
suffering for the people of Afghanistan.
We expect that the adopted resolution will make
it possible to significantly increase the volume of
humanitarian assistance, with the participation of the
United Nations humanitarian agencies, donors and
regional organizations, as well as on a bilateral level.
That assistance must be provided to Afghans quickly
and without any kind of precondition. We are glad that
the new authorities understand the importance of this
work and have demonstrated their readiness to cooperate
in order to provide assistance more expeditiously to all
those in need, especially women and children, who find
themselves literally on the brink.
21-41316

22/12/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We are convinced that, in the long term, without
unfreezing Afghanistan’s assets, it will not be able to
overcome the current crisis. For the past 20 years, the
country has been completely dependent on international
financial assistance and was ultimately unable to get
back on its feet. Doctors, teachers and other workers
need money. Banks too need money. Lack of liquidity
in banks has led to a paralysis of the economy.
We call on the United States and other Western
donors to return funds to Afghanistan. Any further
delay risks additional destabilization, more victims,
an increase in migration terrorist activity and drug
production. The Russian Federation continues to
support the people of Afghanistan — not through
words alone, but also through actions. In the current
reporting period, we sent our second aircraft with
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. A third is
being readied. At the same time, we understand that
humanitarian aid should not be used by those linked
to terrorists or by terrorist groups themselves, as
designated in the sanctions list of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): Estonia welcomes
the adoption today of resolution 2615 (2021), on
Afghanistan. We firmly believe that it is the obligation
of the Security Council to respond to the needs of the
people of Afghanistan, which are increasingly grave
and urgent, and the requests of the humanitarian
community that is active there.
By adopting this resolution, the Council has
emphasized its expectation that the Taliban will respect
and uphold the norms and standards of international
law, including international human rights law, and
constitutional protections for the rights of all persons in
Afghanistan, particularly women, girls and minorities.
The Council has stressed that the accrual of any benefits
to individuals or entities designated by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), whether as a result of direct provision or
diversion, must be avoided. The mechanisms therein
are established just for that — to guarantee that any
exemptions would not benefit those under sanctions
but would instead help aid reach those most in need,
namely, the Afghan people.
Estonia’s elected membership and penholdership
in the Council is ending shortly. However, our long-

S/PV. 8941

term priority of supporting the people of Afghanistan
will continue also after our duties in the Council have
ended.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of today’s
resolution, which creates a humanitarian exception
to enable the delivery of desperately needed aid into
Afghanistan (resolution 2615 (2021)).
Afghanistan is facing the world’s largest foodsecurity crisis. Over 20 million people, half the
population, are in need of urgent assistance. Donors
and the public have responded generously. The United
Kingdom has doubled aid for Afghanistan this financial
year to £286 million. We welcome the global effort
to finance the United Nations flash appeal and, most
recently, the decision by members of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation to step up their efforts.
At the same time, we have a shared responsibility
to put in place the means to deliver aid efficiently and
effectively where it is most needed. This resolution will
help save lives by ensuring that the sanctions regime
established under resolution 1988 (2011) poses no
obstacle to the provision of humanitarian assistance
and other activities that support basic human needs
in Afghanistan. This directly responds to what the
humanitarian community told us they needed.
We must ensure that the Council continues to
strike a balance between enabling life-saving aid
and minimizing the risk of accrual of any benefits to
individuals or entities designated on the 1988 sanctions
list. The Security Council will review after a year.
We welcome the assurances given by the Taliban
to allow humanitarian access and their commitment not
to tax aid. That is vital to ensure as many Afghans as
possible are able to benefit from assistance, including
the most vulnerable, such as women, girls and members
of minorities.
Finally, I want to pay tribute to all those across the
United Nations family, including the United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator and his team, the Special
Representative of the Secretary General and her team
and the countless humanitarian actors in Afghanistan
and outside for all that they are doing to scale up the
response. I would like to express our solidarity with the
Afghan people at this time of extreme hardship.
The meeting rose at 9.45 a.m.

21-413167/7
