V.

37/213.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Conversion of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization into a specialized
agency

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Constitution of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, 128
Noting that the Constitution has been ratified, accepted
or approved by more than the minimum number of States
whose agreement is required for its entry into force,
Recalling paragraph 4 of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1982/66 A of 30 July 1982, concerning arrangements for consultations leading to the notifications foreseen
in paragraph 1 of article 25 of the Constitution,
Appreciating the efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation in organizing informal preliminary
consultations,
1. Recommends that consultations to determine the date
of entry into force of the Constitution of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization should be organized
in three stages among States that have ratified, accepted or
approved that Constitution and other interested States, as
follows:
(a) A one-day procedural meeting in New York in January 1983 to determine the date of substantive meetings and
to give interested delegations an opportunity for a preliminary discussion of the agenda and other organizational matters relating thereto;
(b) A series of consultations at Vienna, leading to a
formal meeting not exceeding one week, if possible immediately following the seventeenth session of the Industrial
Development Board, during the first half of I 983, to discuss
all relevant substantive questions;
(c) A one-day closing meeting in New York to receive
the conclusions of the substantive meetings and to execute
individual notifications to the Secretary-General of agreement for the entry into force of the Constitution of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary conference services for the meetings in New York
and Vienna, and resources from voluntary contributions, to
the extent possible, and extrabudgetary resources, as appropriate, to cover the travel costs of one representative of
each of the least developed countries participating in the
meetings at Vienna.
113th plenary meeting
20 December 1982

37/214.

Economic Commission for Africa: regional
programming, operations, restructuring and
decentralization issues

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975, by which, inter alia, the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Restructuring of the Economic and Social Sectors of the
12•

A/CONF.90/19.

143

United Nations System was established for the purpose of
preparing detailed action proposals with a view to initiating
the process of restructuring the United Nations system so
as to make it more fully capable of dealing with problems
of international economic co-operation and development in
a comprehensive and effective manner, and to make it more
responsive to the objectives of the provisions of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, as well as those
of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolutions 32/197 of 20 December
1977, 33/202 of 29 January 1979 and 34/206 of 19 December 1979 on the restructuring of the economic and social
sectors of the United Nations system, which process was
affirmed as an integral part of the efforts for ensuring the
equitable, full and effective participation of the developing
countries in the formulation and application of all decisions
within the United Nations system in the field of development
and international economic co-operation and by which process specific, additional tasks were assigned to the regional
commissions, including the task of being the main general
economic and social development centres for their respective regions, providing team leadership and responsibility
for co-ordination and co-operation at the regional level and
acting as executing agencies,
Mindful of the terms of reference of the Economic Commission for Africa, 129 in which it is stated, inter alia, that
the Commission shall participate in measures for facilitating
concerted action for the economic development of Africa,
including its social aspects, with a view to raising the level
of economic activity and levels of living in Africa, and shall
assist in the formulation and development of co-ordinated
policies as a basis for practical action in promoting economic
and technological development in the region,
Mindful, in particular, of the importance attached by the
Economic Commission for Africa to economic co-operation
among member States, particularly at the subregional level,
and to the various resolutions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity in this regard, culminating in the Lagos Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy
for the Economic Development of Africa 130 and the Final
Act of Lagos, 131
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
entitled "Economic Commission for Africa: regional programming, operations, restructuring and decentralization issues" , 132 the comments of the Secretary-General thereon rn
and the views of the Economic and Social Council at its
second regular session of 1982, 134
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/63 of 30 July 1982 on regional programming, operations, restructuring and decentralization issues with respect
to the Economic Commission for Africa;
2. Welcomes the recommendations made by the Joint
Inspection Unit in its report 135 and approves the comments
of the Secretary-General thereon;
3. Calls upon the Secretary-General:
(a) To investigate new approaches to regional and
subregional programming and management of the intercountry projects of the United Nations system, working
closely with the organizations of the system;
12• F✓CN.14/111/Rev.8.
110

A/S-11/ 14, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.
A/37/119.
133
A/37/119/Add. l.
114 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/37/3), chap. IV, sect. A.
"'See A/37/119, chap. VI.
131

132
