S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6049th meeting
Thursday, 18 December 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skračić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kenes
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Ballestero
Mr. Kassianides
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. De Vengoechea
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Laher
Ms. Fawcett
Ms. Schedlbauer
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-66031 (E)

*0866031*

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I
representative of Cuba.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of the 118 member States of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
The situation of instability in the Middle East as a
result of Israel’s ongoing military occupation of the
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories since
1967. It continues to be a matter of serious concern not
only for the region but for the entire international
community.
Since last year the situation has been further
exacerbated by Israel’s continued pursuit of illegal
policies and practices, including incessant military
attacks against Palestinian civilians and properties,
continuing construction of settlements and the Wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and continued imposition of all forms of
inhumane and unlawful measures of collective
punishment on the Palestinian civilian population,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. The Syrian Golan is still
occupied, and the situation in Lebanon remains
complex.
The Non-Aligned Movement has repeatedly
called on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and exercise its authority, in
accordance with the Charter, to address the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, where the
Palestinian people have continuously suffered under
Israel’s brutal military occupation of their land since
1967 and where their fundamental human rights,
including the right to self-determination and the right
of the Palestine refugees to return, have been denied
since 1948.
NAM is very much aware of the great negative
impact of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the ArabIsraeli conflict on peace and security. Thus, bearing in
mind Security Council resolution 1850 (2008), adopted
just two days ago, NAM calls upon the Council to
actively follow up and implement this resolution and
reiterates its call for the implementation of all of the
Council’s relevant resolutions, which would contribute
greatly to the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

2

The Movement emphasizes that the primary
impediment to the exercise of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people and to the achievement
of the two-State solution for peace continues to be
Israel’s campaign of unlawful settlements. That
campaign has included the vast confiscation of land,
the construction and expansion of settlements, the
transfer of settlers, the construction of the Wall, the
construction of bypass roads that only Israelis may use
and the imposition of a permit regime and other severe
restrictions on movement in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
NAM reiterates its strong condemnation of all
illegal Israeli settlement activities and measures,
including in and around occupied East Jerusalem and
in the Jordan Valley, which are aimed at illegal de facto
annexation of more Palestinian land. NAM calls for the
immediate, complete cessation of all such illegal acts
and for Israel’s compliance with all of its obligations
under international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions and full respect for its commitments in this
regard in the context of the peace process.
In this connection, NAM also expresses its great
concern at the rising incidence of acts of violence,
harassment and intimidation by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians, their properties and agricultural
land, and calls on the occupying Power to take all
necessary measures to put an end to settler violence
and lawlessness and to hold the perpetrators of crimes
against Palestinian civilians accountable for their
actions.
The deplorable recent events in Hebron — where
extremist Israeli settlers set fire to Palestinian homes
and orchards, shot at Palestinian civilians and
desecrated Palestinian mosques and graves — illustrate
the real danger of the illegal presence of Israeli settlers
in the occupied Palestinian territory and their
destructive impact on the prospects for achieving
peace, security and stability.
NAM also condemns Israel’s continuing unlawful
construction of the Wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, in
flagrant challenge to and disrespect of the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and in
violation of the General Assembly resolution ES-l0/15
of 20 July 2004, which affirms the illegal character of
the construction of the Separation Wall and called for
its cessation and dismantlement.

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is
deeply concerned by the huge physical, economic and
social devastation caused by such illegal and
destructive Israeli colonization practices, which are
dividing the occupied Palestinian territory into
separate, walled-in enclaves and isolating East
Jerusalem from the rest of the territory, completely
undermining the unity, integrity and contiguity of the
Palestinian territory. They are destroying entire
communities, displacing thousands of Palestinian
civilians and isolating tens of thousands more
Palestinians in isolated cantons. NAM reiterates its
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, scrupulously
comply with its obligations as reflected in the Advisory
Opinion and with Assembly resolution ES-10/15.
In flagrant violation of international law, and
despite commitments made in the context of the
Middle East peace process and agreements reached
therein, and in total contradiction to the spirit and goals
of this renewed peace process, Israeli has actually
escalated such illegal activities recently, seeking to
advance its attempts to alter the demographic
composition, character and status of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
impose an illegal unilateral solution.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
submitted two letters to the President of the Security
Council, urging the Council to seriously address this
critical issue, including through the adoption of a
resolution. Regrettably, once again, the Council failed
to act, despite the firm position it had adopted in
previous resolutions on the issue of illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory. It remains unable
to implement its own resolutions.
NAM reiterates its condemnation of all of Israel’s
illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and stresses the
dangers of such continuing illegal and unilateral Israeli
measures. The international community, including the
Security Council, should undertake the necessary
actions to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to abide
by international law and to immediately and
completely stop all settlements and the construction,
expansion and planning of the Wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
At the same time, NAM remains gravely
concerned by the appalling humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza Strip as a result of Israel’s punitive blockade of

08-66031

the area in collective punishment of the Palestinian
civilian population. The occupying Power continues its
closure of all border crossings of the Gaza Strip,
obstructing the movement of persons and goods,
including the delivery of vital humanitarian assistance
such as food, medicines, fuel and other basic materials,
which all remain in short supply. Israel even continues
to hamper the work of the United Nations agencies that
are trying to provide desperately needed aid to the
Palestinian people, who are facing rising poverty,
hunger and disease as a result of this cruel siege.
Such illegal Israeli measures must be vigorously
condemned. The international community must act to
bring an end to this siege of the Gaza Strip to allow for
the free movement of persons and goods in order to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis being endured by the
Palestinian people. In addition, the international
community must insist that the occupying Power abide
by all its obligations under international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, with regard to the
Palestinian civilian population under its occupation.
The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation on its territory
following Israel’s ruthless aggression and serious
violations against the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon. The Non-Aligned Movement
once again expresses its satisfaction at the measures
taken by the Lebanese Government to implement
resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement also welcomes
the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces along
the northern and eastern borders of Lebanon to ensure
security and stability there.
NAM remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
continuing land and air violations of the Blue Line, in
contravention of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly
urge Israel to put an end to the occupation of the
northern part of Ghajar, on the northern side of the
Blue Line, and to immediately refrain from any
violation of Lebanese sovereignty or of resolution 1701
(2006) and from any provocation of the Lebanese
Armed Forces or the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.
The Movement demands the prompt settlement of
the issue of the Shaba’a farms with full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated in resolution
1701 (2006). We urge all parties to cooperate in
protecting Lebanon’s sovereign rights in that area, and

3

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

we note the important efforts of the Secretary-General
in that regard.
The Movement is fully aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its attack on
that country. The Movement once again condemns
Israel’s use of such weapons and deplores the resulting
death toll. NAM strongly urges Israel to provide the
exact locations of those deadly weapons as well as
maps of the landmines planted during its occupation of
southern Lebanon.
The Movement congratulates the people and the
leaders of Lebanon and totally supports the Agreement
reached in Doha on 21 May 2008. In that connection,
the Movement welcomes the election of the new
President of the Republic, the establishment of a
national unity cabinet and the adoption of the electoral
law. Likewise, the Movement welcomes the convening
of two sessions of the national dialogue on ways to
strengthen the State’s authority over all its territories in
order to guarantee the sovereignty and security of the
State and the people of Lebanon. The Movement also
welcomes the agreement banning the use of weapons
and violence as a way to settle disputes.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms once again
that all measures and actions taken or to be taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic character and institutional structure
of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israel’s
measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and without any legal effect.
We also reaffirm that all such measures and actions,
including the illegal construction and expansion of
Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967,
clearly violate international law; international
agreements; the Charter and relevant decisions of the
United Nations, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981); and the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949, and pose a challenge to the
international community.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns the recent
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Syrian
Golan. The Movement demands that Israel abide by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.

4

The members of the Non-Aligned Movement
condemn the act of aggression committed by forces of
the United States of America in Iraq against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 26 October 2008 and express its
deep concern over the negative consequences of that
action for peace, security and stability in the Middle
East.
NAM expresses its great concern at the scant
progress made in the peace process despite its
re-establishment following the Annapolis conference in
November 2007, the resumption of direct bilateral
negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian sides,
and the tremendous efforts to promote the Arab Peace
Initiative. While negotiations and meetings continue
between the two parties, the process continues to be
directly obstructed and undermined by Israel’s
continued implementation of illegal policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and by its disrespect for the
commitments it has undertaken in the peace process.
NAM urges all parties involved, including the
Security Council and the Quartet, to make the efforts
necessary to promote the peace process and thus
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515
(2003), the principle of land for peace and the
implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map.
Finally, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
support for the Middle East peace process and hopes
that the current efforts will finally bring an end to the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 — the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian
Golan — and the achievement of the two-State
solution. The Movement reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to finding a just and peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to ensuring that the
Palestinian people exercise their inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and
sovereignty in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): The objective set at
Annapolis — to reach an Israeli-Palestinian peace
treaty by the end of this year — appears unlikely to be

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

achieved. Yet, we should welcome the parties’
determination to continue the negotiations. Permanent
peace can be achieved only through direct and
intensive negotiations.
It is with that thought in mind that Turkey
welcomes Security Council resolution 1850 (2008), as
it underlines the irreversibility of the Annapolis
process and the significance of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The resolution also recommits the parties to
their previously agreed obligations. That, we believe, is
of particular importance, since the situation on the
ground will have a direct impact on the success of the
process.
In order to maintain the momentum in the
Israeli-Palestinian track at this critical juncture, neither
party should take any action that might undermine the
peace process and prejudice the final-status
negotiations. In that respect, the Israeli settlement
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem must
end. The construction of the separation wall must be
stopped. The daily difficulties experienced by
Palestinians at checkpoints and roadblocks must be
eased. Immediate steps must be taken to halt the rapid
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
The Palestinian people should be able to feel that
what the future has in store for them is a better,
brighter and dignified life. The Palestinian people
should also be able to put an end to their internal
divisions. For their part, the Israeli people should be
able to feel secure and confident about a stable and
peaceful future, free from threats. Thus, the security
concerns of Israel must be addressed.
We all know that the problems of the region are
interlinked. Therefore what is needed is a
comprehensive peace. It is with that understanding that
we welcome the proximity talks between Israel and
Syria and the establishment of diplomatic relations
between Lebanon and Syria, as well as the tangible
developments in Lebanon in the implementation of
Doha Agreement. We believe that the people of
Lebanon will further promote and carry forward the
recent positive developments in their country. We also
hope and expect the resumption of the indirect talks
between Israel and Syria after the elections in Israel.
We agree with the Nobel Prize laureate,
Mr. Ahtisaari, that “All conflicts can be settled, and
there are no excuses for allowing them to be eternal”. A
permanent and comprehensive peace in the Middle

08-66031

East is indeed long overdue and should be within
reach.
With that belief, Turkey will continue to work for
a comprehensive peace based on a two-State settlement
and to contribute to the stability, security and
prosperity of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening the
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
insightful briefing. It is timely, as the Security Council
has just adopted resolution 1850 (2008). We fully
associate ourselves with the resolution, as it contains
essential elements for realizing a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. We also
appreciate the efforts by the Quartet.
I would like to reiterate Japan’s strong support for
and commitment to the Middle East peace process and
its support towards the realization of the two-State
solution. While difficult challenges for the Middle East
peace process remain, we believe that the
developments since the Annapolis conference are
noteworthy. There have been regular interactions at the
highest level between the parties, indicating the
seriousness of their commitment to the process.
We believe that a comprehensive agreement for
the two-State solution is essential for stability and
prosperity in the Middle East, and it must address all
the core issues such as permanent borders, Jerusalem,
security arrangements, refugees and water resources.
Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
through negotiations between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, based on the principle of land for peace,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the agreements
reached by the parties.
We also support Palestinian unity under the
leadership of President Abbas through the national
dialogue, which Egypt has made great efforts to
promote.
It is equally important to create in the region an
environment conducive for the peace process to
continue without pause. We therefore recognize the
significance of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
constructive role of each State in the Middle East. We

5

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

also appreciate the efforts towards the indirect peace
talks between Israel and Syria under the auspices of
Turkey. We hope that the positive progress shown on
all of those fronts will soon culminate in a
comprehensive peace in the region.
There have been some improvements in the
security situation such areas as Jenin and Nablus. This
demonstrates the benefits of cooperation between
Israeli and Palestinian authorities and reinforces the
credibility of the Palestinian Authority under the
leadership of President Abbas.
We believe the achievements to date will serve as
a solid foundation for the peace process going into next
year. Japan stands ready to make every effort to
support the process.
Signs of progress notwithstanding, we are deeply
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
conditions on the ground, especially in the Gaza Strip.
The shortage of basic supplies and the restrictions on
movement are having an adverse impact on the
livelihood of ordinary people. Clearly, tangible
improvements in the daily lives of the Palestinian
people are essential in order to maintain the momentum
of the peace process. To that end, we urge the Israeli
authorities to lift the blockade and allow the movement
and access of the Palestinian people.
At the same time, we must address the issue of
rockets and mortars being fired against the Israeli
people from Gaza. We call upon Hamas and others to
stop any violence and respect the safety of the Israeli
people. Japan calls for extending the current ceasefire
with an immediate cessation of violence. Also, in order
to facilitate the peace process, freezing the settlement
activities by the Israelis must be enforced in
accordance with phase I of the Road Map. The recent
violent acts by the settlers in Hebron revealed a
considerable degree of vulnerability in the West Bank.
We believe that the rule of law must be respected,
and we commend the commitment by the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to strengthen their cooperation
in that regard. It is of paramount importance to secure
a safe environment for both the Israeli and Palestinian
people in which they can live without fear or despair.
Japan is equally committed to support economic
development in the Middle East, which is essential to
enable the Palestinian people to build a viable and
sustainable economy. Japan has promoted the initiative

6

called “Corridor for Peace and Prosperity” in order to
build an agro-industrial park in the Jordan Valley and
to provide job opportunities and facilitate export to the
surrounding areas. The project relies on regional
cooperation among Israel, the Palestinian Authority,
Jordan and Japan.
Moreover, Japan hosted the Fourth Conference
for Confidence-Building between the Israelis and the
Palestinians in October. The two sides were headed,
respectively, by Mr. Meir Sheetrit, Minister of the
Interior of Israel, and Mr. Sa’eb Erekat, Head of the
Negotiations Affairs Department of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. The objective of the
Conference was to deepen understanding and build
mutual confidence between the two sides.
Japan has provided over $1 billion in aid to the
Palestinian people since the Oslo Accords and stands
ready to provide more assistance, in accordance with
its pledge of $150 million made at the Paris
Conference in 2007. We hope that our efforts will
contribute to bringing about the long-awaited peace in
the region.
Briefly, Japan welcomes the recent positive
developments in Lebanon and stresses the importance
of the continuous commitment to Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) by both Israel and Lebanon. We
call upon the parties concerned to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, as
called for in resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
In closing, I would like to emphasize that it is
ultimately the responsibility of the parties themselves
to achieve peace. The success of the negotiations
depends on their efforts. No one else can assume that
responsibility. At the same time, the international
community can help to ease the situation, allowing the
parties to concentrate on their efforts to achieve peace.
Japan expects the leaders in the region to
continue the negotiations with unfailing determination.
Japan, for its part, will continue to play the role of a
responsible and active partner to help realize peace in
the region. We look forward to participating in the
many efforts of the international community, including
the Moscow Conference next year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): We welcome the
convening of this open debate under your presidency,

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

Sir, on the situation in the Middle East, which affords
an opportunity to Member States to share their
perspectives with the Security Council on this
important matter.
Comprehensive peace in the Middle East and a
just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the core issue of
Palestine is a long-held common objective of the
international community, supported by the Council. Yet
the achievement of that goal remains elusive,
frustrating our collective efforts and desire for peace
on the one hand, and perpetuating the cycle of
injustice, violence and instability on the other. The
consequences of that failure will be disastrous — in the
first instance for the oppressed populations of the
occupied territories and, beyond that, for regional and
international peace and security. A sincere and
concerted effort is required to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further and to advance a genuine
process aimed at resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict
comprehensively and peacefully.
It was in that context that the peace process
relaunched at the Annapolis conference in November
last year had engendered great hope and legitimate
expectations. It is, however, regrettable that there has
been no appreciable progress in the negotiations. On
the other hand, the situation on the ground in the
occupied territories has become further aggravated,
largely because of Israel’s policies and actions.
The
international
community
is
rightly
disappointed and concerned over these developments.
As we approach the end of 2008, the goal of a peace
treaty, instead of materializing, has only once again
been postponed. Thus, we can understand the general
feeling among Member States that resolution 1850
(2008) adopted by the Security Council the day before
yesterday does not do full justice to the gravity of the
situation and should have embodied a relatively
stronger and clearer message from this Council. But
more important than that is the fact that international
pressure was such that the Council could not afford to
keep quiet at this critical juncture.
Despite its shortcomings, the resolution is
important in the sense that it keeps alive the hope for a
peaceful
settlement,
building
upon
previous
agreements and obligations. But the international
community must now ensure that its commitment for
peace in the Middle East is consolidated and translated
into concrete results, addressing all core issues during

08-66031

the course of the next year. Pakistan would like to
underline a few points that, in our view, are essential
for this process to succeed.
First, the time has come for the Security Council
to exercise its responsibility for peace and security in
the Middle East, for which there could be no better
way than to implement its own resolutions and
decisions. Business as usual has become unsustainable.
Greater political will, especially on the part of
permanent members, is required to achieve real
progress.
Second, the Quartet must also utilize its full
potential in support of the peace process through a
transparent and objective engagement, bringing the
parties together and mobilizing the international
community’s moral, diplomatic, political and economic
backing of the peace efforts.
Third, in the context of the regional approach, the
Security Council and the Quartet need to engage more
seriously with the League of Arab States, which for its
part has demonstrated a determined, constructive and
dynamic approach for achieving comprehensive peace
in the region, particularly through the Arab Peace
Initiative. Likewise, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, which has an historic interest in the
peaceful resolution of the question of Palestine, may be
a key partner for peace efforts in the Middle East.
Fourth, the framework for peace has already been
determined in the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the Madrid terms of
reference, the Road Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the understandings reached at Annapolis, which flow
from that framework. There can be no deviation or
modification in that basic mandate for the peace
process.
Fifth, to achieve a lasting settlement of the ArabIsraeli conflict, it is imperative to address its root
cause — the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories.
The solution therefore requires Israel’s complete
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan. We would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our call for parallel
progress on the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel tracks
in order to achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

7

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

Sixth, the impediments for peace should be
recognized objectively and removed effectively. The
one-year period since Annapolis has proved once again
that negotiations can only succeed in an enabling
environment of mutual trust and confidence and positive
developments on the ground. That requires urgent and
credible actions by all sides and various fronts, from
security and political issues to capacity-building,
humanitarian and socio-economic development aspects
aimed at improving the daily lives of the Palestinian
people.
As stipulated in resolution 1850 (2008), the
parties must fulfil their respective obligations under the
Road Map and refrain from any steps that could
undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of
negotiations. Israel must stop its military campaigns in
the occupied territories, which continue to cause
considerable and injuries and loss of innocent life,
including among Palestinian women and children.
The firing of rockets into Israel, which does not
serve the Palestinian cause, must also stop. We reiterate
that the killing of all civilians or any civilians is
unacceptable. All sides are called upon to shun
violence and respect their respective obligations under
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
Particular responsibility lies with the occupying
Power, both in Palestine and in Kashmir. In order to
demonstrate its credibility and desire for peace, such
Powers must seriously reconsider their policies and
unilateral actions, which in this case are imperilling the
lives of a besieged Palestinian people as well as the
peace process and do not serve Israel’s own security
concerns. Israel must shun the use of force, put an end
to human rights violations, discrimination, social and
economic strangulation and collective punishment of
the Palestinian people, immediately halt the
construction of the illegal separation wall, stop its
colonization campaign of settlement and demolish
outposts, as promised at Annapolis, and remove the
blockade of the Gaza Strip. Israel must cease the policy
of forcibly establishing facts on the ground, fracturing
Palestinian society, changing its demographic structure
and fragmenting the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem — all actions that jeopardize
the negotiations and the process of a viable and
contiguous State of Palestine.

8

Seventh, the international community must
support the efforts aimed at achieving inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, which is a must for credible and
comprehensive peace. We urge our Palestinian brothers
to put aside their differences and pool all their energies
in the pursuit of peace.
Pakistan remains deeply concerned by the
protracted suffering and dispossession of the
Palestinian people. It is high time for this human
tragedy, inflicted and aggravated by decades of
occupation, to be brought to an early end. We therefore
reiterate the call for a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace based on international law, and full
implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and agreements and obligations of the
parties. Pakistan will remain steadfast in extending its
full support for the achievement of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to exercise selfdetermination and sovereignty in the independent and
viable State of Palestine, on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a
just resolution of the Palestinian refugees issue, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 11 December 1948. That is a cherished objective,
the realization of which the Security Council and the
entire international community must devote full and
sustained attention and all the resources at their
disposal. Success demands nothing less.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Allow me to greet you, Mr. President,
and the other distinguished members of the Security
Council, most respectfully, and thank you for the work
you have done throughout this year.
The Permanent Mission of the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United
Nations recognizes the importance of the debate that
we have been having in recent months to resolve
various conflicts and maintain peace. In particular, we
would emphasize that, on 16 December 2008, the
Security Council considered resolution 1850 (2008),
submitted by the United States and the Russian
Federation, by which a series of measures aimed at
achieving peace in the Middle East, especially in
Palestine, were agreed. That made it possible, after
four and a half years, to adopt a resolution to facilitate

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

the way for direct negotiations between the parties that
could lead to just and lasting peace.
We welcome the appeal for the establishment of a
Palestinian State and for all States and international
organizations to contribute to the optimal functioning
of the Palestinian Government and to strengthening the
development of its economy. But we also believe that
the implementation of the resolution must not be
exclusive or limited, as mentioned by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine. On the contrary, in order to
ensure lasting peace, there must be acceptance of and
legitimacy for all the political, economic, social and
cultural aspects of which it is comprised.
The Palestinian people are a martyred people who
have suffered greatly from genocide, persecution and
the violation of human rights. That is why we stress
our full support for the communiqué on the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, adopted by the Coordinating Bureau of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on 20 November
2008, which was forwarded to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations on 24 November in document
S/2008/735.
The communiqué condemns Israel’s ongoing
violations of international law and the human rights of
the Palestinian people, which severely threaten the
territorial, cultural and social integrity of the
Palestinian people and the socio-economic conditions
of their nation, and represent an ongoing attack on their
right to life. It calls for an immediate withdrawal of the
occupying Power, the removal of border controls and a
halt to Israel’s settlement activities on Palestinian
territory and its illegal practices, which are often
fomented from outside to maintain the momentum of a
war that is ultimately very lucrative for arms traders
and manufacturers.
There are those in Israel who promote peace and
support a prudent and negotiated solution. In some
intellectual, political and academic circles in Israel,
there is no doubt that there will be a Palestinian State
and that an exchange of territory will create relatively
few problems. However, despite those positive
elements, there must be greater resolve and more
determination within the United Nations bodies to
generate that critical mass that sooner or later will lead
to real peace.
Gaza continues to suffer from Israel’s disregard
for human rights and has become a humanitarian

08-66031

emergency that must be treated as such. That is a
situation that humankind can no longer ignore. The
excessive and disproportionate Israeli military action
are of such a scale that, we reiterate, mankind can no
longer tolerate. Negation of the other seems to be the
hallmark of their policy. Here, we must recall the
statements by Richard Falk, Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, who has denounced the Israeli
blockade on Gaza as a flagrant, ongoing and
substantial violation of international humanitarian law,
and described the situation as a humanitarian
catastrophe and the policies implemented as a crime
against humanity, accusing those who continue to
provide political and economic support to Israel of
being Israel’s accomplices. Indeed, that civil servant
was detained by Israel in contravention of the norms of
respect owed to those working towards a negotiated
peace.
We had thought that the horrors perpetrated at
Sabra and Shatila on 14 September 1982 were behind
us. That event led to a greater loss of lives than the
terrible events of 11 September 2001 here in the United
States, which was described by the General Assembly
as genocide. Yet, we note with concern that the policies
that led to that barbarity remain the same.
When the Security Council called on
16 December for strengthening international peace
negotiations so as to achieve a definitive peace treaty
between Israel and Palestine, we hoped that that desire
would become a reality. We continue to believe that
peace needs to be sought by both peoples. However,
we also deeply believe that we urgently need to stop
the ongoing aggression against the Government and
people of Palestine, without undermining their
legitimate and noble aspirations to build a State and a
stable economy as soon as possible, and to live a life of
dignity. Above all, however, we must not allow those
who have committed crimes of genocide to go
unpunished, which is the only way to heal the wounds.
For the Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, silence is an option neither with respect
to the Palestinian cause and the Middle East nor with
respect to the causes of the peoples of the world. That
has been affirmed by President Hugo Chávez Frías in
all international forums. That is why, from this
Chamber, we send a brotherly message of hope and
solidarity to the Palestinian people. We truly hope that

9

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

they will achieve lasting peace in the region, which
will undoubtedly also benefit the Israeli people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank my neighbour to the
right, Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, a region
that is at a critical moment on its way to finding a just
and lasting solution.
This meeting is taking place two days after the
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1850
(2008) on the situation in the Middle East — the first
substantial resolution since May 2004. Thus, we can
only welcome the action of the Council and the joint
American-Russian initiative, which, we hope, will help
to give the Annapolis process new momentum and
safeguard its achievements.
Through the resolution, the Council has
reaffirmed its responsibility for and commitment to the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiation process. It has also
recalled the need for the implementation of the Road
Map by the two parties, while acknowledging the
significant effort of the Arab world through its 2002
Peace Initiative.
Although it does not address some important
aspects, the resolution had, and has, the advantage of
reaffirming the core issues in solving the situation in
the Middle East, namely and above all the
irreversibility of negotiation. That principle entails
renouncing all military solutions and a commitment to
negotiate not just for the sake of negotiation but to do
so with the aim of achieving the desired result, while
adopting the appropriate attitude to ensure the success
of the negotiations. In that context, the sealing off of
Palestinian territory, the ongoing pursuit of the
settlements policy and the cutting off of energy
supplies are all incompatible with the spirit of
negotiation.
The second fundamental principle entails the duty
of the parties to fully honour their obligations under
the Road Map and to refrain from any actions that
might compromise negotiations or undermine the
confidence that should prevail between the parties.
Although Israel’s release of 250 prisoners is
encouraging, the targeted assassinations and impeding

10

of access to humanitarian assistance and the free
movement of Palestinians between Gaza and the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territories deviates from the
requisite atmosphere of confidence and further worsens
the sense of frustration among Palestinians, who are
the innocent victims.
The third fundamental principle pertains to the
call on the international community to contribute to the
establishment
of
environment
conducive
to
negotiations and to support the Palestinian
Government. Those two elements are crucial to the
success of peace efforts. States with special relations
with the parties or that can have a positive influence on
them are therefore called upon to encourage and
nurture the negotiating process. In that regard, the
members of the Quartet have a key role in eventually
providing decisive momentum to the negotiations. We
hope to see that momentum in 2009, ensuring that there
are tangible results on the ground for the Palestinian
people, who are the ones most affected by the ongoing
occupation. At the same time, it is absolutely necessary
for there to be inter-Palestinian reconciliation.
Everything must be done to ensure that as soon as
possible.
The fourth, and last, basic principle entails the
finalizing of a negotiated peace treaty. The call to
continue negotiations and to establish appropriate
conditions to conclude them is aimed at achieving a
peace treaty to resolve all issues, including the most
delicate and decisive. In that regard, the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative continues to be important, meaningful
and relevant as a courageous, balanced and forwardlooking effort to which Israel is called upon to respond
with the same sense of courage and determination.
For its part, the Kingdom of Morocco, whose
King Mohammed VI holds the chairmanship of the AlQuds Committee, remains ready to make its
contribution to the success of negotiations to achieve
genuine peace in the Middle East, ensure Israel’s
withdrawal from Arab territories occupied since 1967
and establish a viable Palestinian State with East
Jerusalem as its capital and living side by side with
Israel.
We hope that the affirmation in resolution 1850
(2008) stating that the Security Council remains seized
of the issue of the Middle East is not merely a matter
of rhetoric but instead the expression of the Council’s
genuine willingness to assist in the negotiating process,

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

remain engaged in following developments, assessing
results and, if necessary, act to inject new momentum.
It is high time that the peoples of region regain peace
and security, that a viable Palestinian State finally
emerges, that the Golan is reintegrated with Syria and
that the entire region once again becomes a land where
all religions coexist and where there is fruitful
cooperation among all peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): For years we have heard
warnings of the imminent collapse of the Palestinian
economy. While the socio-economic situation remains
dire, there have been some positive developments.
Support from donors has increased. Negotiations
between the parties continue. The Palestinian Authority
is implementing key projects. But beyond those
achievements, it is hard to see even the outlines of a
sustainable Palestinian economy, unless Israel delivers
on its promises to lift restrictions.
Economic growth is key to political progress. The
international donor community has spent years
supporting
Palestinian
institution-building
and
promoting accountability. Actions such as Israel’s
recent restrictions on money transfers to Palestinian
banks in the Gaza Strip undermine Palestinian
institutions. If the Palestinian Authority is unable to
pay salaries, it will lose popular support. With
restrictions on money transfers, the United Nations is
unable to pay its staff and disburse emergency support.
Such restrictions undermine legitimate institutions,
bolster the black market economy and embolden
radical organizations.
Settlement activity continues to increase in the
West Bank. Israel’s 2007 census shows that the settler
population increased from 130,000 in 1995 to more
than 270,000 today. Israel deserves recognition for the
evacuation of an unlawfully occupied house in Hebron
two weeks ago, but we remain deeply concerned about
the emerging pattern of destruction of Palestinian
houses and evictions of Palestinian families. Those
actions are contrary to international law and prejudice
the outcome of future negotiations.
Israeli settlements and closures have evolved into
a coherent infrastructure throughout the occupied
territories. That infrastructure strangles the Palestinian
economy, undermines Palestinian institutions and
prevents the development of a Palestinian State.

08-66031

Settlements and closures have become a fundamental
threat to the vision of two States.
We have seen dangerous fragmentation on the
Palestinian side. Militant Palestinians continue to
undercut bilateral negotiations by indiscriminately
aiming their violence at Israeli civilians. Negotiations
may come to naught unless they are supported by
Palestinian unity. Support for renewed reconciliation
efforts is urgently needed, along with an effective
ceasefire in and around the Gaza Strip.
We are faced today by political uncertainty on
many fronts. Decisive action by key stakeholders is
needed to support ongoing negotiations. As donors we
need to remind ourselves of the connection between
financial support and political results. We must join our
efforts to support the peace process. Fragmentation
among donors will only harm the prospects for peace.
We welcome the recent adoption of resolution
1850 (2008), which, in paragraph 4, calls on donors “to
assist in the development of the Palestinian economy,
to maximize the resources available to the Palestinian
Authority, and to contribute to the Palestinian
institution-building programme in preparation for
statehood”.
The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee remains the key
instrument for mobilizing and coordinating donor
support, working in tandem with the Annapolis
process. We have succeeded in mobilizing today’s high
levels of contributions to the Palestinian Authority
under the able leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas
and Prime Minister Salam Fayyad. The Committee’s
meeting in September of this year confirmed the
renewed commitment of all parties — Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and donors — to support the
creation of a Palestinian State. The willingness of
donors to continue to support the process depends upon
whether the parties achieve results. But the opportunity
is there and momentum must be consolidated to
achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict and the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all, I
would like to thank Mr. Serry for his informative
briefing. I think we all owe thanks and respect to the
members of the Secretariat, who do such important
work on this issue. I would also like to thank you,

11

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak today on
this very important issue. It might seem trite to refer to
this as an important issue, but it is important to all of
us, wherever we live, including in Australia. We spoke
at some length on this in the General Assembly, so I
will be brief today.
As a firm friend of Israel and of the Palestinian
people, Australia shares the vision of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace,
security and security. We welcome the statement of the
Middle East Quartet of 15 December 2008, reiterating
its support for the ongoing negotiations through the
Annapolis process. We were encouraged by the
commitment of the parties to the Quartet on
9 November 2008 at Sharm el-Sheikh to “vigorous,
ongoing and continuous negotiations”, and of course to
implementing their respective obligations under the
Road Map for peace.
The progress made at Annapolis must not be lost.
That is why it is important that, irrespective of the
composition of the leadership in Israel or the
Palestinian Authority, this progress must continue, and
they must expedite bilateral negotiations and of course
abide by their obligations under the Road Map.
Australia is deeply concerned by the
humanitarian situation in Gaza, which we referenced a
few weeks ago during Israel’s recent appearance at the
Human Rights Council in the context of the Universal
Periodic Review process. We are very much concerned
by the resumption of violence and indiscriminate
attacks against Israel, which we have condemned. We
strongly support the Quartet’s call for the Egyptianbrokered ceasefire to be respected and extended.
Australia echoes the Quartet’s call for humanitarian
supplies into Gaza to be assured continuously.
Like all right-thinking nations, Australia supports
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace between Israel and its neighbours, consistent
with the Security Council’s resolutions, including its
most recent resolution on the subject, resolution 1850
(2008). We welcome renewed interest in the Saudisponsored Arab Peace Initiative as a possible basis for
further discussions, and hope that progress can be
made on the Israel-Syria track.
Peace will be achieved only with the support of
the international community. Of course, it is the
parties’ principals who will have to make peace, but we
have a deep and serious responsibility to support that

12

process. Both the Israelis and the Palestinians have
asked us to support their efforts by promoting an
environment conducive to peace, non-violence and the
two-State solution. The Quartet has similarly called on
all of us to provide diplomatic and political support
and to assist in building the institutions necessary for a
future Palestinian State.
Australia is committed to providing that support
and we stand ready to assist in any way we can.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): First, allow me to
congratulate Croatia on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the first time and thank you, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to address the Council in this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East.
It is distressing, in the year of the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, to witness the dire humanitarian and human
rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
and to see that the self-determination of the
Palestinians has not yet been realized and that the
occupation has intensified.
While we await results from the continuing
negotiations, changes must take place on the ground.
This includes the lifting of the access restrictions on
the Gaza Strip and the closure regime established in the
West Bank, which puts severe restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the Palestinians and also
affects every aspect of their lives, including their
property rights and their right to education, health and
employment. This also includes the cessation of all
settlement expansion and of the creation of other such
stumbling blocks on the ground that are contrary to
international law and make it more difficult to realize a
two-State solution.
On the Palestinian side, the clashes between
Hamas and Fatah must end. There must also be a total
cessation of rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip, which
mainly target civilians and create terror among the
Israeli population. We urge both Hamas and Israel to
maintain the ceasefire and avoid a resumption of
hostilities.
As a strong supporter of resolution 1325 (2000),
Iceland believes in the importance of women’s
participation in peace processes. I would like to draw
the attention of the Council to the International

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

Women’s Commission for a Just and Sustainable
Palestinian-Israeli Peace (IWC), a tripartite body
involving Israelis, Palestinians and prominent
international women leaders with experience in
diplomacy and political negotiations. The IWC
operates under the chairmanship of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women. The main parties in the
peace processes would benefit not only from the
substantive input that the IWC could give to the
process, but also from the effective working methods
the members of IWC have developed to reach
agreements among themselves on the major issues.
The importance that women have given to the
role that a just and sustainable two-State solution could
play in the process cannot be overstated. The solidarity
among women across the lines of conflict can offer
inspiration and hope for their societies as a whole.
A just and peaceful resolution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is essential to peace and security
throughout the region and worldwide. The main role of
the Security Council is the maintenance of
international peace and security. Accordingly, Council
members have a responsibility to do their utmost to
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Resolution 1850 (2008), adopted by the Council
on 16 December, provides for the continuation of
bilateral negotiations. We welcome the Council’s
resolution. However, the lack of progress in these
negotiations, in parallel with a deteriorating
humanitarian and human rights situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, demands changes in
approach to the negotiations.
In this regard, I call attention to the remarks made
by the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari,
during the recent Nobel Prize ceremony in Oslo, where
he called for the Quartet and the international
community as a whole to accord high priority and a
serious commitment to this most challenging
peacebuilding project ahead of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by extending our thanks to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate at such a critical
juncture. The situation on the ground, particularly in
the Gaza Strip, has reached a disastrous point and the
people living there are subject to untold Israeli crimes

08-66031

and are enduring a humanitarian catastrophe
unprecedented in the past several decades.
In the past several weeks, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories has further deteriorated
as a result of the continued illegal Israeli policies and
practices. Military attacks against Palestinian civilians
and property, the demolition of homes and other
property, targeted killings, the unlawful construction
and expansion of settlements, colonization measures,
the transfer of settlers, the imposition of a permit
regime and of other severe restrictions on movement in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and the
construction of the unlawful apartheid wall are a few
examples of the criminal Israeli activities that have
continued unabated and have even accelerated.
Moreover, all forms of inhumane and unlawful
measures are imposed on the Palestinian civilian
population, particularly in the Gaza Strip.
Israeli settlers’ heinous violence, terrorism,
harassment and racist acts against Palestinian civilians,
their properties and agricultural land have increased.
The recent shocking and condemnable events in
Al-Khalil, where extremist Israeli settlers set fire to
Palestinian homes and orchards and killed Palestinian
civilians in cold blood, display a pre-planned campaign
of terror and intimidation in order to make life there
even more miserable for the innocent Palestinian
civilians.
The world community is today witnessing the
unprecedented tragic situation that the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip are facing as a result of the
atrocious crimes of the Israeli regime. The
international community is witnessing the perpetration
by the Israeli regime of some of the most horrendous
crimes ever committed against innocent people in the
history of mankind. More than 1.5 million people in
the Gaza Strip are starved, massacred and subjected to
collective punishment. They are deprived of the most
basic goods, medical supplies and services that are
necessary to keep them alive.
The Israeli regime has turned a deaf ear to
numerous calls by the international community and is
practically eliminating a whole population before the
eyes of the world community in a criminal move that
has been termed a crime against humanity by United
Nations human rights officials.
For the founders of the United Nations it would
have been certainly impossible, a few decades ago, to

13

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

imagine that in the twenty-first century a whole
population would be subject to such horrendous crimes
against humanity and starved to death by a criminal
regime while the Security Council remained idle. But it
is unfortunately happening now. It is long overdue for
the United Nations and the Security Council to take
urgent and meaningful action in order to counter these
atrocities and war crimes against the Palestinian people
and to help alleviate the suffering and pain of the
people in the Gaza Strip.
Silence on the part of the international
community is not an option, nor is it justifiable.
Hundreds of thousands of people, including women
and children, are looking to the United Nations and the
international community at large in anguish and
disillusionment while constantly subject to the threats,
intimidation and abhorrent crimes of the Israeli regime.
We should not leave them alone. The Security Council
must live up to its responsibility and move quickly to
protect the innocent civilians facing collective
punishment in the Gaza Strip.
The Israeli regime continues its brutal occupation
of, and unlawful acts in, the occupied Syrian Golan,
too. It also continues to occupy parts of Lebanese
territories and persists in its daily violation of
Lebanese airspace, in blatant breach of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). There are other
showcases of the Israeli regime’s contempt for the
Council and for its decisions, and they should be
addressed in a serious manner.
Undoubtedly, inaction on the part of the Security
Council, which is in turn due to the unqualified support
extended by a permanent member of the Council to the
Israeli regime, has emboldened that regime in its war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The Israeli regime
not only continues its abhorrent crimes against the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and other parts of
the occupied Palestinian territories with full impunity,
but it also persists in its intimidation and harassment of
United Nations agencies and human rights officials and
in its vicious threats against the nations who show
sympathy to the innocent Palestinian people. The
unconditional support extended to the Israeli regime by
a permanent member of the Council cannot but be
regarded as explicit support for the war crimes and
unlawful activities persistently pursued by the Israeli
regime.

14

I wish to conclude by rejecting the baseless
allegations that the representative of the Israeli regime
made in her statement against my country. Needless to
say, it was another example of that regime’s futile
efforts to divert attention from its own State terrorism
and atrocities in the region by engaging in smear
campaigns against others. It was also unacceptable to
hear the delegation of Croatia, in its national capacity,
making certain unwarranted references to my country.
That is, in our view, irresponsible, since those
references, which amount to baseless allegations and
are rejected, have been made on the basis of some
distortions fabricated by the Israeli regime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, for your wise
leadership of the Council during the month of
December, and I thank you for convening this monthly
meeting on an issue that continues to be among the
most important issues before the Security Council.
Being one of the oldest threats to international peace
and security, it must remain under close scrutiny by the
Council. I also wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry for the
briefing that he gave to the Council.
Allow me, at the outset, to associate myself with
the statement made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We have invited the Council numerous times to
assume its responsibility in the ongoing crisis in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and to
give it the attention it deserves in order to preserve the
Council’s credibility and to find a solution to this issue.
Indeed, two days ago, the Council adopted resolution
1850 (2008), which is its first on the Palestinian
question in the past five years.
The Council’s adoption of a resolution to move
the stagnant peace process forward is undoubtedly a
commendable act, which, in principle, we welcome.
But, unfortunately, it is in principle only because the
resolution suffers from substantial shortcomings, as it
overlooks and ignores the obstacles that compromise
the chances of achieving a comprehensive and
sustainable peace in the region, most notably the issue
of Israel’s illegal settlements in the occupied Arab
territories and its consequent violations of international
law and of the human rights of the Palestinian people.

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

Our repeated calls to the Council to deal with the
ongoing crisis in the Middle East, with a view to
reaching a comprehensive settlement that includes all
aspects of the problem, do not reflect our view alone;
rather, they reflect the view of the Council. This was
stressed in the presidential statement issued on
12 December 2008 (S/PRST/2008/46), on the occasion
of the adoption of a resolution to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
Accordingly, we wonder why the substance of that
statement was not reflected in resolution 1850 (2008).
That, understandably, caused the resolution not to be
adopted unanimously.
My understanding is that the Council agrees with
me that the achievement of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East, along with the
securing of a sustainable solution to the Palestinian
issue based on two States living side by side in peace
and security, is our common objective, without
exception. We all seek a lasting solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict. We all seek to solve the outstanding
issues, including core issues such as Jerusalem,
refugees, borders, security, settlements and water.
When we talk about the two-State solution, it is
necessary to stress the need that the Palestinian State
must enjoy full sovereignty and must be contiguous
and viable, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
However, the illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied Arab territories and the construction of the
apartheid Wall in those territories constitute an obstacle
to the establishment of a Palestinian State. The Israeli
authorities’ insistence on building illegal settlements in
defiance of the United Nations resolutions and despite
the international consensus on the illegality of those
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
undermines the chances for peace and constitutes a
severe setback for the Annapolis process, which is the
latest of several initiatives that have not been accepted
by the Israeli side. It is therefore imperative for the
Security Council to reaffirm its resolution 1850 (2008)
by adopting the Arab draft resolution on Israeli
settlements, which is before the Council in blue.
Among the serious challenges to international
peace and security are the terrorist acts perpetrated by
Israeli settlers against defenceless Palestinian civilians,
such as in the occupied Palestinian city of Hebron,
where extremist settlers are hammering away against
the Palestinian population while the Israel authorities
sit by passively, doing nothing to stop them. As an

08-66031

occupying Power, Israel is blatantly violating
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. This finding was
confirmed recently by Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, in his
condemnation of these heinous acts. There is no doubt
that the impunity enjoyed by the Israeli settlers
encourages them to persist in terrorism.
This Council should be able to persuade Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories, to cease its
continued violations of Lebanese airspace, and to abide
by its obligations under the Road Map and pursuant to
the international legitimacy represented by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
One serious obstacle to realizing comprehensive
peace in the occupied Palestinian territory is Israel’s
continued policy of aggression, siege and starvation of
the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, which is a
serious violation of all laws, agreements, principles
and ethics. The blockade threatens the lives of Gaza’s
inhabitants and has claimed hundreds of victims,
including dozens of children who died because of
power shortages and the lack of essential medicines
and drugs. The Israeli authorities have not stopped at
these disgraceful acts; they have gone even further by
preventing humanitarian relief from reaching the Gaza
Strip, such as the Libyan ship Al-Marwa and a ship that
sailed from Jaffa loaded with humanitarian relief and
gifts on the occasion of Eid al-Adha, among others.
Mr. Richard Falk, the Special Rapporteur on Human
Rights, described the Palestinians as “a civilian
population being collectively punished by policies that
amount to a crime against humanity”, and said that “it
would seem mandatory for the International Criminal
Court to investigate the situation and determine
whether the Israeli civilian leaders and military
commanders responsible for the Gaza siege should be
indicted”. He added that Israel allows “barely enough
food to stave off mass famine and disease”, leaving the
Palestinians in a “desperate plight”. Can this be the
behaviour of a civilized society?
It is incumbent on the Security Council to
demonstrate the seriousness of resolution 1850 (2008).
The Council is also responsible for following up on the
implementation of that resolution.

15

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

The President: I shall now give the floor to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I am sure that, given the efficient manner in
which you are discharging your responsibilities, the
work of the Council will be carried out successfully.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to your
talented predecessor, Ambassador Jorge Urbina,
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica, for the
exemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council during the month of November.
I convey my warmest greetings to Mr. Robert
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and I congratulate him on his outstanding
briefing to the Council this morning.
I am grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
the other members of the Council, for having given me
the opportunity to participate in this important debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
The Committee remains resolutely in favour of
political
negotiations
towards
establishing
a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. It commends the adoption of resolution 1850
(2008) on 16 December, in which this Council declared
its support for the negotiations launched at Annapolis,
called on both parties to fulfil their obligations under
the Road Map and to refrain from all actions that
would prejudice the outcome of negotiations, and
invited the international community to contribute to the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to
negotiations. The irreversibility of the process must
absolutely be preserved.
While our Committee strongly supports the
continuation of negotiations, we cannot, however,
ignore the significant gap between the political process
and the deplorable situation on the ground. The
Committee is extremely concerned by renewed
violence in the Gaza Strip and the dire humanitarian
situation in the area. The civilian population is

16

paralysed by a blockade imposed by the occupying
Power. Our Committee unequivocally condemns the
violence being perpetrated by both parties and claiming
victims among the innocent civilian population, be it
on the part of Israeli military operations or the result of
rocket fire from Gaza. At the same time, the
Committee considers it totally unacceptable and unjust
that the entire civilian population of the Gaza Strip be
subjected to collective punishment and a paralysing
blockade as a result of the actions of small militant
groups.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip has
severely deteriorated in the past months. The residents
of Gaza urgently need access to basic commodities
such as fuel and food supplies. Medical facilities have
stopped functioning due to a lack of electricity and
basic materials. Building materials are urgently needed
to repair homes and schools that have been bombed.
Some humanitarian aid has been allowed into the Gaza
Strip in recent days, but not enough to meet the needs
of the population. Today, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
announced that it had suspended its food distribution to
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip after it ran out of
supplies.
We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to
immediately lift the siege on the Gaza Strip and to
allow humanitarian agencies to enter to help alleviate
the appalling living conditions of its residents. Israel
should immediately halt military operations and the
excessive use of force in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, and act within the ambit of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We call on both sides to urgently cease all
acts of violence, exercise utmost restraint and allow
calm to prevail.
The Committee is also deeply concerned over
recent settler violence, particularly in the West Bank
city of Hebron. We condemn attacks by Israeli settlers
on Palestinian civilians and the destruction of property.
We remind Israel of its responsibility, as an occupying
Power, to protect Palestinian civilians, property and
holy sites. Israel also needs to urgently halt settlement
activity, fulfilling its obligations under the Road Map.
The international community, including my
Committee, is doing its utmost to create a climate
conducive to the conduct of permanent settlement
negotiations. The Committee stresses the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations towards the

08-66031

S/PV.6049 (Resumption 1)

question of Palestine until it is resolved in all its
aspects in accordance with international law. We urge
all parties concerned to move the peace process
forward towards a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the establishment of a sovereign and
viable Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967
borders. A settlement should be based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), and on the Arab
Peace Initiative, including the acceptance of Israel as a
neighbour living in peace and security in the context of
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): I do not want to take up
any more of the Council’s precious time. I think we
had a long debate and that most of us shared the
message of hope and progress in the peace process, yet
I must refer to the statement by the representative of
Iran.
Again, his statement demonstrates the challenges
before us posed by radical forces in the region, led by
the Islamic forces of Iran, who consistently try to
obstruct any progress towards peace. I think that every
statement today conveyed a message of hope, but that
made by the representative of Iran was in total
contradiction of that message.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Serry
to respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Serry: It has indeed been a long day, so I
will be brief.
First of all, let me thank all those delegations that
have expressed appreciation to me and to the
Secretary-General for our work and contributions to
the various aspects of the peace process. I have
listened, of course, with close attention to this debate
and I must say that I, too, return this evening to
Jerusalem with a feeling that it has largely been very
constructive. I should like in particular to welcome the
contributions made by the representatives of Palestine

08-66031

and Israel. I think that this is the spirit that we should
take with us into the new year.
In my own statement, I also highlighted the fact
that, with the prospects created by the important new
resolution 1850 (2008), in the uncertain period ahead
we have to make sure that we are able to continue this
process with great vigour in the coming year. I
highlighted in particular one issue that, I think, has
been highlighted in almost all the contributions to
today’s debate — the difficult situation in Gaza. Again,
I appreciate the many expressions of strong support
that I have heard around this table for the urgent appeal
I have been making in the Council on behalf of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the calm to be
respected and extended. In the meantime, if one has
followed today’s events, one knows why that is
important, because we have heard from the press in
Gaza statements that call the extension of the calm into
question.
Let me make one thing very clear: The return of
full-scale violence to the Gaza Strip cannot be in the
interests of the Palestinian people. The rocket attacks
on Israel and the crossings must stop and all acts of
violence must cease, including Israeli incursions and
air strikes.
We had an important Quartet meeting on Monday,
calling for the continuous provision of humanitarian
supplies to the people of Gaza. In fact, what we have
now is international unity behind efforts to secure the
reopening of crossings and an easing of the
unacceptable suffering of the Palestinian people, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. The
Secretary-General has personally led those efforts.
Again, those efforts will be placed in serious jeopardy
if the calm is not respected, so we will need the help of
all Council members to make that happen in the time to
come.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

17
