UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR
: ,,i”. I( 17’1 ‘,
;,I/,>
‘, .;,l1 ‘,

th
MEETING:

15 JANUARY

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

PNge
1
agenda (S/Agenda/ 1874) . . . . , , . . , , . . . . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . +, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . .

I

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question..

1

. .. .. ., ,... ...

S/PV. 1874

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sl~pplen~t~s of the Official Rewrcis of the Secutity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~so1ution.v ctntl
Dwisicms of’ tlze Scwrity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolulions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1874th MEETING

President:

(United

Held in New York on Thursday,

15 January 1976, at 3.30 p.m.

Mr. Salim A. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

The first speaker is the representative of Kuwait. In
accordance with the established practice, I request
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
withdraw temporarily from the Council table in order
that his place may be taken by the representative of
Kuwait. I now invite that representative to take that
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Reptiblic,
Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
I.

agenda (S/Agenda/1874)

Adoption

of the agenda

2. The Middle
question

East problem

Adoption

including

the Palestinian

of the agenda

The Middle East problem including
Palestinian question

the

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at previous meetings
[/870th-1873ui
meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania,
Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab
Emirates and Yugoslavia, in conformity with the usual
practice and with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and the provisional rules of procedure, to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote. In accordance with the decision taken by the Council [1870th
rwcting],
I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
to participate
in the discussion.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question on the agenda.

3. Mr. BISHARA
(Kuwait): And so, after three
decades, we are still at square one with regard to the
question of the rights of the Palestinians. More than
eight years have elapsed since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). Let me say, in all
fairness, that rarely, if ever, has such a resolution
triggered so much publicity, despite its considerable
ambiguity. Needless to say, some find a shelter in that
ambiguity to consolidate their expansionist designs,
while others have made it a corner-stone of their
foreign policy on the Middle East. Events have
already proved that resolution 242 (1967) is not only
ambiguous but seriously defective. Its major defect is
its inability to address itself fundamentally
to the
question of the, people of Palestine. And because of
that defect the proverbial resolution 242 (1967) has
become obsolete and ineffective. In our view, it is like
the pyramids of Egypt-it is often quoted despite the
fact that it is soulless and useless and has attraction
only for tourists.
4. Resolution 242 (1967) departed from the crux of the
conflict of the Middle East. The occupation by Israel
of Arab territories is a derivative, a branch, but the
tragedy of, the people of Palestine is its pith and
marrow, It is the gist of the whole problem. Other
issues are consequences, branches or offshoots, but
not the roots. That is why we view the often quoted
yet crippled resolution 242 (1967) with justified ambivalence. Events have proved that we are not mistaken
in our attitude towards that resolution, in which some
Members of the United Nations found the antidote
or the cure, if you 1ike;needed to remedy the situation.
Arab territories occupied since 1967 can be regained
either through action under Chapter VII of the Charter
or, if the Council fails to act, they can ultimately be
liberated by force. They constitute a problem, but not
an insurmountable type of problem.
S. The crucial issue is the right of the people of
Palestine to self-determination
and independence.
This valiant, vibrant and indestructible people, whose
will to survive has not been eroded by the misery of
refugee camps, is not different from any other nation

that has achieved national status within the international community. Its land was robbed by alien settlers, its property confiscated by foreign immigrants
and its elementary and primordial
right to selfdetermination,
sovereignty and independence in its
homeland denied by a conglomeration
of foreign
Powers and insidious Zionist adventurers. In 1948,
the majority of the people of Palestine found itself
consigned to refugee camps whose condition was at
best bleak, at worst subhuman. Israel and its supporters
mistakenly thought that the consignment of the Palestinians to the camps of hopelessness would crush their
spirit of resistance and force them to abandon their
inalienable right to repatriation
and sovereignty in
their own homeland. They banked on time and its
power to erode the will of the Palestinians and turn
them into servile, submissive creatures. They proved
to be wrong. Israel knows, and we know, that it
cannot escape Scot-free with its spoils and pillage
from Arabs and within Arab territories. Hardly has
any nation suffered more deeply, yet emerged stronger
and more tenacious in its struggle than did the people
of Palestine. The agony and the anguish of the camps
have generated in this nation an indomitable
spirit
of resistance instead of resignation
and submission.
The pain of the diaspora suffered by the people of
Palestine has spawned a fearless and dauntless
determination to regain what was usurped by brutal
force, instead of abject capitulation
to the wishes of
Israel and its supporters. The people of Palestine
have been forced for many years to live as the captives of the annual begging bowl, which provides
barely enough to keep body and soul together and to
subsidize their continuance
in the lamentable conditions of the camps.

this example of how a people, determined to regain
the right denied to it, is not benumbed by doses of
annual charity or the inducement of a comfortable
assimilation outside their own homeland; I know this
from experience, simply because I represent ‘Kuwait
and I know what kind of inducement and attraction
is displayed for the assimilation of the Palestinians
in our surrounding areas.
8. In all fairness, one marvels at the equanimity and
stoicism which the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO), my friend and brother,
Mr. Khaddoumi, displayed in his statement the other
day [ibid.]. He did not speak with bitterness or hatred.
He showed that life in refugee camps is not only
insulting to human dignity but is also something to
be dreaded even for his own enemies. He preached
equality for all sides. In other words, he does not wish
to see his enemies endure the misery and pi-ivation
of the refugee camps which he and his kith and kin
have been experiencing for the last three decades. In
his words, there is no craving for revenge, no thirst
for primitive vendetta, no desire to place anybody
in the horrible degradation of the refugee camps.
9. Some argue that the Palestinians do not recognize
the existence of Israel, and therefore do not qualify
to be a real party to the conflict. In our view, this
is a demented logic. How can we expect the Palestinians to recognize Israel when the latter denies their
existence as a nation? And I do not like to elaborate
on this; quotations abound to that effect. How can we
expect the victims of the gladiators to recognize the
right of their oppressors to divest them of their
national sovereignty and evict them from thieir own
homeland? How can we expect the Palestinians, who
have hitherto been treated as subhuman, all of a
sudden to become superhuman and recognize t.he right
of the gladiators to butcher them?

6. After the abysmal failure of the international community to redress the wrongs inflicted upon them,
they resorted to armed struggle. It is not the product
of expediency, but it is the outcome of necessity.
They did so-to quote their spokesman, my friend
and brother, Mr. Khaddoumi,
who is sitting modestly
on my right-when
they despaired of peacefully
recovering their national rights and the primordial,
elementary right to sovereignty,
and thus declared
that armed struggle was the only means to achieve
the liberation of their homeland
and to attain their
national rights.

10. One should give credit to the Palestinians who
have so transcended their tribulations and are charitable enough to forget and forgive for the sake of
building a better future. After all, what do the Palestinians want? They simply want self-determinatidn.
In
that demand they do not depart from the Chlarter of
the United Nations. They are not different from the
Member States assembled in this body and in the
General Assembly. They are not different from any
of us. They are flesh, blood, brain and marrlow, like
us. They have not asked for the impossible, but their
yearnings are the same as those of all other nations
which have an inalienable and primordial right to selfdetermination
and sovereignty in their own homelands. They know that a decision of the Security
Council will not return to them their lost properties
and homeland unless it is accompanied
by the
necessary action under Chapter VII of the Charter,
and they know, as we know too, that we are building
a castle on the moon if we ask for that. In spite of the
abuse of the veto in the past-and
how frequently
this occurred when the national rights of the Palest:i-

7. No doubt the people of Palestine are gifted with
two remarkable and unusual talents: one is patience,
and the other is resilience. Otherwise, how can we-we
who belong to the area and .identify with the tribulations and grievances of the Palestinians,
we who,
indeed, identify ourselves, part and parcel, flesh and
soul, with the tribulations
of the Palestinian peopleexplain their fortitude and survival for three decades
in refugee camps situated within walking distance
from their homes, and their constant search for a
peaceful solution in spite of the magnitude of their
tragedy and the heinousness of tile crimes perpetrated
against them’? In their resilience they have already set
3

c

respond by building settlements under the pretext of
acquiring defence borders. There are no fewer than
65 Jewish settlements built on Arab soil. Yet the world
expects the Arabs to exhibit patience and tolerance
while their territories are gradually, imperceptibly
and clandestinely absorbed, It is not sufficient to
adopt resolutions without taking appropriate action
for their implemetation.
Otherwise we can say in all
frankness that the world has resigned itself to
reiterating principles without any follow-up to translate
those principles into action. States find it easy to
reaffirm provisions of the Charter on the assumption
that this reaffirmation
provides comfort to their
consciences.
14. The realities of the situation have proved that
much more is needed than mere declaratory pronouncements. So long as territories are occupied by
foreign troops, nations will go on fighting regardless
of what others think, until the Iiberation of those
territories is realized. The Arabs in this context are
not different from any other nation. They will not let
Israel squat on their land forever and retain a submissive and passive attitude. They will not prostrate
themselves before the dilctnt of Israel. The way to
stave off any future hostilities lies not in inducing the
Arabs to overlook the occupation of their land but in
bringing .Israel to task through collective measures
enshrined in Chapter VII of the Charter. We should
learn from the lessons of history, since history has
been quoted so frequently in this chamber. Let me say
that the German High Command, at the close of the
last century, insisted on incorporating small portions
of France for self-defence. That decision was one of
the causes that triggered the First World War. Israel
is in duty bound by law, by the Charter and by the
provisions of the resolutions of the United Nations
to withdraw simply, quietly and unceremoniously
from
Arab territories.

nians were at stake-they
hope that the international
community will still come to their rescue.
11. Some may ask what the Palestinians want. The
answer simply is that they want self-determination
and independence, as I stated earlier. They are weary
of life in the refugee camps. They resist assimilation.
They have revolted against the life of the diaspora.
The Palestinians do not want to be dispersed any
more. They want the Security Council to give the
signal for their return to their homeland. They do not
want to wrest from others territories which they do
not own. They look for a decent life after three decades
of consignment to the abominable sordidness of refugee
camps. The Council can and should assist them in
their endeavour for a better life in the future. None
of them forgets that the United Nations owes them
so much after its illegal and graceless decision to
partition their homeland without their consent or
approval and without consulting them. The Council
should take a decision that recognizes the rights of the
people of Palestine to self-determination,
independence and sovereignty. It is imperative to do so not
only because of the realities of the situation-and
those who oppose the realities of the situation find
themselves isolated, not because they are supporting
the anti-Palestinian
forces but because they are
supporting anti-realistic forces-but also because of the
irjustices imposed upon them by the United Nations.
In other words, the United Nations is called upon to
grasp the realities in the area, without which peace
will remain as evasive as a mirage in the desert of
Kuwait or Arabia.
12. The response of Israel to the debate in the
Security Council is the establishment of five additional
Jewish settlements in the Syrian Golan Heights. That
decision, which is fully in harmony with Israel’s policy
of territorial expansion, was publicized at a moment
of anger with the United Nations, simply because
the United Nations had the courage to listen to the
repreientative of the PLO without permission from the
Zionists in Tel Aviv. What does Israel say about those
settlements? It says they are for defensive purposes
against any possible Arab attack. But Israel and the
world at large know clearly and unequivocally
that
the Arabs will not under any circumstances accept
the annexation of their territories by Israel. No nation,
big or small, fragile or strong, would accept the
incorporation of its territories by a neighbour simply
because the latter is in need of those territories for
defence. That argument boils down to a recipe for war
and military onslaught. It is not a prescription fol
peace.

15. If Israel chooses to do otherwise, as it has been
doing thus far, it will incur hostilities, invile bloodshed
and call for more wars. It is up to Israel to choose
between giving up its occupation of Arab territories
and war, between retaining the fruits of aggression and
relinquishing them to uphold the rule of law and to
live in accordance with the dictates of the Charter. It
apparently opts for territories instead of peace, but it
will eventually get neither. In 1973, when the Security
Council was called upon to take drastic measures to
retrieve Arab territories occupied by Israel, the United
States saw fit to veto that draft resolution [S/10974
($24 .1/l/s 19731. It, as well as others, d.id not believe
that the Arabs would launch a campaign to recover
their lands in 1973. The war of 1973 surprised even
the most credulous. Even now, while we discuss the
issue of withdrawal, many States arc unreceptive to
warnings to the effect that the continualion
of the
occupation of Arab territories will spark off and invite
another war. There is i. trend to underrate Arab
insistence on total evacuation of territories. But those
who refuse to face the realities of the situation will
prove to be wrong, as was the case in 1973.

13. If Israel is really and genuinely interested in
peace, then the whole world can bear witriess to the
fact that the signals for that cherished peace have
already been given by Arab States. The Arabs ask fol
complete withdrawal from all the territories occupied
by Israel. The Israelis, who are still captives of the
mentality of the holocaust of the Second World War,
3

16. My plea to the Council is this: let no consideration, whatever its nature, divert the Council from its
duty to act vigorously and promptly to ensure Israeli
withdrawal
from Arab territories.
Let no Power,
whatever the means at its disposal, thwart or scuttle
the will of the Council to live up to its responsibilities
in demanding
the evacuation
of Arab territories
occupied by force, The alternative will be more wars
and more bloodshed.

19. The debate is a historic occasion for peace in
an area whose history is rent by blood-spurting and
mutilation.
No one can afford to miss this opportunity.
But.let me remind the Council in all fairness of the
fact that resolution 242 (1967) hovers around the calmps
of the Palestinian refugees like a sinister ghost beaming
out messages that they are permanently doomed to
the squalid life of the camps. It is incumbent upon the
Council to offer a glimpse of light at the end of a
long, arduous and bleak tunnel.

17. The two indispensable elements of peace are the
realization
of the right of the Palestinians to selfdetermination
and the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Arab territories. Those are the two major tenets
on which all our efforts must be based. Compromising
on either one of them will spell disaster. We are
called upon to uphold the rule of law and the principles
enshrined in our highly cherished Charter. Peace
cannot be firmly maintained if oppression, injustice,
tribulations
or misery overpower men. The Security
Council is in duty bound to establish t,he principle of
legality to guarantee national rights as well as individual
rights and fundamental freedoms, without which true
peace cannot.exist
on a durable and solid basis. It
should work to eliminate threats to peace by punishing
aggression, by divesting the aggressor of the fruits
of its aggression and by suppressing every threat to
peace by collective
measures. Israel has violated
every sacred principle in the Charter. It should be
forced to renounce the use of force as an instrument of
territorial aggrandizement.
It should be compelled to
respect the integrity of Arab territories
and the
sovereign and primordial
rights of the Palestinian
people in their own homeland. It cannot be pampered
forever and encouraged to persist in its role as a
destroyer of all international
morality.
What better
proof do we need of Israel’s contempt for international
morality than its refusal to attend the present debates
of the Security Council. The Council should respond
in kind, acting on a timetable for withdrawal from all
occupied Arab territories and for active measures to
restore to the people of Palestine their inalienable
national and primordial rights and their human rights.

20. The PRESIDENT:
I would request the representative of Kuwait to withdraw from the Council
table so that the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic may resume his place. The next speaker is
the representative of Yugoslavia. I would therefore
ask the representative of Egypt to withdraw tennporarily from his place so that the representative of
Yugoslavia may come to the Council table. I now
invite that representative to make his statement.
21. Mr. PETRIC’ (Yugoslavia): Mr. President., although I am not a member of the Council, let me congratulate you on your assumption of its presidency
for the first month of 1976. The excellent and friendly
relations prevailing between our two non-aligned countries give me an added pleasure in doing so. Your
country and you yourself are known as true and
consistent fighters for the liberation of all Africa and
of each of its nations and former colonies from any
form of oppression. That fact and your signal performance as Chairman of the Special Committee on
behalf of all peoples under colonial rule, as well as
your skill, experience and impartiality in both bilateral
and multilateral
diplomacy, are a guarantee that the
Council, faced with complex and responsible taslks in
the month of January, is in very capable hands
indeed.
22. Now I should like to use this forma1 and public
opportunity
to express our great sorrow over the
passing of Chou En-lai, a great revolutionary
fighter
and leader, a most outstanding statesman and arctlitect
of the People’s Republic of China. His death is a great
loss for China and, consequently, for humanity as a
whole. His most impressive, inspiring and (often
decisive contribution
to the outstanding progress of
his country remains as a source of constant inspiration, and we are certain that the long and succe:ssful
march of the Chinese people will continue.

18. And, Mr. President, let me say it is fortunate
that the debate on the rights of the people of Palestine
is taking place under your presidency. After all you are
the redoubtable Chairman of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, whose mandate is
the elimination
of colonialism and foreign domination.
The question under discussion is entirely in line with
the competence of the Committee
which you have
been chairing so ably. The people of Palestine cannot
have a better choice. I congratulate them indeed on
this unexpected coincidence as much as I congratulate
YOLI, Mr. President, on the assumption of the presidency of this supreme body for the month of January.
1 am confident that the qua!ities that you possess and
of which I am aware will be utilized on behalf of a
just and noble cause.

23. My delegation welcomes the Council’s decision
to hold this debate on the Middle East problem
including the Palestinian question as very timely and
necessary. Indeed, the Security Council, as the organ
entrusted by all the Members of the Organizatioll
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international
peace and security, acting on their
behalf, could not remain passive and not make every
possible effort to do all in its power to undertake
effective steps and measures conducive to a cornprehensive solution of the crisis which continues to
4

threaten us all and, in some important aspects, to
worsen. Therefore,
the Security Council has the
primary responsibility
for the solution of the crisis in
the Middle East also.

the Palestinian people, and not deal with the PLO, is
to expect them to capitulate. And it is, of course,
wholly unrealistic to expect such capitulation from a
brave people of such a history, culture and indomitable
will to survive and realize its inalienable national
rights.

24. It is perhaps not without interest to recall that this
is the first comprehensive debate on the matter that
the Council has conducted since the one held in the
spring and summer of 1973, and it is perhaps not
without interest also to recall the vast changes in the
Middle East with regard to the Palestinian question
and in the entire international
landscape that have
taken ,place since then.

30. We Yugoslavs understand this very well, in the
light of our own national liberation struggle. It may be
of some interest to the Council that the principle of
non-capitulation
has been enshrined in the Yugoslav
Constitution. Let me here read its article 238, chapter VI, on “National Defence”:

25. Against the background of the firm resolve and
proved ca’pability of the Arab peoples to wage an
effective struggle for the liberation of their occupied
and annexed territories, the ever-increasing number
and strengthening of the role and influence of nonaligned countries, together with others opposed to
aggression, the acquisition of territories by force and
the denial of the rights of peoples, two major and
directly relevant changes have taken place.

“No one shall have the right to acknowledge or
sign an act of capitulation, or to accept or recognize
the occupation of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia or of any of its individual parts. No
one shall have the right to prevent citizens of the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from
fighting against an enemy who has attacked the
country. Su’ch acts shall be unconstitutional
and
punishable as high treason.”

26. First, the international community’s final recognition, through the United Nations and otherwise, of the
centrality of the Palestinian question for the solution
of the Middle East crisis and recognition of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people,
as determined in General Assembly resolutions 3236
(XXIX), 3375 (XXX), 3376 (XXX) and 3414 (XXX).
At the same time the General Assembly has recognized the’right of the PLO, as the representative of
the Palestinian people, to participate
on an equal
footing with the other parties in all peace efforts
concerning the Middle East, including, of course, the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East.

3 I. The second change, which is directly concomitant
with, and which indeed results from the first, is the
ever wider, practically total rejection and condemnation of Israel’s policies of occupation and annexation
of the Arab territories on any pretext, of its refusal
to recognize the national rights of the Palestinians,
and of its policy of force, aggression and intimidation.
32. The most recent debates and votes in the
Security Council attest anew to the growing isolation,
to mention only this, that Israel’s sterile, unimaginative, dangerous and increasingly counter-productive
policies are encountering. In this new world of ours,
the world of true and direct interdependence, and
of the increasing influence of an ever growing number
of countries that want to play, and do play, an active
role in international relations-a role of subjects and
not of objects-no one can stop the flow of the mighty
rivers of overdue changes.

27. The members of the world community-all
of
us-are aware of the momentous importance of this
change after the long denial of the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people and its sole representatives and after stubborn attempts to relegate the
Palestinian question to the status of a mere humanitarian issue of assistance to refugees.

33. One can boycott a session; one can threaten,
time and again, to leave the Organization or some of
its organs, or to reduce one’s interest and involvement or contribution,
but this cannot paralyse the
majority any longer. One cannot isolate the world:
one can only isolate oneself. This is not a world one
can “stop and get off’; if one opposes the new,
necessary processes and tides instead of working with
them, one does not stop them, but merely loses the
opportunity to go along with the required progressive
developments. Several major international events in
recent years-involving
Israel, but not only Israelhave proved that unjust and untimely opposition to
progressive changes brings only grief to those who
oppose them.

28. My Government and country, acting especially
within the framework of the non-aligned movement
and the solemn decisions of its conferences, are proud
of the role they have played in bringing this overdue
measure of historic justice to the Palestinian people.
29. At this juncture, 1 should like to both welcome
and congratulate the whole delegation of the .PLO
and its leader Mr. Khaddoumi
on taking, as equal
partners, their seat at the Council table. That in itself
constitutes both an irreversible step and the most
recent and significant mark of the new situation, of a
new negotiating framework, that is being built and
which cannot be undone. To refuse to recognize that
new situation, as Israel does, to expect that somehow
one can evade, go around the Palestinian question,

34. Of course, the persistent blocking of such
changes, while not stopping them, can delay them,
5

heightening
tensions,
adding dangerous potential to
a1rcadY exacerbated
crises and bringing close the
possibility
of explosive situations leading to wars, and
possibly to a general catastrophe.
Of no other area is
this truer than of the Middle East; of no other policy
directly
producing
such dangers is it truer than of
*sracl’s Policy. We must reiterate here that the gravest
responsibility
rests with Israel, in view of its continued
refusal to respect and implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
Israel’s
refusal not only delays the settlement of the crisis and the establishment
of a just
arId therefore durable peace in the Middle East, in the
interest of all peoples and States in the region: it is,
at the same time, the main cause of various tensions
arId explosions
around this issue, in the Middle East
region and beyond.

39. It is indispensable to recognize the PLO as the
sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people
and its right to participate in all efforts for settling
the crisis in the Middle East. It is within this framework
that we would support the earliest possible reconvening
of the Peace Conference at Geneva, which should he
instructed to keep the Security Council and the General
Assembly informed of its work and of the results of
negotiations. We would also be generally in sympathy
with the possible proposal to have the Security Council
agree on a timetable for Israel’s withdrawal from all
the territories occupied since 5 June 1967.
40. Let me now briefly touch upon some familiiar
positions and arguments that one hears and reads
about, that, as usual, suggest that no new step is
to be taken, no change to be effected, no updating
to be done and that, in the final analysis, really amount
to counsels of inaction, of frozen stcrtus qlro and
actual paralysis.

35. The constant refusal of Israel to implement any
of the United Nations resolutions has been stressed in
this and many previous debates. But to that Israel
has recently contributed
two more specific actions as
further evidence not only that it does not want any
movement
towards a just settlement but that it is
actively working to destroy any chance for it. I am,
of course, referring to the terrorist raids in Lebanon
against the Palestinian
camps, in clear retaliation
against the Council’s decision to have the PLO particicipate in this debate, and to the establishment
of
new settlements
in the occupied territories,
as its
“contribution”
to this debate.

41. We have been told so many times that the
differences between parties are so great that only
slow and deliberate activities and processes can bring
results, I shall not now dwell on the obvious unacceptability
of referring to the parties involved in
such a way as to obliterate the crucial differences
between the aggressor and the victims of aggression;
equally, I shall not belabour the evident point that,
after three decades of dispersal of the Palestinian
people and denial of its basic national rights and after
the occupation of 1967, which has now lasted for
almost a decade, it is rather misplaced to come to
the Palestinians and the Arab States and advocate
“slowness and deliberation”.
What I want to stress is
that to advocate any slow approach is simply not
practical. We all know what was the outcome of futile
attempts to freeze the situation before 1973. Almost
two and a half years have now elapsed since the October war of 1973 and, while some partial movement
took place, the basic and most acute issues have
actually
remained untackled.
There is a general
recognition that we must now make a comprehensive
effort, and without delay.

36,. We still vividly recall what followed the Security
Council debate in the summer of 1973. The majority
draft resolution
was vetoed and the Council was
prevented from acting. The fourth war in the Middle
East ensued. We insist that this must not be permitted
to happen again; that the Council must be permitted
to acl-and
to act meaningfully.
37. Addressing
myself now to the more specific
aspects of what has to be done, what kind of decisions
:ire to be taken, what new room must be created for
progress and what changes and realities must be
acknowledged,
I should like to point out my country’s
constant support of, and endeavours to contribute to,
all efforts aimed at finding a definitive, comprehensive
a settlement
of the crisis in all its aspectssolutionwith the participation
of ail the parties to the conflict,
including,
of course, on an equal footing, the PLO.

42. Also, it is being said that we must preserve,
protect and practically petrify the existing “negotiating
framework”.
For, if we try to change it in any way,
it will collapse, there will be no more negotiations,
and so on. This is of course not a realistic or wise
position to take. What we have now, and what we have
had for quite some time, is a “negotiating frameworlk”
without negotiations.
The negotiating
frameworks
have to be filled with active negotiations instead of
their unchanged existence being used as an excuse
against any action.

38. It is our firm position that only within the framework of a settlement
based on the total withdrawal of
Israel from all the territories
occupied since 5 June
1967, and of the recognition
and realization of the
legitimate
and inalienable
national
rights of the
Palestinian
people,
including
the right to establish its
own Slate, can the independent
and secure existence
‘,f all peoples
and States in the region be guaranteed.
The 'l-ight
of all States and peoples
Of the region to
security
and free, independent
peaceful
existence,
development
is essential.

43. When it comes to the process of negotiation
and of peace efforts for a comprehensive settlement,
can anyone really seriously maintain that we can have
that process without the Palestinians, without the PLO,
even after everybody, except Israel, has accepted ,the
6

requirements, of the day, the Council will be able to
adopt a commensurate decision and indicate our
readiness to contribute to al] the efforts to bring peace
based on justice to the Middle East.

fact that the question of Palestine is at the heart of
the Middle East crisis and that, without settling the
first, no solution of the second is possible?
44. We have had more than one war and much
violence to have this issue recognized by everyone
now, except Israel. Shall we wait for another catastrophe in the Middle East in order only then to
proceed to an obvious and necessary updating of the
negotiating framework?

50. The PRESIDENT:
I would now request the
representative of Yugoslavia to be kind enough to
withdraw so that the representative of Egypt may
resume his place at the Council table. Before I call on
the next speaker, I should like to inform the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of Iraq containing a request to be invited, in
accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. I propose, if I hear no objection, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion in conformity with the usual practice and the
relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional
rules of procedure. There being no objection, 1 invite
him to take the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
he will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when he wishes to address the Council.

45. With enough resolution, Israel can be made to
recognize the existing realities, in its own best longterm interest. One should recall in this respect the
experience of 19.56, when sufficient pressure was
brought to bear on Israel. Israel’s counter-productive
obstinacy should not and must not be tolerated to block
the way out of the present dangerous situation, and
no one should in any way support it in that.
46. Here it is perhaps apposite to underline once
again that the Charter does not distinguish between
“democratic”
and other aggression and that it does
not make any distinctions-especially
self-serving-on
the basis of politico-social
systems. Any attempts to
introduce such distinctions in the Organization strike
at the very foundations of the rational and just international order and at the Charter of the United Nations
itself. The victims of air raids, those who suffer under
occupation and interference in their internal affairs
are not interested in the political
system of the
aggressor or under what procedure aggression is
conducted. They are interested only in aggression
being stopped and the aggressor punished.

5 I . Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (t~rrns/rrtionf~~~/~~ Chinc~se):
These days the representatives of many countries
have expressed in their speeches profound condolences
on the passing away of Premier Chou En-lai. In the
name of the Chinese delegation, I wish to express our
heartfelt thanks to them.

47. Finally, let me say just a few words on the matter
of the relationship between the Security Council and
the General Assembly. Their basic constitutional prerogatives and relations under the Charter are of
course clear. It is also very valid to insist that they are
organs of the same Organization,
based on the same
principles, words and spirit of the Charter, with the
same aims and goals, and that they must and do
co-operate.

52. At the same time, I should like to take this
opportunity to express our warm welcome to the
representatives of the five new members of the Security
Council-namely,
Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Pakistan, Panama and Romania. We are convinced
that in the days ahead we will co-operate closely in
our work for the implementation
of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
53. Mr. President, allow me, in the name of the
Chinese delegation, to express once again our warm
welcome to the representatives of the PLO who are
participating in the debate on the Middle East problem
and the Palestinian question in the Security Council.
The Chinese Government and people have consistently
supported the just cause of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples. We are pleased to see that their struggles
have won increasingly broad sympathy and support.

48. At the same time, it is totally unrealistic to imagine
that one does not affect the other, often very directly,
and that one can shield oneself, say, in the Council,
against the political trends and realities of the world
that sometimes may first make a visible impact in the
General Assembly. It is precisely cm the question of
Palestine and the Middle East that the actions of the
General Assembly and its recommendations
to the
Security Council, coupled with the political realities
of the Council’s composition-and
those realities are
not ephemeral but have become a constant-that
the
strong new trends to which I referred at the beginning
of my statement could not be barred at the gates of the
Council against the will of its majority. Hence this
debate.

54. The year 1975 is .over. Reviewing the situation
of the Middle East over the past year, one can see
even more clearly that there, on the one hand, the
struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples
against Israeli Zionism and big-Power hegemonism is
steadily deepening, while, on the other hand, the
rivalry and contention between the super-Powers are
being exacerbated without let-up. The whole situation

49. Let me then, in concluding, express my delegation’s hope that, in responding adequately to the urgent
7

has become
the Middle
settled.

times and adopted a good number of resolutions
which have one common feature of twisting the question of restoration of the Palestinian people’s national
rights into a so-called “refugee problem”. This is most
unfair. We have always been opposed to it and will
continue to oppose it. We hope that the Security Comcil will rectify its long-standing unjust attitude on the
question of Palestine. However, historical experience
merits attention, and no unrealistic hopes should he
pinned on United Nations resolutions. A real settlement of the Middle East question can only depend
on the unity and struggle of the Arab and Palestinian
peoples, with the support of the people of the world.

even more unstable and turbulent, and
East problem remains far from being

55. It must be pointed out that it is mainly the two
super-Powers which are to be held responsible for such
a situation. The focus of the two super-Powers’ rivalry
for global hegemony is in Europe. As an important
flank of Europe, the Middle East is a place both
important in strategic position and rich in oil resources,
and hence it has become an important
link in the
contention between the two super-Powers. Although
each of them has put forward this or that kind of
proposal for a so-called “comprehensive
solution”
solution”
of the Middle East
or a “step-by-step
question, in fact neither of them has any intention
or sincere desire to bring about a real settlement of the
Middle East question. The proposed solutions advertised by them are all aimed merely at strengthening
their respective positions in the contention,
each
trying to squeeze out and overpower the other. Out of
their needs of contention for world hegemony, both
of them are trying hard to create deliberately
and
maintain a state of “no war, no peace”,brief
fighting
followed by a period of truce, with both war and peace
kept under control, or what they call “controlled
tension”.

60. The great victory of the October war and the use
of the oil weapon constitute a brilliant example of the
Arab and Palestinian peoples fighting in close unity
and with one heart and one mind for victory over tlhe
enemy. This pioneering action has dealt a heavy blow
at the aggressive arrogance of Zionism and exploded
the myth of the so-called Israeli “invincibility”.
,4t
the same time, it has upset the super-Powers’ smlug
calculation
of manipulating
the situation and contending for hegemony in the Middle East. This victory
has greatly enhanced the confidence of the Arab and
Palestinian peoples in defeating the Israeli aggressors.
‘It eloquently shows that .Israeli Zionism and the superPowers are not terrible, that they look powerful but are
inwardly weak, beset by difficulties both at home alnd
abroad. It is the 100 million and more Arab alnd
Palestinian peoples united in persistent struggles that
are really powerful.

56. The super-Power which never lets slip any chance
to describe itself as the so-called “natural ally” of
the Arab people is even more sinister in its designs,
with honey on its lips and murder in its heart. It has
surpassed the other super-Power in bullying others and
in intriguing and conspiring. The more one deals with
it, the deeper his experience in this respect. The leaders
of certain Arab countries and the just opinion of the
Arab and the third world have abundantly and cdnvincingly exposed its wild expansionist design and its
iniquitous acts of bad faith in seeking benefit at the
expense of others. Its true features are being exposed
ever more clearly.

61. Faced with that situation, the super-Powers are
stepping up their efforts to sow discord in an attempt
to undermine
the militant unity of the Arab world
and sap the fighting will of the Arab people. However,
through their protracted struggle the Arab and
Palestinian peoples have come to realize ever more
clearly that in order to lead their struggles towards
victory it is imperative to strengthen their unity,
firmly resist and oppose the super-Powers’ schemles
of sowing discord and creating split, and link thleii
struggle against Israeli Zionism closely with that against
super-Power hegemonism.

57. At present, the rivalry between the two superPowers throughout the world, including their rivalry in
the Middle East, is becoming ever fiercer. In these
the danger of war has obviously
circumstances,
increased and not decreased. The upcoming superPower which is most energetic in peddling the fraud
of “dCtente” is precisely the most dangerous source of
a new world war today. One must realize this fully
and make the necessary preparations against it; otherwise he will be taken in and suffer.

62. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle to regain their national rights
and recover their lost territories, firmly condemned
the Israeli Zionist aggression, firmly opposed and
condemned the super-Powers for their contention and
expansion in the Middle East and their support and
abetment of Israel. We maintain that the Security
Council must affirm the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people and that Israel must withdraw
from all the occupied Arab territqries.

58. The history of human civilization
has borne out
the incontrovertible
truth that the people, and the
people alone, are the motive force in the making of
world history. It is the great Arab and Palestinian
peoples and not the Israeli Zionists or the one or
two super-Powers that will determine the future of the
Mid.dle East.

63. The struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples is arduous and the road will be tortuous.
but the future is definitely bright, for the truth and
justice are on their side. We are fully confident of the

59. Over the past two decades and more the Security
Council has discussed the Middle East question many
8

future of their struggle. We are deeply convinced
that so long as they take their destiny firmly into theit
own hands, persevere in unity and struggle, they will
certainly recover their lost territories,
regain their
national rights and win complete victory in the struggle
against aggression and hegemonism with the support
and assistance of the people of the world.
64.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Rtrssian): Members of the Security
Council and representatives of those countries participating in the discussion of this item have just heard
the usual collection of completely
empty, vacuous
and toially malicious tirades from the Chinese representative, camouflaged in worn-out phrases about the
two super-Powers. This demagogic mounthing is used
to camouflage the pro-Israel position of China on the
Middle East problem including the Palestinian question. He is trying to distract the attention of the
Security Council from the item under discussion. The
impotency
of the Chinese position is disguised by
maliciously
slandering one of the super-Powers, and
he is trying to spin this vicious slender out of thin
air.

(interp~etrrtio,lf,‘onl

65. I had assumed that in connexion with the great
mourning in his country the Chinese representative
would declare a moratorium
for himself in his systematic slander of the Soviet Union, but this has not
occurred. Slander against the Soviet Union for the four
years during which China has been in the United
Nations has become the daily habit of and second
nature to t’he Chinese delegation.
66. Not a single word of condemnation
of Israel was
heard in his statement. One super-Power is guilty for
what is happening in the Middle East and the tragedy
of the Palestinian people, and not Israel, international
Zionism or those who help Israel. How monstrous is
this slander, and how far it has gone! The Chinese
representative does not even realize that by uttering
these words of slander and inventions what sort of
ridiculous
position he is putting himself in before
thjs assembly. Who will believe this? The historical
facts of the heroic struggle of the Arab people are,
after all, well known to the entire world, as well as
the assistance which the Soviet people has given and
will continue to give to the Arab peoples.
67. He used the phrase, “the great Arab victory of
1973”, but who made it possible for that victory to
be won? The mouthing and the demagogy of China,
or the genuine material assistance offered by the
Soviet Union to the Arabs? Without all our weapons
it would have been impossible
for that great 1973
victory to have been scored, and this is officially recognized by those who won that victory at the time.
68. The Chinese babbling and malicious slavder
against the Soviet Union is not the sort of weapon
by which victories can be won. This is demagogy which
simply distracts our attention frdm the essence of the

question and what is occurring in the Middle East.
The Maoists have taken on a very unsavoury role,
that of distracting the attention
of world public
opinion and of the United Nations from the aggressive
policies of Israel. This is giving direct assistance to the
aggressor and betraying the legitimate interests of the
Arab countries which were the victims of the aggressor. This is a knife treacherously thrust in the back
of the Arabs to the benefit of Israel and to those who
are zionism’s protectors and patrons. The statements
of the Peking leaders, the Chinese press agency Tsin
hua and the Chinese delegation are very cautious and
mild in their criticism of Israel, as though Israel were
not guilty of what is happening in the Middle East.
And in order to camouflage their pro-Israel policy,
China, as usual, slanders the Soviet Union, trying to
lay upon it the main responsibility
for the fact that
the Middle East problem as a whole, and the Palestinian
question in particular, have not been solved.
69. Like the Israeli usurpers, the Peking leaders and
their delegation in the United Nations are against the
Middle East problem being solved by means of joint
and collective efforts on the part of all parties directly “’ b
concerned, including the PLO. Like Israel, they are j.
against the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle,,,”
East and, consequently, against the participation
of
the PLO in that Conference. Is it not a fact that at the
thirtieth session of the General Assembly, the delegation of China did not vote in favour of resolution
3414 (XXX) on the question of the situation in the
Middle East, or of resolution 3375 (XXX) to invite
the PLO to participate in all efforts to bring about
peace in the Middle East? And how did the representatives of the Arab countries directly involved and of the
socialist commonwealth
vote’? They all jointly and
severally voted in favour of those resolutions. And who
voted against those resolutions? Israel. Consequently,
in whose camp does China now find itself? In the
same camp as Israel, obviously, at least on those
fundamental resolutions, which have been referred to
by every member of the Security Council who has
spoken here and by the representatives of other countries who have participated in this debate as well. They
ha\;e all appealed to the Council to follow the example
of the General Assembly, and to use as the basis of
Council decisions the principles
contained in the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
70. However, China, together with Israel, did not
vote in favour of these resolutions. Why then indulge
in demagogy‘? This is the essence of your position,
Sir. Consequently, you are not on the side of the
Arabs, but rather on the side of the aggressor. One
wonders who it is in fact that China is resolutely
supporting. It is quite obvious: the Israeli aggressor.
71. This is not the only example of an unholy
alliance between Peking and Tel Aviv here within the
walls of the United Nations. What is the delegation
of China aiming at’? What constructive proposals has
it put forward on the problem of the Middle East

during the more than four years China has been in the
United Nations? No such proposals have been made
by Peking, nor could there be any such proposals,
since the Peking Government does not seek a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East. It is trying to sabotage
the efforts in the same way as Israel is trying to
sabotage them. Peking is not interested in reaching a
peace settlement in the Middle East. It is not interested
in restitution to the Arabs of the lands occupied by
Israel, nor is it in favour of recognition of the Palestinian people as an integral part of the Arab family
and the provision ofan opportunity for the Palestinians
to create their own State. We have not heard one
word about this in the statement made by the Chinese
representatives.

of the Soviet Union, not of China. The Soviet Union
and its people have given and will continue to give
comprehensive
political and material support and
effective material assistance to strengthen their defence
potential,
75. The Soviet Union is helping the Arab countries
not by empty, vacuous, demagogic, slanderous statements such as we hear from the mouth of China and
its representatives,
not by hypocritical conjurations
and mere words such as the Chinese indulge in but
real, genuine efforts, including real steps which are
aimed at strengthening the military readiness of the
armed forces of the Arab States. The Soviet Union has
always been and still remains a faithful friend to the
Arab countries and peoples.

72. Peking is interested in exacerbating and heating
up the situation in the Middle East and in that part of
the world. It is doing everything in its power so
that the tension may be maintained as long as possible
at the highest possible point. In Peking they dream of
and thirst for a major military conflict in the Middle
East, so that Peking might observe from afar and
wash its hands of the problem joyfully.
According
to a pet phrase of Mao Tse-tung, you sit at the top
of the mountain and watch the tigers fighting among
themselves.

76. We do not need any Arab oil. You must understand this and not slander us. We have quite enough
of our own oil, thank you-more
than enough. WC
give assistance to our friends, as far as oil is concerned. We even supply oil to the countries of
Europe. We do not need Middle East oil, and the
Chinese representatives slander us by saying that we
are interested in the Middle East only because of oil.
I explained in the statement I made this morning
why we are concerned about bringing about peace
in the Middle East-because war or military confrontation in the Middle East is a fire underneath our window
sill and not under theirs. They are quite far from that
area and they are sticking their nose in, not in order
to create a peaceful situation but to complicate the
state of affairs and to seize power, to heat up the
situation and to bring about a conflict between Arabs
and israelis and between the two super-Powers. Don’t
count on it. There cannot be any fools left in our time
who can folIow in their footsteps on the path of will
provocation.

73. It is quite obvious that Peking adopts an essentially anti-Arab position which is very close to the
policies of the Zionist imperialist forces, the patrons
of the Israeli aggressor. The policy of Peking only
helps to weaken the position of the Arab States and to
allow the aggression to continue and in the final
analysis leads to a protraction of the crisis, which is
perfectly in accordance with the aims of Peking. The
worse the situation, the more chaos there is under
heaven, the better it is for them. But this is not in the
interests of the Arab countries. The tragedy and
suffering of those countries, and primarily of the Arab
people of Palestine, continue, That is the essence of
the policy of Peking and its position, and it cannot be
hoped that any slanderous anti-Soviet fictions will
camouflage or justify this anti-Arab policy pursued by
Peking.

77. A number of statements could be quoted from
responsible and high-ranking Arab leaders who have
expressed gratitude
to the Soviet Union for its
tremendous assistance and to the Soviet people :ts
well for the assistance that it has given throughout
all these years to the Arabs in their sufferings and
their tragedies. I shall recall some of them. At a press
interview on 27 November 1975, the Chairman of the
Executive Committee
of the PLO, Mr. Arafat, gave
the following
assessment of the comprehensive
support given by the Soviet Union to the Palestinians
and other Arab peoples in their struggle against Israeli
aggression so that they might enjoy their legitimate
national rights. He stated that “the plans of imperialism
and Zionism cannot ever be fulfilled. -We must
strengthen our struggle against these plans, a struggle
in which the Palestinian revolution and the patriotic
forces are being given support by the countries of
the socialist commonwealth,
headed by the Soviet
Union.” I shall repeat that so that the Chinese delegwtion will grasp it fully: “being given support by the
countries of the socialist commonwealth, headed by
the Soviet Union”.
Then Mr. Arafat went on to

74. The representative of China has tried in vain to
denigrate the honest and consistent position of the
Soviet Union on the question of a Middle East settlement. It is time for the Chinese representative to
understand that these efforts of his will not bring,
either to him or to his bosses, any honour or glory;
they will simply cover them with shame, marking
them as incorrigible slanderers, abettors of the aggressors and betrayers of the victims of the aggression.
The entire world knows that it is precisely the Soviet
State which, by taking the bread from its own mouth
and tightening its belt, gave and continues to give
assistance to the Arabs as victims of the Israeli
aggression. The tremendous victory which was scored
in 1973, which the representative deigned to mention,
was secured precisely because of the generous help
10

people look, upon with a desire to continue further
the friendship and co-operation between our two
countries.”

say that “great significance should be attached to the
initiative of the Soviet Union regarding the prompt
convening of the Geneva Peace Conference on the
Middle East.”

82. There was a brilliant speech made here by the
representative of Kuwait. I shall quote an extract
from the joint Kuwait-Soviet
Union communiquk
published on 5 December 197%quite recently in fact.
It states that “the people of Kuyait highly value the
support and assistance given by the Soviet Union to
the just cause of the Arabs.” Read these documents,
Mr. Chinese slanderer, and have the conscience to
lie, but to know how far you can go in your lying.

78. Who is against the Geneva Conference? Israel
and China. Here is the alliance between China and
Israel, and this cannot be camouflaged by any antiSoviet slander, nor can our attention be distracted
from the true facts. People understand this perfectly
well. Mr. Arafat went on to say:
“The Palestinian revolution has scored considerable success in the United Nations. By a majority
of votes, the States Members of the United Nations
have condemned Zionism as a form of racism. With
the help of our friends, the socialist countries, the
non-aligned countries, the African and the Moslem
countries, other important decisions have also been
adopted.”

83. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (trrrnsINtiotl.fi.c.,nl Chinc.w):
China’s support to the just struggle of the Arab and
Palestinian people has been sincere and selfless; it
is well-known to all and cannot be distorted. The
Chinese delegation has expounded the truth and
essence of the Middle East question. Thus the Soviet
representative who has been rid of his disguise feels
so ashamed that he could not but resort to lies and
sophistry once again. But these tactics will be of no
help to him.

79. Those are the people who fought for a just solution, not China. China did not in fact vote in favour
of those resolutions and decisions, and no anti-Soviet
slander can help to disguise that fact. The entire
world is aware of the policy of China as far as the
discussion of the Middle East question and the Palestinian question in the Genera1 Assembly is concerned.
They did not assist in adopting those positive resolutions. They were adopted by the efforts of the socialist
countries, the non-aligned countries, the African and
the Moslem countries, as Mr. Arafat has said. Those
are the people who fought for the interests and the
rights of the Palestine Arab people, and not China.

84. The facts are after all facts. Without bothering
to say too much, we need only to point out a few
well-known facts which will suffice for a further
clarification.
First, at the end of 1974, you were
talking profusely in the General Assembly about your
readiness to support the restoration of the national
rights of the Palestinian people, whereas in the
twinkling of an eye you issued ajoint statement with the
other super-Power, in which you changed the “national
rights” of the Palestinian people into their “legitimate
interests”. Is this not an open betrayal of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people?

80. Mr. Arafat went on to say that “the relationship
between the Palestine revolution and the socialist
countries and the Soviet Union is not a purely
transient or superficial thing. It is a strategic relationship which is based on mutual understanding,
trust
and a profound and ever-growing friendship.”
That
is the answer of a worthy son of the Arabs, Mr. Arafat,
to the malicious slanders of Peking and their representatives in the United Nations.

85. Secondly, in the circumstances in which the
Israeli Zionists have been adamantly carrying out their
policies of aggression and expansion, you have gone
so far as to send a steady flow of manpower to
Israel. Is this not a connivance at the Israeli Zionist
policies of aggression and expansion, with one superPower supplying the money and guns to Israel and the
other super-Power, that is, the Soviet Union, supplying
manpower to Israel‘? What is more, you have entered
into overt and covert contacts with Israel which have
even developed into secret talks between officials and
foreign ministers. Is it not another evidence of shielding
Israeli Zionism and betraying the interests of the Arab
and Palestinian people?

Xl. I could give another example. Here is a telegram
of congratulations which was sent to the leaders of the
Soviet Union in connexion with the 58th anniversary
of the great October revolution by the President of the
Syrian Arab Republic, a friend of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Assad, in which he stated:
“In connexion with this great event I should
like to express our feeling of deep gratitude and
appreciation for the position which you have
adopted as a matter of principle in supporting the
struggle of peoples for their rights, their freedom,
their independence
and their self-determination.
Your support for our just cause in our struggle for
the liberation of the occupied Arab territories and
for the restoration of the legitimate rights of the
Arab people of Palestine is something which our

86. Thirdly, in return for your military assistance,
you extorted all kinds of privileges from an Arab
country which was fighting at the front of the war
against Israeli Zionist aggression: then at a critical
juncture of the war you stopped the supply of arms
as a means to take others by the neck in an attempt
to sabotage the just struggle of the Arab countries.
Today you are still pressing for the repayment of
debts, despicably exerting all kinds of pressure by
II

taking advantage of others’ difficulties. You also took
advantage of the Arab countries’ difficulties to buy
oil from them at a low price and to resell it at a high
price to oil-poor countries, reaping fabulous profits in
a turnover in the ignominious
role of a speculative
merchant,

a single fact that we have enumerated. On the contrary,
in his reply he has confessed the shameless role played
by the Soviet Union in the Middle East. Referring to
Hitler, it is the Soviet Union that is today following
Hitler’s policies.
92. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interprctutiwz
from Russiun): One sentence, Sir.
There is a Russian proverb which says: Can the
leopard change his spots?

87. All these are well-known facts, which have been
openly exposed on many occasions by the deeply
victim&d
Arab countries. You are committing
these
acts which cannot bear the light of day for the very
purpose of controlling the Middle East through rivalry
at the expense of the interests of the Arab and
Palestinian peoples, so as further to control Europe
and achieve what the old czars had failed to. Yet you
have the effrontery to style yourself the “natural ally
of the Arab people”. One may ask: Would it not be
closer to reality to change the high-sounding term of
“natural ally” into “the dangerous enemy”?

93. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): After
listening to the dialogue between our two big friends,
China and the Soviet Union, I should like to make a
very brief comment. I should like to stress the appreciation of the Arab nations for the help we have received
from both friendly countries in our fight against
imperialist
and Zionist aggression. Really, the first
time that the Arabs broke the arms monopoly was
with the help of the Soviet Union and the late Chou
En-lai, who intervened and held discussions with the
Soviet Union. The co-operation between these two
Powers was very fruitful for the Arab cause at that
time.

88. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(ill~clpr’crtrriorr Ji*onr Russicrrr): I do not see fit to continue this argument with this Chinese slanderer and to
take up the valuable time of the Council and the guests
we have invited to participate in the discussion of an
important international
issue, namely, the situation in
the Middle East. I advise the Chinese representative
to read my right of reply tomorrow in the records,
and, if he does so, he will understand that what I
said regarding the unmasking of his iniquitous slander
against the Soviet Union needs nothing further to be
added to it.

94. I have asked to be allowed to speak because
of two things that were mentioned: first of all, the vote
on some resolutions during the last session of the
General Assembly. My country was one of those
which did not participate in the voting on one of those
resolutions. I should like to stress that if we did not
vote on that resolution it does not mean that we are
against extending an invitation to the PLO or that we
support the Israeli aggression.

89. With reference to his constant fictions about
paying debts and so on, true, we have asked for debts
to be repaid, because, as I said, we give assistance
by denying ourselves and tightening our belts. That
is our people’s property, and the conditions on which
we give that assistance simply demand that the
contract be fulfilled.

95. With respect to the question of Geneva, some
reservations about Geneva were expressed by some
countries for clear and valid reasons that we do not
have to repeat here. Those countries are not necessarily
supporters of Israeli and Zionist aggression.

90. So far as the reference to the flow of armed
forces is concerned, that is nonsense. We let old
people, children and women go to Israel, not military
units. You are trying to invent everything that your
inflamed brain can think up as slander against the
Soviet Union. It wont get you very far, though. We
have been slandered by many others throughout the
history of the Soviet Union, let me tell you, in particular by Goebbels and Hitler, in whose footsteps you
are now following in slandering the Soviet Union. But
they have already become part of the past, whereas we
exist and we are pursuing our own just Leninist peaceloving policy: equality between all peoples, deep
respect for the rights, sovereignty and national aspirations and interests of all peoples, both great and small.
And if the slanderers of that time did not succeed,
it will not be possible for the Peking slanderers to do
so now.

96. Before I finish my short statement, I should like
to express our friendship and thanks to our great friend
the Soviet Union for the help it gave the Arab nation
in its fight in 1956, 1067 and 1973. We fought with
Soviet arms and support in all domains; and, as the
representative of the Soviet Union said, there was no
economic interest. The Soviet Union does not need
our oil.
97. This solidarity between the socialist countries in
general, including the Soviet Union, China and all the
socialist group,
was really a solidarity
against
imperialism
and aggression; it was not ideological.
We Arabs are not communists; sometimes we are not
pro-communist
and sometimes we are anti-communist,
but we always accept the help of the socialist countries because our struggle is one-the
fight against
imperialism
and aggression-and
we are thankful fol
that help.

91. Mr, LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (t~rrlrsl~/tio/?finnl Chim~sLJ):
The Soviet representative was not able to deny even
12
