S/PV.7811

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7811th meeting

Wednesday, 16 November 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2016/901)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-38657 (E)
*1638657*

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

I take note that, besides this being the last briefing
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) of 2016, it is also the last UNMIK
report by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who has
personally dedicated considerable time and attention to
this issue during the past decade.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2016/901)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Tanin is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/901, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: During the three months since my last
presentation to the Security Council (see S/PV.7760),
there has been some consolidation of the political
situation in Kosovo. Regionally, some new, positive
developments, together with some new reasons for
concern, have emerged. Some of these are well covered
in the Secretary-General’s report before the Council
(S/2016/901); others have emerged since the submission
of the report and deserve to be highlighted.
2/31

16/11/2016

Many of the political expectations with which
Kosovo the year yielded fewer results than hoped.
Difficulty building a broad political consensus has
meant that the territorial delineation agreement with
Montenegro, agreed in 2015, remains unratified, with
attendant consequences for Europe’s visa liberalization
plans for Kosovo. Political divisions have also made
it more difficult to reap the benefits of normalizing
relations with Serbia within the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union (EU). Kosovo’s EU Stabilization
and Association Process, a major development with
far-reaching potential, has been given little focused
attention by officials or the public, despite holding
the promise of much wider opportunities than the visa
liberalization matter can offer by itself.
The political violence of earlier months has
subsided. However, the divergent positions of the ruling
and opposition parties are just as entrenched, and the
general political atmosphere remains deeply polarized.
For Kosovo, this is unfortunate at a time when relations
among traditional regional rivals — for example
Tirana, and Belgrade — have benefitted from renewed
dialogue and the strengthening of economic ties.
Despite the political polarization, some of Kosovo’s
leaders are forging ahead with a farther-sighted view of
reconciliation and the rebuilding of mutually beneficial
relations. I would like to highlight President Thaçi’s
recent engagement jointly with the family associations
of both Albanian and Serb missing persons, and his
emphasis on treating this issue on humanitarian, not
political grounds. He has also recently met with a
mixed Serb and Albanian youth group to encourage
understanding of the possibility of a common future
that would be better than is the situation today.
Such gestures remind us of the potential of genuine
dialogue, including but not limited to the EU-facilitated
political process.
In contrast, the accelerated passage through
parliamentary procedure of a new law on the Trepca
industrial complex emerged as another obstacle to
constructive dialogue. Irrespective of the details of
the law itself, the manner of its adoption was certain
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

to produce the negative reactions that we witnessed.
Assembly members were given less than 48 hours
to review the draft, with almost no opportunity for
analysis and argument. Both the law and the procedure
generated strong protest among the Serb community,
as well as from Belgrade, to the extent that Kosovo
Serb representatives and officials have suspended
their participation in governing institutions. The
international member of the Special Chamber of
the Kosovo Supreme Court has requested that the
Constitutional Court review the constitutionality of
the law, based on concern that it appears to contravene
fundamental property rights.
The divergence between the preoccupations of
governing elites and their electorates is a common
pattern. This phenomenon is present in Kosovo as
well. The priorities identified as being most important
by voters at the community level are often strikingly
distant from the issues dominating the elected bodies
and popular media spaces. The results of recent
surveys, including one commissioned by UNMIK,
indicate that there is little ethnic division in priorities
at the community level; unemployment, corruption and
lack of economic development are the biggest concerns.
Among other recent notable findings are the facts
that the level of trust in governing institutions is low;
the level of trust in international institutions is also
low; a range of party political allegiances appear to
be shifting; all ethnic groups place more emphasis
on dialogue among community leaders as the method
for advancing reconciliation than on political level
dialogue; and the normalization of relations with Serbia
is considered to be an important priority in roughly equal
proportion in both Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb
communities — over 50 per cent in both cases. Kosovo
Serbs and Kosovo Albanians alike, in substantial
majority, believe that the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities will increase the security
of Kosovo Serbs.
In their annual reports, the EU and the World
Bank continue to highlight low levels of employment
generation, and the exceptionally high rate of youth
unemployment, as fundamental issues to be tackled in
Kosovo. Young people unable to find opportunities within
accepted parameters are vulnerable to the temptations
of alternative narratives, including extremism.
Regardless of these familiar dichotomies between
political issues and ground-level concerns, the European

S/PV.7811

perspective remains a force for stabilization throughout
the Balkan region. The dialogue process delivered
progress during this period, including on the freedom
of movement, and in recent days a breakthrough
was announced on the telecommunications issue. In
contrast, there have been few visible signs of progress
on the implementation of the community/association of
Serb-majority municipalities.
Ultimately, political and societal reconciliation
processes must reinforce each other. I hope that political
dialogue is what awaits Kosovo in 2017, accompanied
by the necessary progress at the community level. In
those efforts, the roles of the EU and the United Nations
continue to converge.
I take this opportunity to praise some of the excellent
efforts towards reconciliation at the municipal level,
where municipal authorities have listened and responded
to the concerns of their communities, resulting in real
progress. In Ferizaj/Uroševac, the Mayor appointed a
Deputy Mayor for communities, despite being under
no obligation to do so. The municipal authorities
responded to a request for assistance to clean and
secure a Serbian Orthodox cemetery, and undertook to
provide ongoing support to maintain the cemetery. In
Fushë Kosovë/Kosovo Polje, the municipal authority
approved the allocation of funds to clean three Serbian
Orthodox cemeteries. In North Mitrovica, the longstanding barricade on Prince Milos Street was quietly
and voluntarily removed on the evening of 28 October.
Unfortunately, exceptions do exist. The declaration
by the Suhareka/Suva Reka Municipal Assembly in
late October, opposing the return of Kosovo Serb, is
regressive and regrettable. The absence of a response by
the Kosovo governing institutions is disappointing. The
pain caused by the unresolved cases of missing persons
is real and understandable, but the right to a safe and
dignified return is also fundamental. An opportunity
to demonstrate a commitment to reconciliation has
been missed.
I wish to highlight the progress in efforts to advance
the rule of law in Kosovo. Commitment to the impartial
application of the rule of law should be recognized
and supported. There is deserved recognition for
the determination to pursue cases of high-profile
corruption, including the investigations into organized
criminal activities a few members of Kosovo’s political
class. A clear distinction should be made between
individual and institutional responsibility. While the

16-386573/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Assembly of Kosovo moved to adopt a resolution on the
values of the Kosovo Liberation Army, it is individuals
who have been convicted of crimes, and not groups
or organizations.
One week ago, I had an opportunity to meet with
David Schwendiman, the newly appointed Specialist
Prosecutor of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers. He
informed me that preparations for the full functionality
of the Specialist Chambers were well advanced. The
integrity of the judicial process requires that all parties
refrain from seeking to exert improper influence or
sway public opinion, including through unfounded
speculation about the specific content of the judicial
process. The death in custody of Vetëvendosje party
activist Astrit Dehari has raised concerns and provoked
indignation in many quarters. In the light of the many
questions that have been raised, an objective, thorough
and transparent investigation into that incident
is essential.
Violent extremism and terrorism are evolving
threats in Kosovo and the region. Countering those
threats requires a holistic approach in which law
enforcement is one essential component. Last week, the
authorities in Kosovo arrested a number of individuals
who had allegedly been recruited by extremist militants
in Syria to plan and conduct attacks in Kosovo and
the region. Kosovo’s security bodies deserve special
commendation for their vigilance.
As I have reported to the Security Council, UNMIK
is steadily adapting itself so as to more effectively
address the contemporary challenges in Kosovo. A
logical optimization of our existing resources is helping
to ensure that the Mission discharges its mandate in a
focused and constructive manner, together with all of
its partners. Of crucial importance is the Mission’s
relationship with the Kosovo institutions, and I am
pleased to confirm that the improvement in relations
reported in the Secretary-General’s most recent report
on Kosovo is continuing. Among the many benefits
for all parties, that improved communication helps the
Mission to ensure accurate and balanced reporting on
the situation in Kosovo.
As highlighted by members of the Council in
past meetings, we can all help to advance the cause
of reconciliation. Empirical data from knowledge
products such as the surveys I mentioned help to update
our understanding of the real concerns among the
different geographic and ethnic communities. What did
4/31

16/11/2016

not work yesterday might work today. That concept,
and constructive innovation in general, should guide
our endeavours.
To play our part in supporting a better future for
all people in Kosovo, the Mission continues to rely
upon the support of the Council. I thank the Council
sincerely for that support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
text provided by the delegation): I would like to
take this opportunity to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
introducing the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/901)
and for his overall engagement in the achievement of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). I also salute all Members of
the Security Council and and take this opportunity to
inform the Council of the importance of the continued
consideration by this organ — every three months — of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija, with the aim of
creating conditions for the unhindered implementation
of the UNMIK mandate and as a way of supporting
the dialogue process between Belgrade and Pristina
that is being faciliated by the European Union (EU).
I also take this opportunity to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his contribution
to the work of the Organization during his tenure, as
well as to wish success to his successor, His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres.
Notwithstanding numerous challenges, the
Republic of Serbia has demonstrated time and again
its clear commitment to solving the outstanding issues
through dialogue, within a status-neutral framework
that is guided primarily by the interests of regional
stability and the creation of conditions for economic
prosperity and the progress of the region in the process
of EU accession negotiations.
The agreement on telecommunications was recently
reached due to the efforts of the Republic of Serbia,
whereby a contribution was made to the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement. Yet our readiness to seek
sustainable solutions through negotiations conducive to
a better life for the people of Kosovo and Metohija has
frequently not been reciprocated with the same approach
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

from the other side, which regrettably continues to
resort to unilateral and evidently very detrimental
moves, such as the recent unheard-of attempt by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG)
in Pristina to confiscate the Mining, Metallurgy and
Chemical Combine at Trepca.
Let me point out that, ever since the inception
of the dialogue, Serbia has insisted, during almost
every round and at every level, that the question of
property be included in the agenda, and yet Pristina has
always refused to talk about the matter. Such actions
by Pristina, which instil an atmosphere of unilateral
imposition, fait accompli and ultimatum instead of
solving outstanding issues through dialogue with the
aim of finding acceptable solutions for all involved
parties, as has been done in the past, are not in the
interests of regional peace and stability at all.
As the Council may well know, 1n 1999 UNMIK
undertook to oversee the Mining, Metallurgy and
Chemical Combine at Trepca under resolution 1244
(1999). UNMIK transferred the combine management
rights to the Kosovo Trust Agency, established by
UNMIK itself in 2002. Following the illegal, unilateral
declaration of independence by Pristina in 2008, the
Privatization Agency of Kosovo was established,
which took over the competencies of the Kosovo Trust
Agency, which has not been approved by UNMIK to
this day. The illegal Privatization Agency of Kosovo
then proceeded to privatize State- and communityowned property in the province, to the extent that,
through the persistent pursuit of abusive practices for
which no legal basis exists in resolution 1244 (1999),
Pristina unilaterally privatized about 70 per cent of
State- and community-owned property in the province.
At the same time as the unlawful privatization, Pristina
went on to seize the private property of Serbs and of the
Serbian Orthodox Church. That widespread ill practice
was carried out, by and large, by way of the submission
of fraudulent documents issued by Kosovo institutions
to local Albanians.
The adoption of the law on Trepca was done in
gross violation of the basic principles of resolution 1244
(1999) and the constitutional framework for provisional
self-government in Kosovo. The latter, let me recall,
specifies explicitly that the authority to administer
public-, State- and community-owned property, in
accordance with the relevant UNMIK legislation, as
well as the regulation of public- and community-owned
enterprises, are powers and responsibilities reserved for

S/PV.7811

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
That law, I emphasize, was adopted by the PISG
without participation by UNMIK or consultation with
the owners/shareholders of Trepca, representatives of
the municipalities in the territories on which the Trepca
mines and plants are located or representatives of Serbs
in the PISG. Let me remind the Council that Serbs are
part of the Government of Kosovo and the Trepca North
management and employees. Those unilateral actions
by the PISG induce legal insecurity that may seriously
threaten the fragile security situation in Kosovo
and Metohija. Particularly disconcerting is the fact
that the law disrupts lastingly sustainable economic
development, without which the ethnic structure in
the Serbian communities in the north of the province
is untenable.
By those actions the PISG in Kosovo and Metohija
have patently crossed the bounds of their mandate
and confiscated the private property of Trepca, thus
affecting the owners/shareholders, creditors and the
employees in a direct way. They did so contrary to
the principles of international law against such types
of confiscation, as well as a number of international
instruments guaranteeing the right to the peaceful
enjoyment of property, prohibiting discrimination and
promoting equality before the law, such as the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, the European Charter of Local
Self-Government and so forth. Also, the law runs
roughshod over the basic principles of the free market
and competition and is in direct contravention of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Pristina and the European Union and of the Central
European Free Trade Agreement.
Pristina is in the process of transforming, without
any legal basis or justification, the largest economic
giant in Kosovo and Metohija into the property of the
so-called Republic of Kosovo, while denying Serbia
any rights whatsoever, even though it is the majority
shareholder in the corporation. That is a serious attack
on the interests of the Serbs, including 3,000 of them
working in Trepca. It is estimated that about 38 per
cent of Serbian families directly or indirectly depend
on it. Property and the right to property are sacrosanct,
particularly in the democratic world, and who owns
Trepca is only too apparent. The companies and citizens

16-386575/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

of Serbia who built it own it, and no unlawful decision
of the Kosovo authorities can change that.
Proceeding therefrom, the Government of
the Republic of Serbia decided to make all legal
consequences of the acts and actions of the PISG in
Pristina relative to the legal and physical status of Trepca
null and void. Desirous of ensuring that Trepca, which
is of vital importance for the survival of the Serbs in the
province and for the economic development primarily
of the municipalities of Kosovska Mitrovica, Zvečan,
Leposavić and Zubin Potok, as well as of Novo Brdo
and Gračanica, the Government took action and made
a decision. The attack on Trepca is not only an attack
on one company, it is also an attack on the right of a
people to exist in a territory and an attack on the very
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), on which peace
and stability in the province rest.
Trepca is the lifeblood of the Serbs’ existence in
northern Kosovo and Metohija. Serbian homes sit on
Trepca’s land, and thousands of Serbs work in Trepca’s
mines and support their families by that work. For them
the defence of Trepca is the defence of their right to
exist in Kosovo. In that sense, the attempt to seize it
from its lawful owners is also an attempt to finalize the
ethnic cleansing of the Serbs and to bring into question
the ethnic composition of Serbian communities in the
long term. This is not acceptable.
Not only do the authorities in Pristina usurp the
property of the State of Serbia in Kosovo and Metohija
through the law on Trepca; in article 5 the law states that
the so-called Republic of Kosovo will also appropriate
mineral resources in other parts of Serbia, outside of
Kosovo and Metohija, which is complete legal nonsense.
Serbia remains open to seeking a peaceful and
sustainable solution to this situation, which is not of its
own making, in the belief that resolving all questions
and problems through dialogue and agreement is the
only right way forward. In that context, we expect
Security Council members to bring the force of their
authority to bear and have the law annulled, thereby
preventing its negative legal and security consequences
from jeopardizing the stability of Kosovo and Metohija
and the region, as well as enabling the process of
dialogue and the normalization of relations. Otherwise,
Kosovo and Metohija will become a black hole in
Europe without any protection of private property.
I would like to point out, as I did at previous
meetings of the Council, that the establishment,
6/31

16/11/2016

within the shortest period of time, of the Community
of Serb-majority municipalities, as a mechanism for
the systematic institutional protection of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija, is of paramount
importance for the survival of the Serbian people
in the province. Unfortunately, instead of being the
central issue and acted upon as a matter of priority,
the establishment of the Community has become the
subject of political blackmail. Our side insisted in the
past period that the dynamics of the establishment of
the Community be worked out and that the date for the
management team to commence its work be determined.
The Community of Serb-majority municipalities is to
be based only on agreements already reached in the
dialogue, and not on subsequent attempts to unilaterally
alter the agreements reached with the facilitation of the
European Union.
The process of establishing the Community of Serbmajority municipalities must not be allowed to drag on
and be threatened by unilateral acts that send messages
of disenfranchisement to the Serbian people in Kosovo
and Metohija. One such message is the law on strategic
investment in Kosovo, which, if implemented, would
provide Pristina with cover to contract capital projects
directly, without tender offers; for the participation of
the institutions of local self-government; and to possess
and sell general assets arbitrarily to the detriment of the
status and interests of the Serbian people in the province.
That law was adopted contrary to the procedure that
provides for the adoption of laws of vital interest to
local communities, eviscerating the Community of
Serb-majority municipalities by infringing on the
competencies that under the agreement belong quite
explicitly to that Community to be.
It is clear that this legislative provocation by
Pristina is aimed at making the Community of Serbmajority municipalities an empty shell and preventing
Serbs from making decisions with regard to their
economic development and urban planning. The theft
of Serbian property in Kosovo and Metohija, such
as the failed attempt to seize the tourist complex on
Mount Brezovica, cannot be legalized by any law. It is
therefore necessary to return to the negotiating table, as
the unilateral acts do not benefit anybody.
The situation in Kosovo and Metohija continues to
be characterized by the absence of physical and legal
security for Serbs, especially for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) who have returned or would like to
return home. IDPs are prevented from participating in
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

developing the law on the Kosovo property comparison
and verification agency, which is yet another
inadmissible and frightening example of the attempt
to seize Serbian property in outright contravention of
the agreement on cadastre reached within the dialogue
conducted with the facilitation of the European Union.
All along, thousands of Albanians are being inscribed
in the cadastre as owners of the property of IDPs by
way of submission of fraudulent documents, while
no special mechanism has been provided to notify
IDPs of the proceedings instituted in connection with
their property.
Another method of discouragement of returns,
especially in the region of Peć, is the dissemination
of information in the Kosovo media of the issuance
of indictments for war crimes against a large number
of Serbs, almost as a rule against IDPs reporting for
return. IDPs are repeatedly being attacked, with the
frequent use of firearms and explosive devices, while
acts of desecration against Orthodox graveyards and
memorial plaques of abducted or murdered civilians are
on the rise. Attempts to prevent IDPs from observing
religious holidays, as was the case in Djakovica and
Mušutište, continue unabated. In addition, religious
extremism, compounded by terrorism and the activities
of radicalized extremists returning from battlefields
and terrorist group formations, has dramatically
increased in Kosovo and Metohija. That exacerbates
the polarized political environment, which is replete
with tensions and tear gas democracy and persistent
violence against the members of Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities.
Security in Kosovo and Metohija has always been
in short supply and marked with escalating violence. As
a rule, returnees to ethnically mixed communities are
the most vulnerable. It is therefore hard to understand
why there is reduced focus and space on security
observations in the report of the Secretary-General. It
is for that reason that we propose that new chapters on
the situation in the communities south of the lbar River,
on obstacles aggravating or preventing IDP returns, on
property rights and impunity for ethnically motivated
crimes be included in the quarterly reports of the
Secretary-General.
Let me also point out that the monotonous recitation
of incomplete statistics on attacks on the life and property
of members of non-Albanian communities serves but
to cast a pall of relativity over the civilizationally
inadmissible phenomenon of persecution on an ethnic

S/PV.7811

and religious basis. The report would be much more
informative if, in addition to statistics, it advised
of how competent institutions — including police,
public prosecutors and the judiciary — reacted, and if
it provided data relative to investigations, the search
for perpetrators, indictments, criminal or civil trials
and the types of sentences handed down, along with
the terms of their validity and enforcement in cases
of ethnically motivated criminal offences. Without
institutional reaction, all attacks and other offences
against Serbs are being depersonalized and reduced
to statistics, which leads to the tolerance of a climate
of impunity of ethnically motivated crimes against
Serbs in the long run. Providing data on the outcome
percentages related to such criminal offences would
therefore be very informative indeed.
Instances of desecration against the spiritual
heritage of the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija
are many. The last such instance was the arson that took
place in the Church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina
at the beginning of September, of which I also made
mention in my previous statement to the Council (see
S/PV.7760). Let me remind the Council that that is an
unfinished church that was converted into a public
lavatory and a podium to shoot music videos featuring
scantily clad singers. As if that were not enough,
unknown persons broke into the church and set it
afire. That contemptible act is an outright consequence
of the refusal of the Kosovo authorities and police to
provide round-the-clock protection to the church,
which has been frequently broken into and desecrated.
That incident was preceded by protests by Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians who time and again manifested
unchecked hostility towards the Serbian Orthodox
Church and the Serbian people in the province, the
targets of systematic ethnic terror for the past 17 years.
The church, the only remaining trace and symbol
of the presence of Orthodox Christianity in downtown
Pristina, in which more than 40,000 Serbs lived
before 1999, has been designated for destruction, just
as every other Serbian thing destroyed or expelled
from Pristina and many other places in Kosovo and
Metohija. For weeks, the Pristina authorities bulldozed
each and every square foot of the land surrounding
the church, in an attempt to link it in whichever way
with war crimes; once they failed, the arson ensued.
The extremists calling for the destruction of the church
or its seizure from the Serbian Orthodox Church and
conversion are in fact calling for the continuation of

16-386577/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

ethnic cleansing and the denial of basic religious rights
and freedoms to the Serbian people, thus violating the
civilizational norms of the present-day world. They
fan the flames of ethnic and religious extremism and
radicalism and hamper stabilization and reconciliation.
Furthermore, reflecting Pristina’s true attitude towards
the cultural and religious heritage of the Serbs, they
are at the same time indicative of how right Serbia
was to oppose Kosovo’s admission to UNESCO. Those
who destroy, set ablaze or desecrate Serbian churches
cannot be their keepers. Perhaps those who supported
the admission have now come to realize to whom they
wanted to entrust the protection of the Serbian heritage
in the province.
Because basic conditions for sustainable returns
do not exist, the number of returnees to the province
continues to be lamentably low. I submit that that is a
defeat for all those involved in the process of return.
It is incumbent upon all of us to change that situation
and to create conditions in which IDPs are given a real
choice, in deeds and not only in words, between return
and local integration. To do so, though, we must see to
it that basci conditions be fulfilled in places of return
with regard to personal and property security. The rule
of law, non-discrimination, full respect for basic human
and civil rights and a step away from politics, which
deepens the gap among communities on a national
and religious basis, are the necessary preconditions
for normalizing relations and finding solutions to
questions relative to IDPs from Kosovo and Metohija.
It is important to keep such people in the focus of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, despite the numerous problems the world
faces, including the current refugee and migrant crisis,
all the more so as this is exactly a question that explicitly
falls under the UNMIK mandate. The international
community must not allow those people to be forgotten.
It is not enough to note that the level of returns is
unacceptably low; the reasons for the failure should be
analysed instead. The failure is attributable primarily
to the rigid attitude of the majority community, as
well as of its political leaders, towards the return of
displaced Serbs.
Let me remind the Council — and, when speaking
about Kosovo and Metohija, the Secretary-General
should also recall in his reports and remind each of the
members of the Council — that truly sustainable returns
have been realized only by 1.9 per cent of internally
displaced persons. Does the Security Council believe
8/31

16/11/2016

that that is a topic that should no longer be discussed?
If not, the Council would call on Pristina to create the
necessary conditions and appeal to people to return to
Kosovo. We cannot allow that to be forgotten. I hope
that none of the countries represented in the Council
will operate with double standards now that it pertains
to Serbians who are displaced. That is why I recall, once
again, that the Security Council adopted a resolution
giving a mandate to the Mission to enable the return
of internally displaced and persecuted persons from
Kosovo, whether Serbs or Albanians. Only 1.9 per cent
of Serbs have returned. That percentage accounts for
approximately 4,000 internally displaced persons. One
of the reasons for that is the disregard for communities
south of the Ibar River, which increases their feeling of
being isolated, sidelined and left to their own devices.
Each and every time the representatives of Pristina
utter their accusations of alleged genocide and ethnic
cleansing of Albanians, please remember my remarks
from our previous meeting that, out of 427 localities
in which they lived until 1999, Serbs were expelled
from 311. Today no Serbs are present there. More than
220,000 were expelled.
Let us remember the victims of the monstrous
crime of trafficking in human organs, testified to by
Mr. Dick Marty, Special Rapporteur of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, in his report. Let
us remember the abducted and disappeared Serbs and
other non-Albanians from Kosovo and Metohija, the
fate of whom is unknown 17 years after the conflict.
More than 1,000 Serbs have been killed since 1999.
The number of their killers against whom legally valid
sentences were handed down still amounts to zero.
Let us remember Father Chariton, the martyr
bestially killed in my native Prizren in June 1999.
He was decapitated in the same way in which, to the
consternation of the entire world, the terrorists of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant behead their
innocent victims today. His headless body was found
with his arms and backbone broken and with stabs in
his heart, gruesome evidence of the torture of Albanian
extremists to which he succumbed.
Let us remember the March pogrom of 2004, in
which 19 Serbs were killed and 900 wounded, despite
the international presence in the province. Nine hundred
and thirty-five Serbian, Roma and Ashkali houses were
set afire. Six towns and 10 villages were ethnically
cleansed. About 4,000 men and women were expelled
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

from their homes. Thirty-five churches were destroyed,
burned or desecrated, many of which were built as early
as the fourteenth century. The abbey of Devič, which
was founded by the Serbian Despot Đurađ Branković
in 1434, was also burned that March, while those who
set fire to Mother of God Ljeviška Chuch, which is on
the UNESCO World Heritage List, burned automobile
tires so that fire quickly incinerated some of the most
beautiful icons from the first half of the fourteenth
century, which represents some of the cultural heritage
of the world.
Let us remember the numerous instances of
vandalism on Serbian cultural and religious heritage
throughout the province, unbecoming of modern-day
Europe and the civilized world. Since June 1999 and
the cessation of the armed conflict, 236 churches,
monasteries and other facilities owned by the
Serbian Orthodox Church, as well as historic-cultural
monuments, have been targets of attack. One hundred
and seventy-four religious sites and 33 historiccultural monuments have been destroyed. There are
no undamaged tombstones in most Serbian cemeteries,
while south the Ibar River no monuments from Serbian
history remain intact. No localities south of the lbar
River have streets today with Serbian names, as most
of them have been renamed to bear the names of the
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army, who are
proven terrorists and perpetrators of monstrous crimes.
The message sent to the Serbs is very clear indeed:
those who killed and expelled them now pass as national
heroes, and monuments are erected and streets and
public institutions are renamed to glorify their names.
Those instances of institutional violence in present-day
Kosovo and Metohija are part of the strategy aimed at
erasing the traces of the centuries-long presence of the
Serbian people and State and legitimizing the results of
the ethnic cleansing of the Serbian people.
The representatives of Pristina continue to repeat
their false accusations, which are based on the premise
that a lie told 1,000 times becomes a truth. Let us
remember all that I have said. Those lies cannot change
the fact that Kosovo is not and cannot be a State. Kosovo
is nothing but the product of a violation of international
law, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the postulates on which modern civilization was
built. Ethnic cleansing, mass violations of the human
and civil rights of non-Albanians, and the destruction
of the cultural heritage that belongs not only to the
Serbian people but also makes up a part of Europe’s and

S/PV.7811

the world’s cultural heritage, all make up the foundation
of the self-declared fake State of Kosovo.
The best evidence of the civilizational immaturity
of those professing to be the leaders of the Albanian
people in Kosovo and Metohija is the recent
adoption — and please listen carefully to this — in the
Kosovo Parliament of a cynically entitled “Resolution
on the protection of the values of the Kosovo Liberation
Army”. That shameful resolution is predicated on the
assumption that crime is of positive social value. If
the seizure of property and the torturing and killing
of civilians, as well as the ambush of journalists and
ambulances, can be called values, then the terrorist
Kosovo Liberation Army does deserve to have a
resolution devoted to it. It is not known that any
Parliament in the world, except perhaps during the
Second World War, ever adopted a resolution glorifying
criminals and terrorists. Yet the Parliament in Pristina
has managed to make itself unique once again. Not
a modicum of censure of terrorism and violence is
to be found in the resolution, which also makes no
mention of the “yellow house” in which people had
their organs ripped, of the abductions, of the rapes
or of the pogroms of Serbian and other non-Albanian
civilians, which represent the true values and legacy
of the Kosovo Liberation Army. For those reasons I
say to the members of the Security Council — who are
also representatives of civilized society — that that act
by the highest legislative body in Pristina deserves the
strongest possible condemnation.
It is exactly in that way that the Parliament in
Pristina sent a clear message to the entire international
community, including those sitting here in the
Chamber, about what the Parliament thinks of the
Specialist Chambers — which Mr. Tanin referred to
and which other speakers likely will as well — and
the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation Army that those
Chambers are supposed to verify and punish. That
means that the Parliament in Pristina, which adopted
the necessary legislation for the commencement of the
work of the Specialist Chambers in The Hague, has
sent an unequivocal advance notice as to what we can
expect going forward in the process of establishing
accountability for the crimes committed against the
Serbs and other non-Albanians.
That also shows that the visits by Hashim Thaçi to
monuments and in connection with the farmers killed
in their fields at Staro Gracko in July 1999 and the
children killed at Goraždevac in 2003 while they were

16-386579/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

playing on the banks of the village stream are nothing
but an act of one-shot unsuccessful political marketing.
The assessment from the report before us states that
“[l]eading by example helps to change attitudes
in wider context and gives optimism for the
potential for reconciliation to succeed at the social
level.”(S/2016/901, para. 22).
Let me remind the Council that nobody was held
accountable for those crimes and that, in all likelihood,
nobody ever will be. Only time will tell if those visits
will be transformed into a concrete positive step forward
in the furtherance of security and respect for the rights
of non-Albanian communities. Once the perpetrators
are identified and tried, we will certainly commend
Mr. Thaçi’s visits. For the time being, though, not just
those crimes, but no crime to date committed in Kosovo
since 1999 has been punished.
In the interest of regional stability, our side will
continue the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
The dialogue is aimed primarily at addressing the
everyday vital problems of the people living in Kosovo
and Metohija and at normalizing relations. We will
not abuse the dialogue as a platform to ram through
the independence of Kosovo. Let me recall that the
essence of each and every dialogue, including the one
in Brussels, is to achieve agreements, and not impose
solutions. The role of the international community is to
help achieve compromise, rather than assist one side in
imposing its interests. That is true in particular of the
Community of Serb-majority municipalities, which is
of paramount importance for the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia will never recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo, but it will
continue the policy of seeking peaceful solutions of
this question on the basis of a responsible approach
and the full implementation of the agreement reached
within the Brussels dialogue. Regardless of the
numerous challenges and frequent manifestations
of non-constructiveness and the only-too-evident
propensity to resorting to half unilateral steps, we
will continue to be committed to working towards the
normalization of relations. We do not want the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija to be a latent threat to the
stability and progress of Serbia or the region. We will
therefore work with dedication on solving disagreements
peacefully, being aware that a long process is in front
of us and that, to make things more difficult, we often
10/31

16/11/2016

do not have a proper interlocutor, one who shares our
vision of a region aspiring to reconciliation, the rule of
law and democratic values.
I call on States that have not recognized the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
to stay loyal — despite the pressure to which many
of them have been exposed — to their principles of
respect for international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the supreme authority of the Security
Council for safeguarding international peace and
security, whose resolution 1244 (2000) confirms the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Serbia. They should always bear in mind that the
support of the international community is key to the
success of the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Each and every change of position of the countries that
have not recognized the independence of Kosovo would
negatively affect the continuation of the constructive
approach of the parties in the dialogue and the
implementation of the agreements reached.
At the same time, I also call on various countries
that have recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo to seriously reassess their
decisions and contribute in that way to the efforts
aimed at finding a mutually acceptable solution to the
question of Kosovo and Metohija. That is what we are
asking for — a chance for dialogue and an agreement
instead of unilateralism, instead of unilateral acts. We
expect Council members to lend their support, while
keeping mind the values enshrined by the United
Nations, and to repudiate the rampant propaganda and
outright lies whereby we keep being told perpetually by
the representatives of the PISG in Kosovo at Security
Council meetings.
In conclusion, let me point out once again that
Serbia continues to be firmly committed to peace,
dialogue, reconciliation and regional stability — in a
word, to lasting solutions that will lead us to the future
instead of to the conflicts of the past.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: As always, it is an honour to come
to speak before the Security Council on behalf of the
Republic of Kosovo.
The countries that Council members represents
have put so much effort into bringing about peace
and stability in the Western Balkans, and for that we
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

will be forever grateful. We Kosovars are living proof
that, when there is solidarity among the free nations
of the world, when there is courage and goodwill,
life overcomes death and good prevails over evil.
The Security Council members have spent countless
hours negotiating and adopting dozens of resolutions
and presidential statements concerning the situation
in Kosovo. Furthermore, the tax payers’ money of
Member States was spent for the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) to be
deployed in Kosovo in the immediate aftermath of the
war. We in Kosovo remember very vividly goming back
to our homes in 1999 and finding everything in ashes.
Fortunately, thanks to the Council’s hard work and
commitment, we were not alone. The United Nations
and its agencies were at the forefront of our efforts to
build peace and stability. Again, for that we will be
forever grateful.
It is precisely because of that profound feeling
of gratitude that we in Kosovo somehow feel
uncomfortable that, every three months, we come back
here to the Chamber, taking up the Council’s valuable
time, when we all know that the world we live in today
has way too many pressing issues demanding the
Council’s attention.
Let us just do a quick reality check. First, this
is 2016, not 1999. Secondly, as of 17 February 2008,
Kosovo is no longer administered by the United Nations.
Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign State that
is recognized by the overwhelming majority of the free
nations of the world. Those facts are irreversible. The
clock of history cannot be turned back. But yet we come
here every three months to hear from my colleagues
from Serbia about a parallel universe in which Kosovo’s
statehood is inexistent; in which Kosovo Albanians
committed ethnic cleansing; in which the oppressor
becomes the oppressed; in which Milošević is the
hero and the Kosovo Liberation Army, an army that
fought for liberation, is a terrorist group; and in which
Kosovo violated international law, while Serbia was
trying to protect it. That is the parallel universe that my
colleagues from Belgrade try hard to portray.
In the real world, as I said, Kosovo is free,
independent and sovereign — and that fact will not
change. It is not only that we did not violate international
law but, at Serbia’s request, the International Court
of Justice issued a clear and unambiguous separate
opinion in its advisory opion on the Accordance with
internatinoal law of the unilateral declaration of

S/PV.7811

independence in respect of Kosovo (see A/64/881). I
shall quote part of it, as I am sure Council members
have seen it:
“No State can invoke territorial integrity in
order to commit atrocities (such as the practices of
torture, and ethnic cleansing, and massive forced
displacement of the population), nor perpetrate
them on the assumption of State sovereignty,
nor commit atrocities and then rely on the claim
of territorial integrity notwithstanding the
sentiments and ineluctable resentments of the
‘people’ or ‘population’ victimized. What has
happened in Kosovo is that the victimized “people”
or “population” has sought independence, in
reaction against systematic and long-lasting terror
and oppression, perpetrated in flagrant breach
of the fundamental principle of equality and
non-discrimination. The basic lesson is clear: no
State can use territory to destroy the population.
Such atrocities amount to an absurd reversal of
the ends of the State, which was created and exists
for human beings, and not vice-versa.” (A/64/881/
Add.1, para. 176)
While we in Kosovo will never shy away from
and remain committed to bringing justice to all the
victims, regardless of their ethnicity and background,
we are not seeing the same level of commitment
from our neighbour to the North. Kosovo has taken
unprecedented measures to address the alleged crimes
by establishing the Specialist Chambers. Cooperation
with international and local justice has never been a
subject for negotiation in Kosovo. We want justice for
all, because that is the only way we can bring peace
to all the families that have lost their loved ones. In
Kosovo we do not fear justice, because we have nothing
to hide. Our cause and our war were just.
While we have gone to great lengths to address
all the allegations made against us, Serbia has been
anything but willing to prosecute war crimes. I
have said it before in this Chamber, and I will say it
again — 20,000 women were raped in Kosovo during
the war. The number of people indicted for that is
zero. Again, 1,262 children were brutally killed, and
the number of people indicted is also zero. Thousands
are missing, and there are very clear traces of the
institutional chain of responsibility and command used
to hide its tracks. As has been documented, the Serbian
Government went so far as to erect buildings in the

16-3865711/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

mass grave sites. I will say it once again — the number
of those indicted is zero.
There can be no reconciliation without
accountability and justice. As we reaffirm our
commitment to inter-State dialogue between Kosovo and
Serbia, mediated by High Representative Mogherini, I
must stress that we in Kosovo are not satisfied with the
pace of the implementation of the agreements that have
been reached. A few days ago, our delegations agreed
on the dialling code for Kosovo. That is certainly great
news, as it will strengthen our independence and bring
millions of dollars to our budget. However, I should
remind the Council that we also celebrated agreement
on the dialling code a year ago.
Our scepticism about the success of that dialogue
is also amplified by Serbia’s constant violations of
the agreement on freedom of movement. Two Kosovo
citizens, one of them a regional police commander,
were recently arrested and detained under arrest
warrants issued by the Serbian authorities. They were
released — after being held in prison unnecessarily
and for far too long — because no reasonable charges
were brought against them. The Serbian authorities
claim to have lists of arrest warrants against hundreds
of Kosovan Albanians. That is absolutely unacceptable.
Serbia has no jurisdiction over Kosovan citizens.
Actions such as those we have witnessed recently are
not only legally wrong, they also directly undermine
our efforts to normalize the region and improve
freedom of movement. Because they fear arrest,
Kosovan Albanians do not feel comfortable travelling
through Serbia any more. And this is not the first time
that Serbia has violated international law and abused
the agreement on freedom of movement reached in the
high-level dialogue in Brussels. It is a demonstration
of the Serbian Government’s attitude in insolently
provoking Kosovo’s Government.
If we look back, however, it is not only former
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army who have
persistently featured on Serbia’s wanted lists. I would
like to recall here Serbia’s lists of arrest warrants issued
even for various Western leaders, who include former
President Bill Clinton, Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright and Secretary of Defense William Cohen of
the United States; former President Jacques Chirac
and Premier Lionel Jospin of France; former Prime
Minister of Britain Tony Blair; former Chancellor
Gerhard Schroeder of Germany; and many other
ministers of foreign affairs and defence. The former
12/31

16/11/2016

NATO Secretaries-General Javier Solana and George
Robertson and former NATO Supreme Commander
in Europe, General Wesley Clark, were also among
those accused. The bottom line is that the process of
normalizing relations between Kosovo and Serbia does
not end in Brussels, where the agreements are signed.
They are meaningful only when they are implemented
in our own countries.
Another clear demonstration of Serbia’s lack of
sincerity regarding normalization is the outrage that
Belgrade has expressed over the new law we recently
enacted concerning the Trepça mines. Serbia has also
exploited the Serbian community in Kosovo as a means
to its ends. The Trepça mines are in Kosovo, they
belong to Kosovo and they will be managed by Kosovo.
The Trepça law accords fully with Martti Ahtisaari’s
comprehensive proposal on Kosovo’s final status and
with our Constitution. And it was specifically UNMIK
that assigned full authority over and management
of public and socially owned enterprises to the-then
Kosovo Trust Agency, which later became the Kosovo
Privatization Agency. I know that my colleague has
distributed complete background information on the
new law to everyone here.
Serbia has no legal basis supporting its allegations
about property rights relating to public property and
enterprises located within the territory of the Republic
of Kosovo. Any such efforts will meet with strong
opposition from the Government and the people of
Kosovo. Such behaviour undermines the normalization
of relations between the Republic of Kosovo and Serbia.
There is no legal basis to the claims of the Serbian
authorities; their words and actions only exhibit
colonial tendencies towards Kosovo. The time when
decisions for Trepca and other Kosovo resources were
made in Belgrade is over, once and for all.
On 13 October, 11 Members of Parliament
representing the Serbian community in Kosovo sent
a request to the Constitutional Court of the Republic
of Kosovo to review the applicability of the Law on
Trepca with the provisions on property protection and
the rights of communities of the Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo. On 31 October, the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Kosovo ruled that Law No. 05/
L-120 on Trepca is in compliance with the Constitution.
The ruling stated that Kosovo-Serbian Members of
Parliament did not substantiate their allegations on
constitutional grounds and did not provide evidence
indicating how and why the challenged law on Trepca
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

has violated the Constitution, either in procedure or
in substance.
The Court further commented that the law on Trepca
is not limited to one or another ethnic community in
Kosovo but is designed for the well-being of the whole
of society. There is no evidence as to how and why
Kosovo Serbs would be damaged this this law; quite
the opposite is true. Making Trepca and other Kosovo
resources fully functional means permitting and
allowing all Kosovo citizens to work and prosper. We
hope that Serbian representatives in Kosovo will start
making their own decisions without any fear or pressure
from Belgrade, and that they decide to re-engage in the
parliamentary and institutional life. That is the only
way forward.
Allow me to also take this opportunity to also
address the preliminary observations of the Special
Rapporteur, Ms. Karima Bennoune.
As to the number of displaced people, to claim that
200,000 thousand Serbs were displaced after the war
from Kosovo is factually incorrect. If that had been the
case, then no single Serb would be living in Kosovo
today. According to the census organized in 1991, at
a time when Kosovo was under Serbian occupation,
the number of Serbs living in Kosovo was 194,000.
Unfortunately, to this date we still do not know the
accurate number of Serbs living in Kosovo. That is
because when Kosovo institutions organized the census
in 2011, the Government of Serbia unleashed a very
aggressive campaign to discourage the participation
of the Serbian community. The smear campaign went
so far as to label registration in the census as an act
of betrayal. For us, this is not about numbers; even if
only one Kosovo Serb cannot return, for us that is one
too many.
At the same time, we must also remember that not
all Serbs who fled Kosovo after the war were actually
citizens of Kosovo. When the war erupted in Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, entire neighbourhoods were
built in several locations in Kosovo to accommodate
Serbs who used to live in those parts of the former
Yugoslavia. Some of them decided to stay, as is the
case of the Marević family, which came to Kosovo in
July 1995. Today, one of the members of that family
is a Minister for Local Government in the Republic
of Kosovo.
In addition, in line with our Constitution, dual
citizenship is allowed. Kosovo Serbs who are also

S/PV.7811

citizens of Serbia have a constitutional right to vote
in the Serbian Parliamentary elections. In the absence
of a Serbian embassy in Kosovo, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe mission
administers the process in Kosovo. According to data
from the 2016 parliamentary elections, 106,094 voters
in Kosovo were eligible to vote in those elections.
Obviously, the numbers do not match up. Either the
Serbian Election Commission inflated the number
of Serb voters in Kosovo, or the number of Serbian
displaced people is inflated.
We will only get the full picture once we organize
the next census. We will spare no effort to create
better living conditions for all Serbs living in Kosovo.
Every citizen of Kosovo is free to return. The Kosovo
Government has spent tens of millions on different
projects, building homes and supporting sustainable
return. As enshrined in our Constitution, Kosovo
belongs to all its citizens. However, we also need
to be cautious and work with the local communities,
and not provoke unpleasant situations like the one we
witnessed in late August in the village of Mushtisht in
the municipality of Suharekë, when visiting Serbian
pilgrims were met with protests from the Albanian
villagers seeking justice for the crimes committed
during the war in their village.
On 3 April 1999, the Serbian army, with the
assistance of some local Serbs, deported the entire
local Albanian population, killing 14 civilians and
destroying, looting or burning down every single house
in the village — 1,051 of them, to be more precise.
According to the testimonies collected by several
human rights organizations, 122 local Serbs were active
members of the Serbian military and paramilitary
forces. These are small communities where everybody
knows one another. Everybody knows what happened,
and everybody knows who did what, and yet no one
was ever indicted for the crimes committed there. That
is why justice is so important. It has been said time
and time again by people much wiser than me that true
peace is not only the absence of war, but the presence
of justice. All victims in Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnicity, deserve truth and justice. That is the only
way we can build peace and reconciliation.
Another issue that is repeatedly brought to the
Chamber by my colleagues from Serbia is the state of the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo. Allow me to state
that the Kosovo Constitution provides unprecedented
rights for the protection of the Serbian Orthodox sites

16-3865713/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

in Kosovo. It is not only our constitutional duty to
protect and preserve our shared cultural and religious
heritage; it is also our moral duty. During the last war
in Kosovo, Serbian forces destroyed 218 mosques and
other historic or religious sites in my country, including
centuries-old libraries. Unfortunately, we also saw
scenes of attack and destruction in the March riots in
2004, when around 35 Orthodox sites were attacked.
We in Kosovo condemned those acts in the strongest
terms. Over $10 million were allocated in the budget of
Kosovo to repair the damage, and many international
donors have contributed with additional funds.
Religious tolerance has been the backbone of our
society. Churches and mosques share the same yard in
many cities in Kosovo. Interfaith tolerance had always
functioned in Kosovo until politics decided to step in.
There is only one Orthodox Church in Kosovo with
which we have a problem, and that is the church that
the Milosević regime decided to build on the premises
of the Public University of Pristina. That is the church
my colleague was referring to.
Let me remind those present that construction
on that Church began in 1992, at a time when our
autonomy was revoked and when the University of
Pristina closed its doors to all Albanian students and
professors, including my own. That object lately has
become a source of tension, and the only heritage it
bears is that of repression. It stands there as a reminder
of a time when we were denied our most basic human
rights. The Serbian Orthodox Church on the grounds
of the University of Pristina campus was built illegally
and by force as part of a campaign of repression, and we
in Kosovo should preserve it as such.
Destruction is not the answer. That object should
serve as a reminder of very difficult times, but it
should also serve to persuade the clerics who accepted
the illegal building of the church by Milosević to do
some soul-searching and confront the role they played
when they acted in unison with the Milosević regime.
Kosovo is a secular republic. It is multireligious and
multicultural, and we will fight to preserve it as such.
Any attempt to change the fabric of our society will
be meet with resistance by our people and action from
our Government.
Just last week, thanks to the cooperation of Kosovo,
Albanian and Macedonian law enforcement institutions,
a terrorist group was apprehended. That is yet another
reason why Kosovo must become part of the global
14/31

16/11/2016

family. Most of the challenges we face are borderless,
and cross-border cooperation and coordinated actions
and responses to those threats are necessary. We
therefore regret that INTERPOL has decided to postpone
voting on three applicant countries until the criteria for
membership are revised. We believe that we should all
be treated on individual merits. Kosovo’s request to
join should be considered because we meet the criteria.
Transparency International highlighted in a report last
week that the Kosovo police is the most credible and
trusted police force in the region. We believe that not
only Kosovo, but also INTERPOL would gain from our
membership, and we are convinced that in the coming
sessions our request will be put forward.
We in Kosovo are fully aware that there is much
more work that needs to be done in order to meet the
rightful expectations of the Kosovo people. Internally,
we have realized that independence is not selfsufficient. People want more jobs, better education and
health care. They want to be equal citizens of the global
family of the free nations of the world. And it is our job
to make sure that what we leave behind for the future
generations is a republic in which everyone, regardless
of ethnicity, gender, religion or sexual orientation, has
equal opportunities to prosper. To achieve that goal,
there is more that needs to be done, but it is a goal worth
fighting for.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Çitaku
for her statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for the very comprehensive briefing
on the situation that he gave via video-teleconference
from Pristina, and we reiterate our full support to him as
he carries out his important functions. I also thank the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and the Ambassador
of Kosovo, Ms. Vlora Çitaku, for the statements they
have just delivered.
I will begin by once again recalling our desire
to see a review of the regularity with which the
Security Council considers the situation in Kosovo,
given the improvement in the security situation and
the progress that has been made in strengthening
Kosovo’s institutions. We also believe that those
positive developments justify ongoing efforts to
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

reconfigure the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo with respect to its structure, size,
number of staff and activities. Alongside a number
of our partners, we call on the Secretary-General to
formulate recommendations along those lines in his
forthcoming report.
France remains convinced that Kosovo’s future
is no longer being determined primarily within the
Security Council, but rather through the political
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina under the
auspices of the European Union. Although there have
been tensions in the dialogue over the past few months,
progress has been made. I am thinking in particular of
the agreement on telecommunications of 13 November,
the agreement on license plates for vehicles to facilitate
traffic between Serbia and Kosovo, or the continuation
of work on the Mitrovica bridge. We welcome these
positive developments, which must have a concrete
impact on the living conditions of the people on the
ground. It is important in this respect that the technical
aspects of these agreements should be implemented
within the time limits laid down.
However, this progress is not sufficient. We
therefore expect that all the commitments entered into
under the agreements concluded under the auspices
of the European Union will be implemented as soon
as possible, including with regard to the creation
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities. This is a key element of the dialogue.
We therefore urge the Kosovo and Serbian authorities
to intensify their efforts to produce even more concrete
results in the months to come. The normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina remains in
general a prerequisite for their respective advances
towards European integration, which were further
encouraged at the Paris-Balkans 2016 summit held on
4 July. We invite Serbs and Kosovars to engage on all
subjects with a view to normalization, including on the
Trepca issue.
Ongoing efforts to consolidate the rule of law in
Kosovo must remain a priority. The integration of new
Serbian personnel into the Kosovo judicial system is
moving in the right direction. The reduction in the
number of incidents involving minorities, as noted in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/901), is also good
news. However, we expect Kosovo to pursue its efforts
in the fight against corruption and organized crime.

S/PV.7811

Stengthening the rule of law also requires the fight
against radicalization in all its forms. France welcomes
the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in this regard,
both locally and within the Global Coalition against
Da’esh. I also take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, which contributes every day to the rule of
law and security there. France also wishes to stress the
need to ease the tensions of recent months on Kosovo’s
domestic political scene.
The construction of an independent, modern
and democratic State requires the establishment of
a calm and responsible dialogue between the various
components of the political field, in compliance with
the provisions of the Constitution and in the context
of the proper functioning of existing institutions. We
are particularly concerned about the tensions arising
from the process of ratifying the border delineation
agreement with Montenegro. In that context, the
Kosovo authorities must continue to mobilize in favour
of dialogue among the various political forces and the
establishment of a peaceful and inclusive society.
Finally, I conclude by stressing that France will
continue to support the efforts of the Kosovo authorities
in favour of the international recognition of their State.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing and insightful analysis of the situation
prevailing in Kosovo. We welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. We
also welcome Ambassador Vlora Çitaku to this debate.
I shall start by reiterating Angola’s stand on the issue
of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence.
For Angola, resolution 1244 (1999) continues to
be the applicable legal framework for reaching a
comprehensive solution for Kosovo through dialogue
and negotiation based on the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Regarding the situation in Kosovo, the report
of the Secretary-General on UNMIK (S/2016/901)
describes a less virtuous situation by comparison
to the previous three periods. Increasing tensions,
political violence and public protests are on the rise,
whether relating to the delineation of the border with

16-3865715/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Montenegro, which remains the most contentious issue
in Kosovo’s political debate; the law on the Trepca
mining complex, which has the potential to seriously
undermine relations between Belgrade and Pristina; or
the freeze of participation by Kosovo Serb members of
the Assembly and the Government in official activities.
Furthermore, the disruption of the work of the Kosovo
Assembly, due to the aggressive actions and disruptive
tactics of some parties, is a very negative development.
In short, a number of sensitive issues — including the
return of Serbs to their lands of origin — and political
tensions between the Government and the opposition
parties continue to undermine the normal functioning
of Kosovo’s institutions.
We welcome the commitment of the new Serbian
Government, sworn in on 11 August, to proceeding with
and intensifying dialogue with Pristina and maintaining
its support for the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, as well
as improved cooperation between the municipalities
of northern Kosovo and Pristina-based ministries. It is
our expectation that common ground will be reached
and that an agreement establishing the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo will finally be implemented.
However, the report further highlights the slow
implementation of the agreements reached within
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU),
despite signals of commitment on the part of the parties
to moving forward, including on the issues of free
movement, telecommunications and integration of the
Kosovo judiciary. The issues of returns, reconciliation,
the protection of cultural heritage and community
relations still have a long way to go. The reported
security incidents, physical assaults, verbal threats,
robberies targeting returnees and the vandalism of
property are matters of concern.
Against that tense backdrop, we warmly commend
the example set by the President of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, by paying his respects to past Serb victims of
sectarian violence in an effort to change attitudes and
to promote reconciliation. In that regard, we echo the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia in expressing the expectation that this
visit will be transformed into a palpable, positive step
forward in the furtherance of security and respect for
the rights of non-Albanian communities.
16/31

16/11/2016

In conclusion, we underline the fundamental role
played by the United Nations, through UNMIK, in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
and its engagement with Pristina and Belgrade. We
acknowledge the positive results achieved in tackling
organized crime and corruption in Kosovo, indictments
for terrorism-related offences, and the fight against
incitement to nationalistic, racial, religious or ethnic
hatred, discord and intolerance. We remain confident
that the political leaders of Belgrade and Pristina will
be able to fulfil their commitments and implement the
agreements reached under the EU-facilitated dialogue
process. We hope that the dialogue will proceed in good
faith and in a results-oriented manner aimed at building
a better future for all peoples in the Balkans.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I, too, welcome
First Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador
Çitaku to the Security Council today, and thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing.
New Zealand strongly supports dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina aimed at normalizing relations,
and the European Union’s support for that process.
We encourage the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo to
engage constructively in that dialogue with sincerity
and determination to achieve concrete results for their
people. We reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for
both sides to seek fair and lasting compromises.
While a number of agreements have emerged
from the dialogue, the pace of implementing them
has been relatively slow in some instances. We were
pleased to learn about the recent agreement relating
to telecommunications and we look forward to seeing
progress on Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo.
We encourage both sides to make progress on other
issues identified in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/901), including those of internally displaced
persons and of missing persons. Implementation of
agreements reached within the dialogue is in the best
interest of all of Kosovo’s communities. Therefore,
we hope that both sides can focus on delivering on
their commitments and refrain from taking actions
which unnecessarily divert energy away from
constructive dialogue.
The previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/666) noted a significant reduction in aggressive
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

protests and political violence. We are, therefore,
disappointed to see a recurrence of such incidents,
including disruptive tactics in the Kosovo Assembly.
When elected representatives engage in such behaviour,
what example does that set for the communities they
represent? We encourage those parties who oppose
the use of violence to achieve political objectives to
continue to distance themselves from that behaviour, to
send a clear message that concerns must be addressed
through peaceful and normal democratic processes.
Previously, New Zealand has welcomed progress
towards the establishment of a specialized court to try
cases brought forward by the European Union Special
Investigative Task Force. We are therefore pleased
to see another step taken in that direction with the
recent appointment of a specialist prosecutor. We look
forward to the court becoming operational as soon
as possible and contributing to the broader process
of reconciliation.
Finally, and as we have said throughout our
Council term, we believe the Council should take a
more flexible approach as to how and when it considers
this agenda item. The current frequency of meetings is
not justified by the situation on the ground, especially
when contrasted against other pressing issues on the
Council’s agenda. We say that not to diminish the range
and strength of views that exist on the question of Kosovo
or to suggest that everything is perfect in Kosovo.
Rather, we believe that the Council has a responsibility
to organize its work in a manner that directs its time
and energy towards the peace and security challenges
that most urgently demand our attention. In that regard,
we would also be open to considering a possible
restructuring of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
to reflect the improving realities on the ground with the
passage of time.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
briefing. I also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements.
Uruguay, a civilized nation, understands that
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999), including full
respect for Serbia’s territorial integrity and sovereignty,
is the international legal basis for resolving the situation
in Kosovo. As such, it calls for political dialogue and

S/PV.7811

constructive approaches that may lead to solutions that
promote progress and stability in the region. Despite
certain general economic and political progress, internal
political tension and violent outbreaks are challenges
we must continue to address. In that regard, Uruguay
rejects of the use of violence and encourages all parties
to find common ground that will lead to stability and
cover the entire population of Kosovo.
We also welcome Sunday’s technical agreement
on telecommunications as well as progress in the
reconstruction of Mitrovica Bridge. As for the recent
tensions over the Trepca mining complex, I call on the
parties to seek a solution through political dialogue.
I want to raise three important aspects that will
help reconcile the various communities that live in
Kosovo: the protection of cultural property, respect for
the differences within the communities, and the living
conditions of internally displaced persons.
From her visit to Kosovo in October, Ms. Karima
Bennoune, Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural
rights, expressed concern over the politicization of
cultural heritage. Respect for the culture and religious
beliefs of every community, as well as policies aimed at
minorities, are essential to reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence, and will help internally displaced persons
return to their homes.
According to Mr. Chaloka Beyani, Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights of
internally displaced persons, while positive measures
have been taken, the authorities must redouble efforts
to achieve lasting solutions for those who have been
internally displaced for 17 years. Of particular concern
is the situation of communities of minorities and the
most vulnerable displaced persons. I also agree with his
view that the international community must follow up
and support those efforts.
Uruguay underscores the importance of the
accountability, access to justice and, in particular,
cooperation with the special court set up to judge
crimes committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army.
We also echo the concern expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/901) regarding the protection
of witnesses in trials for crimes committed in Kosovo
during the 1998-1999 conflict. Moreover, Uruguay
agrees with the conclusions of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women on the need to prioritize policies that give voice
to survivors of sexual violence in conflicts and, in

16-3865717/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

particular, its defence of providing full reparation to
the victims of sexual violence in the Kosovo conflict.
Finally, I want to express our support for and
recognition of the work of Special Representative
Mr. Zahir Tanin and UNMIK, in their task of promoting
security, stability and the respect for human rights, as
well as to the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations
agencies on the ground.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): As
my first order of business, I would like to convey my
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his very comprehensive
and detailed briefing and update on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo report
(S/2016/901). We would like to once again underscore
our support for his efforts to strengthen security and
stability and the respect for human rights in Kosovo.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku. I
thank both of them for their statements.
We strongly support efforts to implement the
agreements reached between Belgrade and Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union (EU). We are
nonetheless disappointed to learn of the delay in the
implementation of the provisions of those agreements.
We nonetheless commend to the progress that has
been achieved, most notably, in the recent agreement
concluded between the two parties pertaining to
telecommunications, which we note was reached under
EU supervision.
There can be no alternative to dialogue, and we call
on leaders in Belgrade and Pristina to relaunch highlevel dialogue without further delay in order to achieve
consensus, find fair solutions and guarantee the full
implementation and roll-out of the agreements reached
in August 2015. We hope that the recent agreement
on telecommunications will breathe new life into the
process of addressing outstanding issues, particularly
the issue of heritage assets.
We also welcome the positive signs highlighted in
the report, indicating the genuine desire of both parties
to establish the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities in order to protect the freedoms and
rights of the Serb populations. We call on both parties
to fully implement the association/community of Serb18/31

16/11/2016

majority municipalities as quickly as possible in order
to strengthen regional stability and further the process
of reconciliation. We attach a great deal of importance
to enhanced cooperation with the Council with regard to
reporting. We call on all parties to enhance and extend
their dialogue in order to include more people in the
decision-making process, particularly those that have a
direct impact on the lives of the people concerned, so
that their voices are heard.
We support efforts to improve regional stability and
security. That is one of the pillars of Egypt’s foreign
policy, because we believe it is important to enhance
the political and economic future of the region. Against
that backdrop, we are concerned by the current political
stalemate with regard to the delineation of the border
between Kosovo and Montenegro. We call on both
parties to find a solution to the stalemate as soon as
possible so as to resolve the border delineation issue
and strengthen domestic and regional security.
We must also ramp up efforts for regional integration
and reject speech aimed at stoking animosities in the
region and sowing further division. Egypt supports
the efforts and work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
all regional and international organizations. We firmly
welcome the key role played by UNMIK in Kosovo as
it seeks to strengthen security, respect for human rights
and stability. We also welcome the very important
role played by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, my good friend Ambassador Tanin, for his
briefing and for sharing his thoughts with us. I also once
again welcome the presence in the Security Council
of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
I would like to begin what will be my last
statement in the Council, at least as a member, on this
agenda item by reiterating Spain’s gratitude for the
excellent work of Ambassador Tanin and our firm and
unwavering support for him and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Their work is important and necessary, but also of
great complexity in the light, inter alia, of the reiterated
issue of defining the Mission’s purpose. We believe
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7811

that the current lack of headway in various spheres
on the ground makes the work of UNMIK doubly
relevant, in particular its efforts to foster reconciliation
between the communities, promote and protect human
rights, and improve governance at the local level. It is
precisely at this local level that UNMIK has chosen to
prioritize its actions, because it is the key to unlocking
the vault of reconciliation and peaceful coexistence
that we all desire for Kosovo. It is the objective we all
share, but that unfortunately we continue to be unable
to fully achieve.

establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities remains key to ending the
current deadlock situation, so that the process becomes
a priority for all parties.

The future of Kosovo and the entire Western
Balkans necessarily depends on overcoming division,
finding mutual understanding on prevailing needs,
and jointly constructing a progressive future. In this
process, we must acknowledge that the European Union
plays a crucial role. However, we must ensure that in
the future the citizens themselves must play that role
with sincere and unconditional commitment. Moerover,
we can support only those processes that are jointly
spearheaded by the citizens themselves.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the two essential elements of the Spanish
position, combining coherence, and this without
prejudice for its principled position, with a constructive
spirit, which allows us to support any measure or
process which, like the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, not only benefits the population of the
territory but also the stability of the entire Western
Balkans region.

Among those, the most noteworthy event was
without a doubt the Brussels dialogue facilitated by
the European Union — first, because it was jointly
determined by the parties, and secondly, because,
independent of the political or ethnic affiliations of
citizens, the dialogue process placed the region within
the framework of the values and principles of the
European Union. Nevertheless, despite the aspirations
created at the outset, the dialogue was unable to achieve
major results in 2016, which is about to end. It is
therefore necessary to restart the dialogue in good faith
and in a constructive manner, particularly at the highest
level, and for the parties to renew their commitment
to the implementation of and compliance with the
agreements already reached.
Spain welcomes the recent telecommunications
agreement and other small, as yet incomplete measures,
such as the work to reconstruct the Mitrovica Bridge.
However, other recent measures, such as the adoption
of the so-called nationalization law of Trepca,
openly contribute, due to their unilateral nature, to
undermining the spirit of dialogue. It is indispensable
that the parties avoid adopting unilateral measures that
erode the necessary mutual trust, neutralize progress
and further himder progress. There is a need to work
together in good faith to implement the agreements
reached to date in the context of dialogue, and to work
towards reaching new agreements. In that regard, the

We are aware of the domestic difficulties that have
been the hallmark of the political situation on the ground
throughout this year. However, these difficulties cannot
be used as a pretext. The same is true, if not more so,
of the use of political violence and failure to respect the
rules of the game of democracy.

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing today. I welcome
Ambassador Çitaku and First Deputy Prime Minister
Dačić back to the Security Council and I thank them
both for their statements.
It has been less than three months since the last
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (see
S/PV.7660). In that time, a great deal has happened in
the world. The United Nations chose a new SecretaryGeneral, and the United States chose a new president.
But in truth very little has happened in Kosovo that
warrants the Council to spend yet another afternoon
discussing UNMIK. In the last 11 weeks, we have spent
more time debating Kosovo in this Chamber than we
have spent discussing North Korea and its missile tests.
As New Zealand and France have already said,
this is clearly unnecessary. As the United Kingdom’s
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson saw during his visit to
Pristina and Belgrade last week, the people of Kosovo
and Serbia no longer live in the world we hear about in
this Chamber. Instead, they live in a world where their
prospects for the future matter more than the divisions
of the past. It is the future that the leaders of Serbia and
Kosovo both want, as they made clear to my Foreign
Secretary, and it is a future that the Security Council
has a responsibility to help realize.

16-3865719/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

It was in that positive, forward-looking spirit that
London played host to the United Kingdom-United
States Kosovo Investment Forum this month. Over 150
companies heard about the great potential of Kosovo,
the potential of rich natural resources, the potential of
unexplored reserves of lead, silver and chrome, and,
of course, the great potential of the dynamic, talented
young men and women of Kosovo. It is a potential
clearly seen in the Trepča mines, which could bring
economic prosperity to all of Kosovo. It is vital that
the Government continue to consult transparently on
the future of this important economic asset, and it is
this spirit of consultation and of dialogue that is so
necessary to the realization of Kosovo’s potential.
This is most clearly seen in the dialogue facilitated
by the European Union (EU). I would like to welcome
the commitment to the dialogue shown by both sides.
But as the Special Representative has made clear,
implementation of those commitments has slowed,
which will only hold both countries back on their paths
to membership in the EU. Normalization of relations
is in the interests of the people of Kosovo, Serbia and
the region. So let us call on all sides to redouble their
efforts to deliver on their commitments.
But dialogue should not just be limited to meetings
in Brussels. Dialogue is also needed between Kosovo’s
politicians in the Assembly. Disruption and violence
have no place in political discourse, and I call on the
opposition and the Government to work through their
disagreements in a spirit of dialogue, not confrontation.
But away from the destruction in the Assembly, the
latest UNMIK report (S/2016/901) also makes clear that
dialogue is ongoing elsewhere. I want to pay tribute to
President Thaçi and welcome his efforts to reach out to
Kosovar Serbs on issues such as missing persons. I urge
all parties to engage in that spirit so that together they
can deal with issues of the past.
Dealing with the past, however, also requires
accountability. As the Secretary-General’s report sets
out, a number of senior political figures involved in
corruption or war crimes have been brought to justice
in the past few months, which is a vital reaffirmation
that the rule of law applies consistently to all people
in Kosovo no matter their position, and that there will
be no impunity. This pursuit of accountability must
continue, including through the Special Court. Coming
to terms with the past is a vital part of building a future
for all in Kosovo.
20/31

16/11/2016

I would like to close with a final reflection on
dialogue. If there is perhaps too little dialogue in
Kosovo at the moment, there is certainly too much
dialogue about Kosovo here in New York. So I call
again for a reduction in the number of these meetings
and a reduction in the number of these reports. This
would more accurately reflect the realities on the
ground in Kosovo. In that spirit, we echo calls for
increased efficiencies to be found in UNMIK and for
a further scaling down of the Mission in line with its
mandate. We also support calls for the Secretariat to
present proposals for restructuring the Mission in the
next report.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and
continued service.
I have always followed Kosovo with great interest
since the time I spent from 1999 to 2000 serving as
Chief Political Officer in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Today, I
have brought with me a bottle of wine from Kosovo, a
cabernet sauvignon from the Bodrumi i Vjetër winery.
Now, I know that the Security Council is not a place to
talk about wine, but I have a reason for doing so. I want
to share a short anecdote with the Council.
In the Prizren region in the southern part of Kosovo,
there are high-quality vineyards, believe it or not. But as
a result of the conflict in the late 1990s, these vineyards
fell into disuse and were abandoned. When in 1999 I
visited the owner of one of these vineyards, he told me
that it would take several years before they could revive
the vineyard and produce grapes for wine again. In the
meantime, he hoped he could obtain capital from Japan
for investment and labour costs to care for the vines and
prepare them to restart producing grapes.
These great vineyards had indeed fallen apart. Even
if they once produced wonderful wine, I wondered, who
would invest in them if they were not going to make
a profit for several years? Then I was led inside the
winery, where there were several large metallic tanks
full of wine from years before. Naturally, I asked for
a taste. It was delicious red wine with an exceptional
aroma. An idea came to me: if this wine were sold,
it could bring funds to the vintner. When I asked a
Japanese colleague in UNMIK for help, he was able
to connect the vineyard owner with a Japanese trading
company. Seventeen years later, the vintner is producing
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

and exporting great wine like the wine I am holding, to
acclaim from international wine lovers like me.
Throughout Kosovo there are countless people like
this genial vintner who have regained self-sufficiency
with the support of Governments, the United Nations,
international
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations and, of course, individuals. It is the same
thing for the Government of Kosovo. Since UNMIK’s
establishment 17 years ago, Kosovo has gained a
Constitution, a Government and a parliament.
According to the International Monetary Fund,
Kosovo achieved an enviable real economic growth
of 4 per cent last year, with similar projections for the
next five years. To be sure, Kosovo still faces many
challenges. Progress it the talks between Kosovo
and Serbia is slow, and the number of returnees to
Kosovo remains small. However, the dialogue in
Brussels between Kosovo and Serbia continues.
Domestic political divisions on drawing the border
with Montenegro are largely a matter for Kosovo’s selfreliant democracy, although it is important to listen
closely to the views of the minority.
That leads me to a larger point. Kosovo is not without
problems, but its various problems should in general be
solved by the judgment of the people of Kosovo and the
people of the region. Why the United Nations? Let us
seriously consider the possible withdrawal of UNMIK.
On that matter, we should consider focusing our
limited peacekeeping resources on other areas in the
world where more serious clashes are evident. Having
just returned from a Council visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, that is especially clear to me.
A Security Council briefing every three months
no longer seems necessary. To be honest, it gives me
great pleasure to talk about my memories of Kosovo
once every three months, but the efficient and effective
functioning of the Council should take priority. Put in
a very simple way, we have to consider how we use our
time. Indeed, Council members have expressed keen
interest in improving the Council’s working methods.
I therefore join New Zealand and the United Kingdom
in their call for a reconsideration of the Council’s
working methods concerning the allocation of its time
and energy. Even if a report is undertaken every three
months, the Council has the flexibility to decide whether
or not to receive a briefing on each occasion. It should
be sufficient that the Council retains the flexibility to
meet on the matter as needed, and UNMIK is a prime

S/PV.7811

example. I look forward to discussing that matter further
in the context of revising presidential note S/2010/507,
although that really is just a matter of practice.
In concluding, I would like to emphasize our
continued support and appreciation for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin.
We look forward to his next report and look forward
to celebrating the success of his work over a glass of
Kosovo wine.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing, and the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, for his statement. We also welcome the presence
of Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
In advocating for a peaceful solution to the dispute
in Kosovo —
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My apologies for interrupting. I wanted to ask
my colleague and friend from Japan to take his bottle
of wine off the Security Council table, if he would. I
would again like to remind everyone that this table is
a sacred piece of furniture that should be treated with
respect. As a matter of principle, we should not place
glasses and bottles of wine on it.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In advocating for
a peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
resolution 1244 (1999) —
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Sorry, as to the bringing
of a bottle of wine, I do not find it anywhere in the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
or in presidential note S/2010/507 a prohibition on
bringing a bottle of wine to the Chamber.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In advocating
for a peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the applicable
international legal basis for the achievement of a
holistic solution to the dispute, within the framework
of political negotiation. In that regard, we call for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia to be
upheld, in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The

16-3865721/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

support of the United Nations, particularly through
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), so as to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights remains crucial for
fulfilling the commitments entered into. That work has
been complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).
However, we express our concern in the light
of the scant progress made in terms of the European
Union-facilitated talks concerning the process of
implementing of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations.
In that regard, we urge parties to redouble their efforts
in the quest for a political, peaceful, fair and lasting
solution, within the framework of international law
and in compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Brussels Agreements.
Although the report (S/2016/901) indicates that the
security situation has remained stable over the past few
months, we regret the acts of violence perpetrated by
certain political actors as well as the difficulties faced
by Serbs seeking to exercise their right of return. In that
connection, we believe it is vitally important that full
respect for the human rights of displaced persons and
minorities be promoted, as well as ensuring that they
can return to their places of origin, in order to ensure
that those citizens can fully enjoy all of their human
rights without discrimination.
However, we are concerned by the fact that acts
of violence are still being perpetrated, targeting
Kosovo Serb civilians in certain areas. We therefore
call on parties to take relevant measures to overcome
the situation and prevent persecution and hostilities
based on ethnic or religious grounds. Moreover,
we are alarmed by the fact that the sale of business
and properties in Kosovo undermines the rights of
Kosovo Serb minorities and has become an additional
controversial element that is impeding the return of
displaced persons to their home communities. It is
worth pointing out that the Association/Community of
Serb-majority municipalities in northern Kosovo has
not yet been established. We therefore urge the parties
to intensify their efforts in that regard, as was agreed in
Brussels at the highest level.
The issue of clarifying the situation of people who
went missing during the war is still a high-priority
issue. In that regard, we urge interested parties to
22/31

16/11/2016

intensify their joint efforts on that matter. We welcome
the decision to establish an analysis team to support the
sub-working group on forensic issues.
In terms of cultural and religious heritage, we
underscore the need for the parties to work together to
deliver effective protection for the important heritage
of the different Kosovo communities, which will
allow all people to participate in cultural life without
discrimination and to be able to access and enjoy their
cultural heritage.
In terms of the fight against impunity, we would
like to highlight the headway made towards ratifying
the agreement with the Government of the Netherlands,
as well as the fact that the agreement is now in the
final phase of the review process. It should serve to
streamline the work of the Specialist Chambers in
investigating the allegations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the armed conflict
in Kosovo. The application of justice in these cases in
the framework of due process will certainly contribute
to reconciliation and peace among all parties.
With regard to the fight against terrorism, we
commend the efforts undertaken to combat this
scourge, such as the sentences handed down to some
citizens accused of joining or trying to join Da’esh.
Our country supports measures to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, which
must be accompanied by effective strategies to address
such issues as marginalization, poverty, violence
and intolerant ideologies, with a view to preventing
radicalization and with a special focus on young people.
Efforts must also be made to effectively implement
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
prohibiting the financing, training and transfer of arms
to the aforementioned terrorist groups.
In conclusion, we reiterate that dialogue and
cooperation between the parties are the only way for
countries to shake off the vestiges of violence and
thereby achieve peace and stability. Now more than
ever, it is essential that the parties continue to meet and
ttalk at all levels, in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements of 2013.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku of Kosovo back to New York and thanks
them for their statements. I am also grateful to Special
Representative Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing.
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Years of persistent efforts by the leaders in
implementing socioeconomic reforms have evidently
borne fruits. We are pleased with the strong economic
performance shown by Kosovo with a 4 per cent
growth in its gross domestic product and a marked
improvement in its global ranking for doing business,
as reported by the World Bank. As Kosovo moves closer
towards European Union integration, we envisage
further intensified efforts by Kosovo to restructure its
economy, implement economic reform measures and
address the persisting challenge of high unemployment.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina remains a crucial aspect in paving the way
towards European integration in the interests of peace,
stability and prosperity in Kosovo and the region.
We therefore wish to see the resumption of the
high-level European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade as soon as possible.
With respect to outstanding commitments, as agreed
in the 15-point Brussels agreement, Malaysia urges
Pristina and Belgrade to redouble their efforts in
implementing the historic agreement. This includes the
establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities and the implementation of the
action plan for telecommunications in Kosovo. We
also welcome the recent progress made with regard to
Kosovo’s judicial integration and the redevelopment of
the Mitrovica bridge.
I share the concerns on the political tensions
relating to the issues of territorial delineation with
Montenegro and the Trepca mining and industrial
complex, as highlighted by Mr. Tanin today and the
Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2016/901).
We call on the opposition parties and their supporters
to abstain from political violence in expressing their
grievances. We also urge all parties and stakeholders to
avoid inflammatory rhetoric and to engage in dialogue
and consultations in good faith to resolve the issues
amicably and in accordance with the rule of law.
Malaysia commends President Hashim Thaçi of
Kosovo for his exemplary leadership and reconciliatory
gesture in visiting memorials commemorating Kosovo’s
civilian victims in the conflict. His visits send a much
needed signal of reconciliation, national unity, social
integration and building a common future. We call on
the people of Kosovo to similarly focus on rebuilding
trust and confidence to cease the targeting of minorities,
as well as religious and cultural sites.

S/PV.7811

Part of the effort to rebuild trust between the
communities in Kosovo involves addressing the past. In
that regard, Malaysia takes note of the appointment of
the Chief Prosecutor of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers
in the Netherlands to try cases arising from the
findings of the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force. We also commend ongoing efforts by the
Kosovo Government in countering terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization.
I join my other colleagues in reaffirming support
for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We commend the leadership of the
Special Representative and the important role of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Kosovo Force in ensuring peace, security and
the rule of law in Kosovo.
Lastly, my delegation strongly supports the call
made by other Council members for a reduction in the
frequency of Council meetings of UNMIK to better
reflect the situation in Kosovo and in view of more
pressing matters on the Council’s agenda.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his
briefing. I welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement.
China also listened carefully to the statement delivered
by Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We understand the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important legal
basis for resolving the issue of Kosovo. We must follow
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, within the framework of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in order to reach appropriate
settlements and solutions to the question of Kosovo
acceptable to all relevant parties through dialogue
and consultations.
China welcomes the establishment of the new
Government in Serbia and appreciates the positive
efforts of Serbia in seeking a political solution to the
question of Kosovo. We hope that both Pristina and

16-3865723/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Belgrade will resume high-level political dialogue
at an early date in order to carry out pragmatic and
constructive consultations and implement the relevant
agreements already reached so as to effectively protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic groups in
Kosovo and advance national reconciliation. We hope
that both parties will refrain from any words or actions
that may lead to the complication and escalation of the
situation in a joint effort to actively seek a sustainable
solution to the question.
China commends the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
under the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Zahir Tanin. We support
UNMIK in continuing to implement Security Council
mandates. We hope that UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
will carry out their work, in accordance with their
respective mandates, in order to play a constructive role
in the proper settlement of the question of Kosovo.
The authority of the Security Council, as the main
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should be respected and its seriousness must
be protected.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
and share the very serious concerns he has expressed
with regard to the state of affairs in Kosovo. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, and his team for their work, and we
thank him for his briefing on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which
demonstrates that there are ongoing serious issues in
the province.
We must note that the situation in Kosovo remains
extremely unstable. There are a growing number of new
cases of violence against Serbians. In order to resolve
such cases, they must not be swept under the rug, but
rather addressed directly.
In the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/901),
references are made to the serious incident in the town
of Mušutište on 28 August, in which Serbian pilgrims
were subject to attack by nationalists. The rise in
animosity against minorities bears witness to ongoing
threats. Such threats are also posed to the physical safety
of Kosovar Serbs. First and foremost, it is absolutely
24/31

16/11/2016

clear that that is the reason for the lack of significant
progress in the return of refugees to Kosovo. Where
are the security and prosperity we were promised
when Kosovo was unilaterally declared independent?
Regrettably, no response to that question exists.
The utmost attention must be paid to the matter
of the protection of Serbian religious and cultural
heritage. There are ongoing cases of interference
by local authorities in the matter of the property
of the Serbian Orthodox Church and of attempts to
expropriate its property or complicate the use of sites
belonging to it. The Church of Christ the Saviour
in Pristina is systematically subject to vandalism.
Obstacles are levied when addressing the consequences
of such desecration and the rebuilding process. We
are extremely concerned about the campaign to seize
economic assets belonging to Serbian State companies
and bodies.
A striking example is the recently adopted law on
the nationalization of the mining complex, Trepca. The
very sustenance of a significant portion of Serbians,
those living in the north of the province, depends on
that mining company. Such decisions do not help to
resolve the situation. Indeed, in adopting that law, the
leading Kosovar party did not bother to consult with
its nominal partners in the coalition of the Assembly
of Kosovo, the Serbian List. As a sign of protest, the
Serbian List boycotted the activities of that body.
Again, such methods do not contribute to national
reconciliation. As Mr. Dačić rightly said, the attack was
not on the complex, but rather on Serbians.
It is time for serious work with Pristina. Despite
every effort, the mediators in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina have failed to break the stalemate.
There is an increasing number of issues surrounding
the dialogue. For the fourth year in a row, practically
nothing has been done to implement the key agreement
on the creation of the association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo. Attempts are made to divert
attention from the true cause of the state of affairs — the
sabotaging of the agreement by Pristina by fomenting
inter-Kosovar disputes on the legality of the delineation
of the border with Montenegro, which supposedly is
hampering the so-called Kosovo Government in its
actions. We think that matters concerning the property
of the Serbian State bodies, companies and private
individuals in the province account for a large part
of the problem and require greater attention from the
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Mission. The Mission should manage that matter more
actively.
The Kosovar authorities have had a symptomatic
and almost allergic reaction to the recent court ruling
with respect to former members of the Kosovar
Liberation Army (KLA). Attempts to invalidate
the verdicts, including through the use of threats,
demonstrate the context in which the work of the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office for the investigation into war crimes by the
KLA is being conducted. Regrettably, preparation for
the beginning of the court’s work is marked by a lack
of transparency. International bodies and countries
participating in the drafting and implementation of
that project are accountable to the Security Council in
providing full, timely updates on the implementation
of the project. The priority is to ensure the thorough
investigation of crimes by the KLA and the punishment
of perpetrators.
With regard to the work presently being undertaken
to launch the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office to investigate war crimes by the
KLA, we have questions about the status of the regular
reporting of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) regarding the formation and
functioning of the Specialist Chambers and its bodies,
including the Office of the Specialist Prosecutor. Let us
not forget that EULEX was approved by the Security
Council in this very Chamber. I hope that my colleagues
in the European Union will take this opportunity to talk
to us about current developments.
Furthermore, we know that the prosecution of
the Kosovars guilty of crimes has been entrusted
to a most dubious body, the Specialist Court, which
is being created by the unrecognized authorities of
Kosovo, whose legal system can hardly be considered
mature enough for the conduct of such serious legal
proceedings. The system of appointing judges and the
role of EULEX in it is far from transparent. For that
matter, we ask to be informed about developments. We
welcome the inclusion in the report of information,
which we had called for time and again, regarding
the investigation of the tragic cases in Kumanovo,
Macedonia, in May 2015. We think that the matter
should continue to be monitored until those responsible
for that criminal terrorist act are identified and brought
to justice.

S/PV.7811

I would also like to touch on the issue of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We regret that there has been
an attempt by KFOR, with thought of pretext to avoid
contact with Russian representatives. It seems that our
partners do not wish to discuss those issues, which does
not serve to resolve them. We hope that today’s meeting
will send a message. We see violations of resolution
1244 (1999), as well as of the United Nations mandate,
when attempts are made to transform KFOR into a fullfledged armed forced.
We take note of information with regard to an
agreement reached on telecommunications between
Belgrade and Pristina. Its implementation will be of key
importance. That is the very weak link in the dialogue.
No tangible progress has been made in carrying out
key agreements on the creation of the association/
community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, since
April 2013, but that is the key to guaranteeing the rights
and freedoms of Serbians. We think that further delays
in the process with invented pretexts can only further
degrade the situation in Kosovo and around it.
In the current circumstances, keeping a watchful
international eye on processes in Kosovo is of particular
importance. In that connection, it is important to ensure
stable staffing and budget parameters for UNMIK.
We see no reason to review the practice of quarterly
reporting on the Mission’s activities. For now, the
situation in Kosovo does not require that. In particular,
we would like to underscore the fact that no one has the
right to call into question, much less revoke, resolutions
and make irresponsible statements in the Chamber.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully applicable and
is still the obligatory international legal basis for the
settlement of the situation in Kosovo.
Mr. Yelchencko (Ukraine): I join other members of
the Council in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing.
Ukraine highly appreciates the work conducted by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo under the leadership of Mr. Tanin on the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
mandate. I also welcome the First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, as well as Ms. Vlora Çitaku back to the Council
and thank them for their statements.
Ukraine supports the political dialogue between
the two sides, under European Union facilitation. In
our view, that dialogue continues to be the cornerstone

16-3865725/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

on the road to reconciliation. It is a driver of reform
and an important prerequisite for the region’s further
European integration. We are also convinced that there
is no alternative to dialogue and cooperation within the
Brussels process. It is crucial that the political leaders
of the two sides demonstrate courage and farsightedness
and continue searching for solutions that will bring
peace, stability and prosperity to all people in Kosovo.
We witnessed some positive developments during
the reporting period that give us cautious optimism
for the future of Kosovo. In particular, we welcome
the recent agreement reached between Belgrade and
Pristina on telecommunications, which envisages the
unimpeded work of Telekom Srbija in Kosovo and a
dialing code for Kosovo. We hope that that progress will
pave the way for resolving other outstanding issues.
We also welcome a new understanding reached
on implementing the agreement on the reconstruciton
of the main bridge in Mitrovica, as well as improved
cooperation between the municipalities in northern
Kosovo and the relevant Kosovo ministries, particularly
concerning municipal finance. My delegation joins the
Secretary-General in commending the efforts made at
the municipal level to employ members of non-majority
communities in local governance institutions.
That progress proves that the parties are able
to put aside existing differences and concentrate on
the dialogue in order to achieve the normalization of
relations. Unfortunately, that is not always the case. We
take note of the assessment that the implementation of
the Brussels Agreement continues to be relatively slow.
To our regret, we observe serious delays on many issues
in the implementation of outstanding commitments,
dangerous divisive rhetoric and even violence.
While we praise the declared commitment of
both parties to move forward with the establishment
of the Community of Serb-majority municipalities in
Kosovo and the implementation of the agreements on
the freedom of movement and the integration of the
judiciary, that commitment should be translated into
more specific and effective actions, since those issues
constitute vital prerequisites for further enhanced
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
Political tensions concerning the issue of territorial
delineation with Montenegro are negatively affecting
Kosovo’s European integration path, as the ratification
of the demarcation agreement with Montenegro remains
26/31

16/11/2016

one of the requirements for visa liberalization with the
European Union.
Another divisive issue that has a negative impact on
the situation on the ground and undermines the efforts
to establish confidence and trust between the sides is
the ownership and structure of the Trepsca industrial
complex. We are concerned about the dangerous
inflammatory rhetoric that we have witnessed over the
past month on that issue. We urge the parties to engage
in more close consultations to find a way out of that
situation. It is important to negotiate a solution and
avoid further possible provocations and violence.
I would like to underscore that Ukraine commends
the expressed commitment of both sides to intensify
dialogue. That is what we need to focus on in the near
future. That is what we need to adhere to in order to
assure further stabilization of the situation, promote a
better atmosphere for talks and, at the end of the day,
ensure the prosperity of the whole region. I therefore
wish to express Ukraine’s full support for the SecretaryGeneral’s call on political leaders in Belgrade and
Pristina to demonstrate courage and political will and to
resume the high-level dialogue without delay. Belgrade
and Pristina need to move full speed ahead with the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 Brussels First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations by building trust among communities and
finding compromise on the most difficult issues.
A certain role in that process is still played by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. However, we need to look to the future. It is
high time to seriously consider our next steps of how
to rationalize the Mission in terms of restructuring or
downsizing, as well as to review the Council’s timetable
of consideration of the situation in Kosovo and its
relevant reporting cycle, given the progress already
achieved. We join the United Kingdom, New Zealand,
Japan and others on that issue.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes Foreign Minister Dačić and
Ambassador Çitaku. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tanin for his briefing.
We welcome the positive tone of the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2016/901) and its
acknowledgement of the overall economic and political
progress in Kosovo. We applaud the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for its commitment over the years in assisting Kosovo to
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

develop multiethnic, democratic institutions that uphold
the rule of law and respect human rights. Through its
continued and diligent commitment to a peaceful and
stable Kosovo, UNMIK has fulfilled its mandate. The
situation in Kosovo is drastically different from what it
was when the Security Council adopted resolution 1244
(1999), and much has changed even since the Mission
was restructured in 2008. It is time to streamline
and rationalize UNMIK even further with respect to
structure, size, personnel and tasks, as several Member
States have already noted. We continue our call for
increased efficiency and downscaling of the Mission
in line with its mandate and realities on the ground in
Kosovo and ask that the Secretariat present proposals
for restructuring the Mission in its next regular report.
A number of us just returned from the Security
Council’s trip to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where United Nations
peacekeepers are called upon to protect civilians from
armed groups and where upwards of 700 civilians
were killed in the past two years. While Kosovo
faces challenges that would be expected of any young
country, the Security Council does not have the luxury
of deploying United Nations resources in Kosovo
when they are so desperately needed to address active
conflicts elsewhere, such as in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Given the continued progress and overall
stability in Kosovo, we also believe it is high time for
the Council to adjust the reporting and briefing cycles.
A three-month reporting cycle is simply not necessary,
as several Member States have already noted. Kosovo
has reached a point in its development where deliberate
and methodical reform is required to further increase
political and security stability, normalize relations with
its neighbours and strengthen human rights and rule-oflaw institutions. Those efforts take time. Of course, we
should continue to track Kosovo’s trajectory; but such
close oversight by the Security Council is unwarranted.
We once again urge fellow Council members to work
with us to adjust the reporting period to six months.
We have seen positive signs of economic
development in Kosovo. While it is true that according
to the World Bank, gross domestic product gross
ticked down slightly to 3.6 per cent, the SecretaryGeneral’s report also notes that that is a favourable rate
as compared with neighbouring countries. We would
also like to point out that it is a higher rate of growth
than that experienced by over two thirds of Security
Council members. As we have already heard from my

S/PV.7811

Japanese colleague, that rate of growth is the envy of
some. Therefore, the accompanying level of 33 per cent
unemployment must be urgently addressed. We still
believe that further economic reform can help improve
governance, combat corruption, increase transparency
and bolster the rule of law.
In that vein, we welcome efforts by the Government
of Kosovo to put the Trepca mining enterprise on
a path to successful restructuring. We recognize
that that will be a difficult and contentious process
that must be done openly and transparently with the
inclusive representation of stakeholders. Trepca must
be restructured in such a way as to provide maximum
economic viability and with the benefit of the affected
workers and communities in mind. UNMIK wrote
regulations in 2002, which have since been incorporatee
in Kosovo’s laws and institutions, that form the legal
basis for restructuring Trepca and other publicly or
socially owned enterprises. It also established a special
privatization court to adjudicate claims.
We also welcome the extension of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX),
which is helping to strengthen justice and fight
corruption in Kosovo. Expanded joint training and foot
patrols are clear signs of the established coordination
that EULEX has achieved. Given Kosovo’s accession
to the International Federation of Association Football
and the Union of European Football Associations, we
also appreciate the guidelines produced by EULEX
regarding the policing of international soccer matches.
Sport is an opportunity to normalize relations and
should be used to bring communities together, although
bad behaviour by fans can quickly spiral out ofcontrol.
Progress on justice and the rule of law will serve to
combat corruption, help attract foreign investment and
contribute to Kosovo’s overall development.
It is unfortunate that political violence has delayed
agreement on territorial delineation with Montenegro.
That issue must be resolved. Tear gas, petrol bombs
and rocket-propelled grenades have no place in civil
political discourse.
We encourage the important work Kosovo is
undertaking to address the serious problem of foreign
fighters, and we applaud the recent arrest of individuals
in Kosovo likely affiliated with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Syria. Foreign fighters present a
threat to all countries and require a collective response.

16-3865727/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The entire region, including Kosovo, needs
an inclusive and integrated approach that includes
international institutions, such as INTERPOL, to
ensure cooperation and coordination on issues vital to
the national security of all States Members of the United
Nations. Kosovo’s membership and participation in
international organizations is not only good for Kosovo,
but for the international community.
Finally, we believe all Member States should
recognize Kosovo as an independent State. When
Kosovo succeeds, the entire region will benefit. A
democratic, stable and independent Kosovo is a force
for regional stability, and to that end we welcome
Kosovo and Serbia’s efforts to pursue the normalization
of relations through the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. We commend the leaders in both Belgrade
and Pristina for their willingness to make difficult
decisions, and we continue to appreciate the High
Representative Mogherini’s facilitation of the talks.
The United States reaffirms its support for Kosovo
as it continues to develop a prosperous and peaceful
multi-ethnic democracy, fully integrated into the
international community.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Senegal.
First, I would like to thank Ambassador Zahid
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary- General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for the excellent briefing he has
just delivered. I also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Minister of
Serbia, and Ambassador Çitaku for their statements.
I am necessarily concerned about the unabated
tensions mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/901), new tensions that undermine some
of the progress made since the end of the conflict
with the cooperation of stakeholders on both sides.
Such progress made possible the agreement on
telecommunications, which my delegation welcomes as
important. In that regard, in order to reinvigorate the
momentum towards ensuring lasting stability — which
beyond Kosovo is a matter of concern for the entire
Balkans region — we would strongly encourage the
political players in Kosovo to work towards a calm
political environment, on which the tenor of the
dialogue with Belgrade depends, while also calling
upon Serbian authorities to maintain and bolster their
28/31

16/11/2016

commitment to a constructive and calm dialogue with
Pristina. My delegation joins the Secretary-General in
welcoming the progress made to date by both parties in
the context of the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
We encourage partners and countries with influence
to bring it to bear to continue to support the talks.
In order to draw upon the achievements made in that
framework, we think it crucial that the agreements
reached until now be carried out effectively and that
leaders on both side fully commit to resume dialogue
in a constructive spirit. That remains the only way to
normalize relations.
Recent developments noted in the report,
in particular the political context leading to the
ratification of the border demarcation agreement with
Montenegro and the new law on the Trepca industrial
complex, serve to remind us of the need for inclusive
dialogue on all pending matters, both among domestic
and foreign stakeholders. My delegation believes that
difficulties can be overcome; certainly, they should not
become an obstacle to the political process under way,
especially with regard to implementing the agreement
on integrating the Kosovo judiciary, where notable
strides have been made. Along the same lines, we
welcome the agreement reached on 5 August for the
implementation of the agreement of 25 August on the
reconstruction of the main bridge in Mitrovica. We
would encourage parties to ensure the success of the
agreement by upholding their outstanding obligations.
Senegal agrees with the Secretary-General that
efforts are needed on the humanitarian and human
rights fronts so as to increase the return of refugees,
foment trust among the various communities and build
diverse yet inclusive societies.
Similarly, with regard to the activities of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), whose
mandate was extended to 14 June 2018, we welcome
its shoring up of Kosovo’s achievements in the area of
defence, in promoting the rule of law and human rights
and in combating terrorism and organized crime. Its
support also contributed to the holding of a regional
conference of police directors general in Skopje from
8 to 10 September, which included representatives from
Kosovo, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Serbia. We welcome UNMIK’s activities to promote
reconciliation, transitional justice and human rights
and to support the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina.
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

In addition to encouraging dialogue, Senegal urges
all stakeholders to make further strides towards peace
and development, in particular by encouraging the
implementation of the 25 August 2015 agreements in
north Kosovo. We therefore reiterate our unstinting
support to the joint EULEX-United Nations
Development Programme project aimed at increasing
trust among the communities by protecting cultural
heritage. We would also like to see a strengthening of
cooperation on information-exchange for resolving the
issue of missing persons.
By way of conclusion, my delegation would like to
pay tribute to Special Representative Tanin for his wise
guidance of UNMIK. We also welcome the efforts made
by the Kosovo Force, EULEX, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union. These are all stakeholders resolutely committed
to peace and stability in Kosovo and the whole region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): In my statement earlier
I said that Council members would hear a number of
lies from Pristina’s representative. One can ascertain
from her statement how she perceives an ideal country.
Simply put: If it is such an ideal country, I wonder why
the migrants crossing through the Balkans do not go to
Kosovo. Why do its citizens flee Kosovo for Western
Europe? Next time, I could also inform the Council how
many Kosovar Albanians are in possession of Serbian
passports, and how our diplomatic and consular
representative offices in Western Europe every day
work with Kosovar Albanians.
What kind of country are we talking about? There
was mention of crimes, rapes and murders. Why was
no one accused? The Kosovo speaker, who represents
it now, says that the number of those indicted for those
crimes is zero. Well, that is their problem. Why did
they not charge anyone? Why did they not say that this
person or that person committed rape or murder? If,
as was said, Serbia has no jurisdiction in Kosovo, why
was nothing done about it in The Hague? Every one
of Serbia’s police and military was questioned at the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
The Hague hundreds of times. It is impossible to bring

S/PV.7811

charges based on the representative’s fictional accounts
recited here in the Security Council.
And what is going on with Oliver Ivanović?
Ms. Çitaku says that we have arrested Kosovo’s citizens.
She urges that our people should be indicted, but when
it comes to her citizens, everyone is innocent, right? So
if according to her whoever may have been convicted
is innocent, what is happening in the case of Oliver
Ivanović? He has been under house arrest for months.
Is there a single witness — Serbia has demanded to
see a list — who can confirm the allegations made
against him? The representative made a little mistake,
because that list was erased after 2000 by those who
bombed Serbia. But I have to declare here in New York,
before the Security Council, that the decision to bomb
Serbia was illegal and taken without the assent of the
Council. I believe firmly that many who were on that
list deserve to be tried, but the Tribunal found no legal
basis for instigating proceedings against those who
bombed Serbia. That was a judicial decision based on
no decision of the Security Council. Of course, that list
also includes people who were lauded by Kosovo — who
were employed, permitted to research mining resources
and given mobile phones.
Now the former Croatian Prime Minister Milanović
turns to Kosovo. Is Wesley Clark now on the list of those
working in Kosovo, having borne witness to Bernard
Kouchner and William Walker claiming that Serbia
was bombed? He was the Head of the Mission to Serbia
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and before any statements were made by any
forensic experts, he said that those who died in Račak
were the victims of Serbs. Now he is a national hero.
Ms. Çitaku speaks of colonialism. What is she
talking about? What are the countries that have been
liberated from colonialism? Does she have any idea at
all of what colonialism is? The first capital of Serbia was
in Kosovo. The seat of the Serbian Orthodox Church is
in Kosovo. What kind of colonialism is that? Name any
Albanian cultural monument dating back to that time.
What is she talking about? She thinks that because she is
here in this meeting, supported by some major Western
Powers, that she can tell lies here. But in fact that
support does not strengthen Kosovo’s position; rather
their support for the positions that Kosovo presents
here undermines their own reputations. Ms. Çitaku
mentioned Mr. Ahtisaari. Was it the Security Council
that adopted the Ahtisaari proposal?

16-3865729/31

S/PV.7811

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Ms. Çitaku has presented the dangerous thesis that
everything in Kosovo belongs to Kosovo. The people
there are living under capitalism, so can she actually
tell them that everything located in Kosovo is the
property of Kosovo? There should be some law about
those rights. She does not even like Special Rapporteur
Karima Bennoune, who has spoken of 200,000 displaced
Serbs. The number is not important — even if it is only
50,000, they should be allowed to return. According to
United Nations data, they amount to 1.9 per cent. Will
the Council remain silent on this and say that those
people do not have to go back? Is the Council going to
legalize ethnic cleansing? it has no right to do that.
Regardless of our country’s small size, when it is
a question of our Church we will defend it. Ms. Çitaku
claims that the church on the grounds of the campus
of the University of Pristina is problematic because it
was built under the Milošević regime. But what about
the fourteenth-century church of Our Lady of Ljeviš,
which Kosovo set on fire, and which was placed on the
UNESCO World Heritage List? When was that built?
Does that have anything to do with Milošević? Where
was Milošević in 1981, when there were demonstrations
demanding Kosovan independence? There was always
a plan for unification with Albania from the very start,
and that should be admitted. She is not Kosovar; she
is Albanian. Her country of origin is Albania. This is
not about colonialism; it is about a national minority
in someone else’s country that has unilaterally
declared independence.
I should like to point out to those here, including my
friend from Japan, that this could happen to his country
tomorrow. The fact that his country has over 100 million
inhabitants does not give it more rights than Serbia.
We do not have a principle that says we lost because
Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence was
permitted and because some countries accepted it. It is
really not nice that the United States has called on other
countries to recognize Kosovo’s unilateral declaration,
thereby violating Serbia’s territorial integrity. One
hundred years ago, the only foreign flag that flew in
front of the White House was Serbian, in recognition of
Serbia’s sacrifices during the First World War, when we
lost a third of our population.
I am happy for the Ambassador of Japan and his
bottle of wine. In the fourteenth century, Serbia’s
Tsar Dušan enacted a law protecting the quality and
geographic origin of Kosovan wine. At the time, he
was the only ruler owning 25 kilometres of vineyards
30/31

16/11/2016

between Veliko Hoča and Prizren. Needless to say,
there is nothing that the representative of Pristina can
say about that, because at the time her people did not
live in Kosovo. We are therefore not colonizers, and
such terms should not be used in this principal organ of
the United Nations.
With regard to INTERPOL, of course Palestine was
also on its agenda and the United States was not inclined
to vote on that. Kosovo and Taiwan were on its agenda,
too — or perhaps Taiwan was not on the agenda, but it
was announced. Kosovo told everyone that it would be
participating in the INTERPOL meeting, so why did
it not submit its request? It did not submit it because it
knew it would lose.
I will end in the same way that Ms. Çitaku began,
by quoting her fictional statement. Today we are in
2016, not 1999. That is correct. Of course, the world has
changed in the meantime. Today, those who bombed us,
and for whom monuments have been raised in Pristina,
are gone. The world has indeed changed. Today, those
who supported Kosovo’s positions are gone. The world
has changed in the sense that people understand that this
is about the violation of rights. Each and every violation
of international rights is of a universal nature and is
applicable to all. I respect the will of all, but we have
to start with the legitimate interests of our own people.
I do not know if the names of squares and streets in
Pristina will be changed, as the media has suggested,
but in any case we do not need the support of anyone
from outside. Let us resolve our problems by ourselves.
The representative of Kosovo is hiding behind big
brother. Let us talk and find a sustainable solution. No
one is going to drop a solution on Kosovo in the same
way they dropped the bombs in 1999. Unfortunately for
Kosovo, that time is over.
The President (spoke in French): Ms. Çitaku has
asked to make a further statement. I give her the floor.
Ms. Çitaku: I will be very considerate of the
Council’s time, but some of the issues raised by my
colleague from Serbia deserve a response.
In fact, most of his statement, if it were not so
troubling, given that it was delivered here in the Security
Council, would have been amusing and entertaining.
Accusing the international community, the leaders of the
free world and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
of being involved in Kosovo for their own interests and
our resources is insulting. Actually, Kosovo is a clear
16-38657

16/11/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

example of the world coming together to defend human
dignity, human life and humanitarian values.
For those who do not know, Kosovo is the size of
Connecticut; it is a small country. By the way, we had
borders long before we had our statehood. We are not
actually very rich in natural resources. Our biggest
resource is human resources — people. We have a
young population, 70 per cent of whom are under 30.
This human potential, which was liberated and enabled
to live in freedom, is the only benefit and pleasure that
the international community has gained. Sincerely,
I am shocked and offended. I hope that my colleague
from Serbia will reflect on these statements.
Secondly, the war in Kosovo did not happen 500
years ago or 70 years ago; it is a recent war. It happened
in 1998 and 1999 before the eyes of the world, under the
eyes of those in this Chamber, and journalists from the
United States to Russia to China to Japan. Everybody
was there and the images are real. Interpretations can
change and be different, but facts cannot change. Facts
are real.
I am sorry that my colleague is losing patience.
I listened to him, and ask him to listen to me. I just

S/PV.7811

hope that one day we will come to the Chamber and
hear an apology and signs of remorse from Serbia,
because ultimately that is in Serbia’s interest as well.
Can anyone imagine Germany, after the Second World
War, accusing Allied forces of intervening to save
Europe? I really hope that Serbia will reflect because,
as I said, that is the only way the region will be able to
move forward.
Unfortunately, our legislation and Constitution
make it very clear against whom we can open
investigations and indictments. We cannot indict
people in absentia — when they are not physically
present in Kosovo — and the fact is that most of the
people who committed war crimes have left Kosovo.
As far as Mr. Ivanović is concerned, he was indicted
and has been brought to trial by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The Kosovo
Government supports the role of EULEX, and we look
forward to a time when all these trials are far behind us.
I apologize for taking more of the Council’s time.
I really felt offended and I know some others here did
as well.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

16-3865731/31
