United Nations

A/RES/61/202

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 53 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2006
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/61/422/Add.5)]

61/202. Implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/201 of 22 December 2005 and other resolutions relating
to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 1
Reaffirming the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 2 which recognizes the
Convention as one of the tools for poverty eradication,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 3
Reaffirming the universal membership of the Convention, and acknowledging
that desertification and drought are problems of a global dimension in that they
affect all regions in the world,
Noting that the timely and effective implementation of the Convention would
help to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and encouraging affected country parties to
include, as appropriate, in their national development strategies measures to combat
desertification,
Recognizing the need for the provision of adequate resources for Global
Environment Facility focal areas, including a focus on land degradation, primarily
desertification and deforestation,
Stressing the need for further diversification of funding sources to address land
degradation, in accordance with articles 20 and 21 of the Convention,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
See resolution 60/1.
2

06-50649

A/RES/61/202

Noting the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its
seventh session to establish an ad hoc intergovernmental intersessional working
group with the mandate to review the report of the Joint Inspection Unit in full and,
building on the results of that review and other inputs, to develop a draft ten-year
strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention, 4
Recognizing the need to provide the secretariat of the Convention with stable,
adequate and predictable resources in order to enable it to continue to discharge its
responsibilities in an efficient and timely manner, and further recognizing the
provision in section A on budget reform in the decision of the Conference of the
Parties at its seventh session on the programme and budget for the biennium 2006–
2007, 5 including the request that the Executive Secretary take additional measures
necessary to address the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit, 6 ensure that
the financial rules are fully respected in the future and report on this matter to the
meeting of the Bureau and in the performance report for the biennium 2006–2007,
Noting the decision of the Conference of the Parties at its seventh session to
introduce the euro as the budget and accounting currency from 2008–2009,5
Recalling its resolution 58/211 of 23 December 2003, in which it declared
2006 the International Year of Deserts and Desertification,
Noting the activities undertaken within the framework of the celebration of the
Year,
Underlining the importance of the issue of desertification in the process of the
Commission on Sustainable Development, in particular in the context of its
sixteenth and seventeenth sessions dealing with thematic clusters on agriculture,
rural development, land, drought and desertification,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 7

2.
Reaffirms its resolve to support and strengthen the implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa1 to
address causes of desertification and land degradation, as well as poverty resulting
from land degradation, through, inter alia, the mobilization of adequate and
predictable financial resources, the transfer of technology and capacity-building at
all levels;
Reiterates its call upon Governments, where appropriate, in collaboration
3.
with relevant multilateral organizations, including the Global Environment Facility
implementation agencies, to integrate desertification into their plans and strategies
for sustainable development;
Takes note with appreciation of the outcome of the fourth replenishment
4.
of the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund, 8 including the pledges made by the
international community to the Trust Fund at the third Global Environment Facility

_______________
4

ICCD/COP(7)/16/Add.1, decision 3/COP.7.
Ibid., decision 23/COP.7.
6
See JIU/REP/2005/5.
7
A/61/225, sect. II.
8
Global Environment Facility, document GEF/A.3/6. Available from www.gefweb.org.
5

2

A/RES/61/202

Assembly, held in Cape Town, South Africa, on 29 and 30 August 2006, and stresses
the importance of the fulfilment of the commitments;
5.
Invites the Global Environment Facility to continue to make resources
available for capacity-building activities in affected country parties implementing
the Convention;
Welcomes the establishment of the ad hoc intergovernmental
6.
intersessional working group with the mandate to review the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit in full and, building on the results of that review and other inputs, to
develop a draft ten-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the
implementation of the Convention, for submission to the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention at its eighth session, and invites parties to the Convention, as well
as other stakeholders, to submit views and comments to the working group in order
to assist it in its work;
Invites parties to contribute on a voluntary basis either to the Supplementary
7.
Fund or in kind to cover the cost of the activities of the intergovernmental
intersessional working group in order to allow it to fulfil its mandate;
Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the institutional
8.
linkage and related administrative arrangements between the Convention secretariat
and the United Nations Secretariat, to facilitate the implementation of decision 23 of
the Conference of the Parties at its seventh session pertaining to the introduction of
the euro as the budget and accounting currency of the Convention;5
9.
Invites Member States to be represented at the highest appropriate level
at the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention;
10. Expresses its appreciation for the financial contributions made by
countries and other relevant stakeholders to carry out activities in the context of the
celebration of the International Year of Deserts and Desertification;
11. Requests the secretariat of the Commission on Sustainable Development
to work closely with the secretariat of the Convention in the preparations for the
sixteenth and seventeenth sessions of the Commission in the areas relevant to the
Convention;
12. Takes note of the ongoing work of the liaison group of the secretariats
and offices of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, 9 the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and the Convention on Biological Diversity, 10
and further encourages continuing cooperation in order to promote complementarities
among the secretariats, while respecting their independent legal status;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session
the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa”;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.

_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.

10

3

A/RES/61/202

83rd plenary meeting
20 December 2006

4
