bers of the Council, it was decided that the Ad Hoe
Sub-Committee established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 276 ( 1970) would be composed
of all the members of the Council.
On 15 May I 970, the President issued a note 4
stating that, after consultations with all the members
of the Council, they had taken note of the interim
report 11 submitted by the Ad Hoe Sub-Committee
established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 276 (1970) and it was agreed that the SubCommittee would continue its work in accordance
with its terms of reference in order to be in a position
to formulate its recommendations to the Council by
the end of June 1970 at the latest.

of the General Aaaembly and Security Council pertaining to Namibia;
2. Declares that the continued presence of the South
African authorities in Namibia is illegal and that consequently all actl taken by the Government of South
Africa on behalf of or concerning Namibia after the
termination of the Mandatf': are illegal and invalid;
3. Declares further ,hat the defiant attitude of the
Government of South Africa toward~ the Council's
decisions undermines the authority ,,f the United
Nations;
4. Consider:r that the continued OCCUJ;ation of Namibia by the Government of South Afnca in defiance
of the relevant United Nations resolutions and of the
Charter of the United Nations has grave consequen~s
for the rights and interests of the people of Namibia;
5. Calls upon all States, particularly thooc which
have economic and other interests in Namibia, to
refrain from any dealings with the Government of
South Africa which arc inconsistent with paragraph 2
of the present resolution;
6. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28
of its provisional rules of procedure, an Ad Hoe
Sub-Committee of the Council to study, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, ways and means by which
the relevant resolutions of the Council, including the
present resolution, can be effectively implemented in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
Charter, in the light of the flagrant refusal of South
Africa to withdraw from Namibia, and to submit its
recommendations by 30 April 1970;
1. Requests aJl States, as well as the specialized
agencies and other relevant organs of the United
Nations, to give the Sub-Committee all the information
and other assistance it may require in pursuance of
the present resolution;
8. Further req~sts the Secretary-General to give
every assistance to the Sub-Committee in the performance of its task;
9. Decides to resume consideration of the question
of Namibia as soon as the recommendations of the
Sub-Committee have been made available.

Dttiaion
At its 1550th meeting, on 29 July 1970, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, proceeded with
the discussion of the item entitled:
"The situation in Namibia:
"(a) Report of the Ad lloc Sub-Committee
established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 276 (1970) (S/9863) ;8
"(b) Letter dated 22 July 1970 from the Per-mancnt Representatives of Burundi, Finland,
NeeaI, Sierra Leone and Zambia to the
Umted Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/9886)." 11

Resolution 283 (1970)
of 29 July 1970

The Security Council,
Reaffirming once more the inalienable right of the
people_ of . Namibia to freedom and independence
rccogm.zed in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 .December 1960,
.
RH{firming Security Council resolutions 264 ( 1969)
of 20 March 1969 and 276 (1970) of 30 January 1970
in which the Council recognized the decision of the
General Assembly to terminate the Mandate for South
West Africa and assume direct responsibility for the
i:crritory until its independence and in which the continued presence of the South African authorities in
Namibia, as well as all acts taken by that Government
~n behalf of or concerning Namibia after the termination of the Mandate, were declared illegal and invalid,
Recalling it£ resolution 269 ( 1969) of 12 August
1969,
Noting with great concern the continued flagrant
re_fusal of th~ _Government of South Africa to comply
with the dec1S1ons of the Security Council demanding

Adopttd at tht 15J9th mttt•
Ing by 13 vott, to ,w,a1, with
1
abitentfon,
(France,
Unfttd Kln1dom of Great
Britain and North,rn lr,lond ).

•

• •
In connexion with the implementation of the above
resolution, the President of the Sec1,1rity Council
announced, In notes circulated as Security Council
documents, the following measures which had been
approved by the Council:
On 30 January 1970, the President Issued a note•
___stating that, after consultations among all the mem-

'Ibid., Suppt,m,nt for April, May and June 1970 document

a See Official Ricord, of tht S,curlty Councll, Tw,nty-fifth

Y,ar, Suppl,m,nt for lanU'1ry, F1brut1'1 ,md March 1970

documoot S/9632.

S/9803.

8 Ibid., document S/9771.

·

'

• Ibid., Supplement for July, Augu.rt and Stptembtr 1970.

2

7. Calu upun all States to discourage their nati~nals
or companit;S o{ their nationality not under direct
government.al controi from investing or obtain~g conceHiona :n Namibia, and to this end to w1thho]d
protection of sl.ch investment against cl.aims of a future
lawful government of Namibia;
8. Request.s all States to undertake without delay
a detailed study and review of all bilateral treaties
between themselves and South Africa in so far as these
treaties contain provisions by which they apply to the
Territory of Namibia;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake
without delay a detailed study and review of all multilateral treaties to which South Africa is a party and
which, either by direct reference or on the basis of
relevant provisions of international law, might be
considered to apply to the Territory of Namibia;
10. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to make available to the Security Council the
results of its study and proposals with regard to the
issuance of passports and visas for Namibians, and to
undertake a study and make proposals with regard to
special passport and visa regulations to be adopted by
States concerning travel of their citizens to Namibia;
11. Cal/3 upon all States to discourage the promotion of tourism and emigration to Namibia;
12. Requests the General Assembly, at its twentyfifth session, to set up a United Nations fund for
Namibia to provide assistance to Namibians who have
suffered from persecution and to finance a comprehensive educational and training programme for Namibians,
with particular regard to their future administrative
responsibilities in the Territory;
13. Requests all States to report to the SecretaryGeneral on measures they have taken in order to give
effect to the provisions set forth in the present resolution;
14. Decides to re-establish, in accordance with rule
28 of its provisional rules of procedure, the Ad Hoe
Sub-Committee on Namibia and to request the SubCommittee to study further effective recommendations
on ways and means by which the relevant resolutions
of the Council can be effectively implement, d in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, in the light of the flagrant refusal
of South Africa to withdraw from Namibia;
15. Requests the Sub-Committee to study the replies
11ubmitted by Governments to the Secretary-General in
pursuance of paragraph 13 of the present resolution
and to report to the Council as appropriate;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to give every
assistance to the Sub-Committee in the performance of
its tasks;
17. Decides to remain active1y seized of this matter.

the immediate withdrawal of South Africa from the
Territory,
Deeply concerned that the enforcement ot South
African laws ar.d juridical procedures in the Territory
have continued in violation of the international status
of the Territory,
Reaffirming ita resolution 282 ( 1970) of 23 July
1970 on the arms embarJO - ~ t the Government of
South Africa and the a1gniflcancc of that resolution
with regard to the Territory and people of Namibia,
Recalllng the decision taken by the Security Council
on 30 January 1970 to establish, in accordance with
rule 28 of its provisional rules of procedure, an Ad Hoe
Sub-Committee of the Council to study, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, ways and means by which
the relevant resolutions of the Council, including resolution 276 (1970), could be effectively implemented in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, in the light of the
flagrant refusal of South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia, and to submit its recommendations to the
Council,
Having examined the report submitted by th-: Ad Hoe
Sub-Commfttee1 and the recommendations contained
in that report,
Bearing in mind the special responsibility of the
United Nations with regard to the Territory of Namibia
and its people,
1. Requests all States to refrain from any relations
~iplomatic, consular or otherwisc--with South Africa
implying recognition of the authority of the Government
of South Africa over the Territory of Namibia;

2. Calls upon all States maintaining diplomatic or
consular relations with South Africa to issue a formal
declaration to the Government of South Africa to
the effect that they do not recognize any authority of
South Africa with regard to Namibia and that they
consider South Africa's continued presence in Namibia
illegal;

3. Calls upon all States maintaining such relations
to terminate existing diplomatic and consular representation as far as they extend to Namibia, and to
withdraw any diplomatic or consular mission or representative residing in the Territory;
4. Calls upon all States to ensure that companies
and other commercial and industrial enterpme1 owned
by, or under direct control of, the State cease all dealings
with respect to commercial or industrial enterprises
or conce11ions in Namibia;
5. Call., upnn all States to withhold from their
nationals or companies of their nationality not under
direct governmental control, government loans, credit
guarantees and other forms of financial support that
would be used to facilitate trade or commerce with
Namibia;

Adopttd at the 1550th muting by 13 votu to rwne,
with 2 abslt'ntions (Franu,
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland).

6. Calls upon all States to en.aure that companies
and other commercial enterprises owned by, or under
direct control of, the State cease all further investment
activities, Including conce11ion1 in Namibia;

•

• •

1 /hid., document S/9863.

3

Taking further note of the recommendation of the
Ad lloc Sub-Committee on the possibility of requesting
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice,

In connexion with the implementation of the above
resolution, the President of the Security Council
announced, in a note circulated as a Security Council
document, the following measures which had been
approved by the Council:
On 18 August 1970, the President issued a note9
stating that, after consultations Mnung the members
of the Council, it had been agreed that the Ad Hoe
Sub-Committee on Namibia re-established in pursuance of Security Council resoiution 283 (1970)
would be composed of all the members of the Council
and would work under the same procedures as those
followed by the Ad Hoe Sub-Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution 276

Considering that an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice would be useful for the
Security Council in its further consideration of the
question of Namibia and in furtherance of the
objectives the Council is seeking,
l. Decides to submit, in accordance with Article 96,
paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations,
the following question to the International Court of
Justice, with the request for an advisory opinion which
shall be transmitted to the Security Council at an
early date:

( 1970).

"What are the legal cons.::quences for States of
the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia,
notwithstanding Security Council resolution 276

Resolution 284 (1970)

( 1970)'?";

or 29 July 1970

2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the International Court of Justice,
in accordance with Article 65 of the Statute of the
Court, accompanied by all documents likely to throw
light upon the question.

The Security Council,
Reaffirming the special responsibility of the United
Nations with regard to the Territory and the people
of Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 276 ( 1970) of 30 January
1970 on the question of Namibia,
Taking note of the report and recommendations"
submitted by the Ad Hoe Sub-Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution 276 ( 1970),
M

Adopted at the 1550th meeting by 12 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions ( Poland,
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republic.J, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Ibid., document S/9911.

0 Ibid., document S/9863.

QUESTION CONCERNING THE SITUATION IN SOUTHERN RHODESIA 10

In connexion with the implementation of resolution
253 ( 1968) of 29 May 1968, the President of the
Security Council announced, in notes circulated as
Security Council documents, the following measures
which had been approved by the Council:
On I O April 1970, the President issued a note11
stating that, after consultations with the members
of the Council, it hacl been agreed that until a
further decision was rcnchcd the Committee establi11hed in pursu:incc of Security Council resolution
2~3 ( 1968) ~ould be composed of: France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, S1erru Leone, Union of Soviet Socialist

Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America. 12
On 30 September 1970, the President issued a
note 13 stating that, after consultations, it had been
agreed that as of 1 October 1970 the Committee
established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) would be composed of all the members of the C',)\lncil, and that ttie Chairmanship of
12 The composition of the Committee. as originally established, is 11ivcn in documents S/8697 of 31 July 1968 and
SIR697/Add.l of 27 January 1969: see Of!icia/ Records of the
Strnrlty Council, Twtnty-thi,d Ytar, Supplement for July,
A Uf<'USt and Stpttmbrr 1968. and ibid., Twenty-fourth Year,
S11pfltment for January, February and March 1969.
I Sec O{firlal Rtrnrds of the Stcurlty Council, Twtnty.
fifrh Y tar, Supplt'mtnt for July, August and Septt'mber 1970,
document S/995 I.

1" Rc,olution~ or dec:iaion, on thi9 que~tion were al!IO
11dopted by the Cuuncil in l96J, 196,, 1966, 1968 and 1969.

1 Sec O(fidul Rtrord., nf tht Strnrlry Counr/1, Twtnty-fi/th
Yr"r, Suppltmrnt for April, May and Ju,it /970, document
S/9748.

4
