IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (X~":7I) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of exanurung on a more
regular basis all matters falling within its terms of
reference and requests the Secretary-General to provide
the Committee with all necessaJ"y assistance;
3. Decides to include in the provisiona·l agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/47.

United Nations Conference on Succession
of States in Respect of Treaties

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3496 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which ,it decided to convene a conference
of plenipotentiaries in 1977 to consider the draft _articles on succession of States in respect of treaties,
adopted by the International Law Commission at its
twenty-sixth session, 11 and to emb?dy the results of
its work in an international convention and ,such other
instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 18 of 24 November 1976, by which, after noting that an invi~ation had
been extended by the Government of Austria to hold
the United Nations Conference on Succession of States
in Respect of Treaties at Vienna, it had decided that the
Conference would be held in that city,
Noting that the Conference met at Vienna from
4 April to 6 May 1977, in accordance with the ~bov~mentioned resolutions but that it was not possible m
the time available fo; the Conference to conclude its
work and to adopt an international convention and
other appropriate instruments, as requested by the General Assembly,
Noting further the view of the Conference that one
more session would enable it to conclude its work as
envisaged by the General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the recommendation unanimously
adopted by the Conference that it should be reconvened
at Vienna for a final session of four weeks,
Taking into account the invitation of the Government of Austria, accepted by the General Assembly in
resolution 31/18, which extends aLso to a resumed session of the Conference, 12
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Succession of States in Respect of
Treaties; 13
2. Approves the convening of a resumed session
of the United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in Respect of Treaties at Vienna for a period of
three wee~s, from 31 July to 18 August 1978, with
a possible extension of up to one further week should
this prove necessary in the view of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secr;etary-General to make the
necessary arrangements, as provided under General
11 fbid,,
Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (Al
9610/Rev. l ), chap. II, sect. D.
12 See A/32/141/Add.l.
13 A/CONF.80/15.

209

Assembly resolution 31/18, for the efficient servicing
of the Conference;
4. Expresses its firm conviction that the Conference
will thus conclude its work and adopt an international
convention and other appropriate instruments as requested by the General Assembly.
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/ 48.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making
process

The General Assembly,
Recalling its duty under Article 13, paragraph 1 a,
of the Charter of the United Nations to initiate studies
and to make recommendations for the purpose, inter
alia, of encouraging the progre~sive development of
international law and its codification,
Observing that, in the period since the inception of
the United Nations many important multilateral treaties
have been prepared by a number of different United
Nations organs,
Bearing in mind the important contribution ~f the
International Law Commission to the preparation of
multilateral treaties during the past twenty-nine years,
A ware of the heavy burdens which active involvement
in the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Conscious of the desirability of assessing the efficiency and adequacy of the procedures followed by t~e
United Nations in the formulation of the texts of multilateral treaties with a view to the improvement of such
procedures,
Bearing in mind the need for the United Nations to
exercise economy in the use of its resources,
Taking into account that in certain important and
specialized areas the interested parties have developed
methods of negotiation of proved and continued value,
Recalling the publication by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research of a study on the wider
acceptance of multilateral treaties, H
Recalling those resolutions of the General Assembly
urging the greater participation of States in multilateral
conventions concluded under the auspices of the United
Nations,
Observing that the United Nations has not hitherto
given comprehensive consideration to the techniques
and procedures used in the preparation of multilateral
treaties,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the techniques and procedures used in the elaboration of multilateral treaties, taking also into consideration the debates in the General Assembly at the current
session and the observations referred to in paragraph 2
below, with a view to its submission to the Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session;
2. Invites Governments and the International Law
Commission to submit by 31 July 1979, for inclusion
in the report referred to above, their observations on
this subject;
14 UNITAR/ST/2.
