S/PV.7736

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7736th meeting

Tuesday, 12 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-21430 (E)
*1621430*

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Maldives, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia and Turkey to participate in this
meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Wilfried I. Emvula, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the very important
responsibility of the presidency of the Security Council.
Late last month, I returned from my eleventh visit
to Israel and Palestine as the Secretary-General. As it
2/58

12/07/2016

happened, it was also as Israel’s occupation entered into
its fiftieth year. I carried a clear and consistent message
to leaders on both sides, namely, that time was running
out. That fact is also at the heart of the report of the
Middle East Quartet. I know that the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, has fully briefed the Security
Council. Some on both sides have criticized the report’s
contents and sought to dismiss its conclusions and
recommendations. The report’s overriding message,
however, is irrefutable: as negative trends grow more
frequent, the prospects for a two-State solution grow
more distant. The report’s 10 recommendations provide
a practical approach to end the political stalemate,
resume the transition to greater Palestinian Authority in
the West Bank and chart a course towards negotiations
to resolve all final status issues. I urge both sides
to immediately begin discussions with the Quartet
on implementing those recommendations as we all
continue to work in coordination with key stakeholders,
including regional countries and the Security Council,
to restore hope in a political solution. The Quartet
Envoys are now taking steps in that direction.
The parties will have to make the necessary
compromises for peace. At the same time, the region
and the wider international community must exercise
their influence to encourage both sides. French efforts
to pursue peace complement those efforts. I welcome
their coordination with the Quartet. I also welcome
Egyptian efforts, including the recent visit by the
Egyptian Foreign Minister to Palestine and Israel.
The failure of Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
advance peace has created a vacuum. Extremist voices
have filled that space. Recent incidents reinforce the
mounting risks. Those responsible for recent terror
attacks must be held accountable. However, closures,
such as those in Hebron, as well as punitive demolitions
and blanket revocations of permits, penalize
thousands of innocent Palestinians and amount to
collective punishment.
I am also deeply troubled by shrinking space for
civil society in the region and around the world. I am
concerned by Israel’s passage of the so-called “NGO
Transparency Law”, which contributes to a climate
in which the activities of human rights organizations
are increasingly delegitimized. All the while, Israel’s
settlement enterprise marches on. Days after the Quartet
called on Israel to cease settlement construction and
expansion, Israel announced plans to advance building
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

approximately 560 housing units in the West Bank and
240 more in occupied East Jerusalem. That is in flagrant
disregard of international law. Those actions constitute
an undeniable contradiction of Israel’s official support
for a negotiated two-State solution. I urge Israel to
immediately cease and reverse those plans.
We must ask: How can the systematic expansion of
settlements — the taking of land for exclusive Israeli
use — and the denial of Palestinian development be a
response to violence? Such policies will not bring the
two-State solution closer to reality. Such policies will
not make Israelis safer or more secure. As many former
Israeli military and intelligence officers have clearly
stated, those policies will do precisely the opposite.
Indeed, every brick added to the edifice of occupation
is another taken from Israel’s foundation as a majority
Jewish and democratic State. At the same time, those
Palestinians who celebrate and encourage attacks
against innocents must know that they are not serving
the interests of their people or of peace. Such acts must
be universally condemned and more must be done to
counter the incitement that fuels and justifies terror.
During my visit I also made my fourth trip to
Gaza. Militant activity continues, undermining the
fragile ceasefire and threatening to provoke another
devastating escalation. Despite significant progress,
tens of thousands of people are still displaced following
the 2014 conflict. Families are forced to live without
electricity for 12 to 18 hours per day. Unemployment
remains staggering. Funds to rebuild Gaza remain
elusive. I once again urge donors to fulfil their
pledges made in Cairo. But long-term stability and
sustainability for Gaza depends on the lifting of the
crippling closures and a re-establishment of a single,
legitimate Palestinian governing authority based on
Palestine Liberation Organization principles.
Turning very briefly to the Golan, I would add that
the situation remains volatile and continues to undermine
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement between
Israel and Syria, thereby jeopardizing the ceasefire
between the two countries.
As we focus on Israeli-Palestinian peace, we must
take a hard look at where the conflict stands. How much
longer can the parties and the international conirnunity
accept political paralysis, and at what grave price? I
encourage the Security Council to support the efforts
of the Quartet to work with the parties, the region

S/PV.7736

and interested stakeholders in advancing peace. The
children of Israel and Palestine deserve nothing less.
I will never forget my moving meeting with student
leaders at a school in Gaza of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East on my final day in the region. One 15-year-old boy
concluded by saying,
“Harsh restrictions drain away the ambitions of
any young person. And this is how we see our
future — to be killed by the conflict, to be killed
by the closure or to be killed by despair.”
Surely, we can do better for all the children of Palestine
and Israel. Surely, they deserve a horizon of hope.
It is time for the parties to take action to build
that future. The international community, including
through the recommendations outlined in the Quartet’s
report, remains resolute in its commitment to support
the goal of a peaceful future for both Palestinians and
Israelis. That is why I encourage the Security Council
to support the efforts of the Quartet — of the United
States, the Russian Federation, the European Union
and the United Nations — to work with the parties, the
region and interested stakeholders in advancing peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I congratulate
the delegation of Japan on its skilled leadership as
President of the Security Council and I express my
appreciation for the convening of this important
open debate. I also thank His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for being with us today and for
his valuable briefing to the Council. It was delightful
recently to see him visit the State of Palestine and
to receive the highest order decoration by President
Abbas in Ramallah. It was a special moment and I was
delighted to witness that special moment.
The Security Council is meeting against the
backdrop of an extremely volatile and tense situation
on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and ongoing deadlock in the
efforts to create a viable political horizon to resolve
once and for all this deadly, destructive and tragic
conflict. It is also meeting against the backdrop of
ongoing regional and international initiatives aimed at

16-214303/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

salvaging the two-State solution and the prospects for
peace and charting a way forward for their realization.
Regrettably, however, for various reasons, none of those
initiatives have come to fruition and the political will to
act responsibly and boldly — in line with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in the
interest of justice and human rights and for the sake of
peace and security — remains perilously absent.
The Arab States continue to extend their hand
in peace, supporting the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination and
independence, while also striving to open up a new
era of peace, stability and security in our region. For
over 14 years, the Arab Peace Initiative has offered a
bold path forward, and yet Israel, the occupying Power,
remains intransigent, belittling that most significant
initiative, failing to reciprocate time and time again,
and obstructing the revival of a political horizon on its
basis. Israel has also stood in rejection of the important
multilateral effort for peace undertaken in the context
of the French initiative to establish an international
support group for Palestinian-Israeli peace and set
the foundations for an international peace conference
aimed at bringing the parties together to finally resolve
the conflict.
In this regard, while underscoring its limitations
and the need for further bold steps commensurate
with professed intentions and commitments and the
real urgency of the matter, we recognize the joint
communiqué issued by the participants in the Middle
East peace initiative meeting held on 3 June in Paris.
We reaffirm our continued cooperation in this regard
and appeal for ongoing coordination and efforts to
advance that initiative and the prospects for peace.
The most recent international initiative is that
undertaken by the Middle East Quartet, which on 1 July
released a long-awaited report. Unfortunately, the report
did not meet expectations, failing to rise to the urgent
needs of this critical juncture and regrettably failing to
acknowledge the gravity of the nearly half-century of
Israeli foreign occupation of our land and its existence
as the primary source of the instability, violence and
violations we are witnessing; its impact on every single
aspect of Palestinian life, scarring and depriving one
generation after another for decades, forcing them to
live in a perpetual state of oppression and misery in
which they are being denied every human right; and its
total incompatibility with any peace effort predicated
4/58

12/07/2016

on international law and justice and the two-State
solution, as per the long-standing global consensus.
After nearly 50 years of occupation; after more
than 20 years of negotiations; and after nearly 70 years
of the question of Palestine remaining unresolved on
the United Nations agenda and constituting an open,
painful bleeding wound in the international body
and a threat to international peace and security, we
expected and were promised more from the Quartet.
The patience exhibited not just by Palestine but also
by other regional and international partners was
clearly based on a belief that this time the Quartet
would rise to the responsibilities it has assumed and
make bold recommendations to address the main
challenges, including the final status issues, aimed at
finally and definitively ending the Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
that began in June 1967 and achieving the two-State
solution of an independent, sovereign, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security within recognized borders
based on the pre-1967 borders, and a just solution for
the Palestine refugees based on General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).
Regrettably, this was not the case. The Palestinian
leadership has clearly expressed its deep disappointment
and dismay regarding the report and the manner in
which it deals with critical and sensitive issues, or fails
to do so. This includes the report’s glaring failure to deal
appropriately with the ongoing criminal actions, illegal
measures and constant provocations being perpetrated
by Israel, the occupying Power, against our people
and land. It also includes the repeated inappropriate
attempts to draw a symmetry between the occupying
Power and the occupied people and to equate individual
acts of violence with the official, deliberate policies and
actions of the occupying Power, which are the source
of this conflict and all of its ills. Moreover, the report
represents yet another attempt to manage the conflict,
rather than reaffirm the principles and parameters
of a final and just solution and define the means for
reaching that objective within a set timeframe and with
the necessary international support and guarantees.
The report’s characterization of nearly every Israeli
action as simply a response to Palestinian actions, rather
than as part of systematic, deliberate and decades-long
policies and practices, is unacceptable and offensive.
This is the case whether in reference to the use of
administrative detention against Palestinians, punitive
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

home demolitions, the severe closures, the provocations
and incursions at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, or the killing of
Palestinian civilians by the Israeli occupying forces in
military raids or demonstrations. Equally offensive is
the implication that security is only a need and a right
for Israel, while this right for the Palestinian people,
along with their need and right to protection as occupied
people, is ignored.
The inability of the Quartet report to refer to
the incessant violence, destruction, intimidation
and barbarism of some extremist Israeli settlers as
terrorism, including the burning to death of a young
family as they slept in their home, while repeatedly
and liberally characterizing Palestinian actions as
such, is telling of the narrative adopted. In this regard,
as the report actually does in one instance, we would
point to the reflections and statements of senior Israeli
officials — both military and political — referring to
such actions as terror and cautioning about the extreme
dangers posed by such individuals and groups to the
Palestinian civilian population under Israel’s occupation
and to Israeli society itself.
Not the least of this is the incitement to violence, the
vicious hatred and racist extremism routinely fomented
by Israeli settlers and Jewish extremists against the
Palestinian people and often declared as well by
numerous Israeli officials and religious leaders who are
on the Israeli Government’s payroll and continue their
malicious incitement against the Palestinian people and
their leadership. The Palestinian people are suffering
immensely from such inflammatory and racist rhetoric
and incitement, which continue to fuel terror and hate
crimes against innocent Palestinian civilians. Yet, rather
than go into further detail in the context of this debate
about the extent and impact of such Israeli extremism,
we would refer to the many recent statements made in
this regard by several Israeli leaders themselves, who
are directly addressing this dangerous phenomenon and
illness as we speak.
We note the Quartet’s recognition of the destructive
nature of Israel’s settlement construction and expansion
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
that its designation of occupied Palestinian land for
exclusive Israeli use, whether for military or settler
purposes, its confiscation of Palestinian property
and demolition of Palestinian homes, and denial of
Palestinian development are part and parcel of this
illegal settlement campaign. Moreover, the persistence
of such illegal policies and practices certainly raise

S/PV.7736

serious questions about Israel’s long-term intentions, as
noted by the report. Those intentions are reconfirmed
by the statements of some Israeli Ministers, including
the Prime Minister himself, that “there should never
be a Palestinian State”, as opposed to the deceptive
statements that we hear in this Chamber from the
representative of the occupying Power.
It is an understatement to say that, through this
illegal network of colonies and infrastructure Israel, is
entrenching its occupation daily, hammering one nail
after another into the coffin of the two-State solution.
While the report rightly concludes that all of this
is eroding the viability of the two-State solution, it
fails to affirm that Israel stands in grave violation of
international law, including humanitarian and criminal
law, in its implementation of its settlement schemes and
constant attempts to de facto annex the Palestinian land.
In that regard, we note the report’s finding that at
least 70 per cent of so-called Area C, which actually
comprises 60 per cent of the West Bank, has been
expropriated for exclusive Israeli use. Nearly all of the
30 per cent that remains, much of it private Palestinian
property is, as noted in the report,
“effectively off-limits for Palestinian development
because it requires permits from the Israeli military
authorities that are almost never granted”.
That fact alone is telling of the Israelis’ true intentions in
occupied Palestine, where the Israeli settler population
now exceeds half a million and the construction of
settlements and related infrastructure continues every
single day.
Actually, in an immediate response to the Quartet’s
report, the Israeli Government provocatively approved
the construction of another 800 housing units and
illegal settlements in and around occupied East
Jerusalem. That is further proof that the failure to
hold Israel accountable for its violations and to take
bold measures for peace, as opposed to recommending
piecemeal confidence-building measures, is a mistaken
and futile approach that will only be met with further
Israeli contempt and arrogance.
As for the situation in the Gaza Strip, where Israel’s
inhumane and illegal blockade continues to be imposed
and the man-made humanitarian catastrophe continues
to deepen, the report neglects to address the underlying
issues and the flagrant violations that are being
perpetrated by the occupying Power as it collectively

16-214305/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

punishes the entire Palestinian civilian population
there. In that regard, despite the regrettable political
divide and the ongoing efforts to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation and unity as a matter of national urgency,
the failure to bridge that divide cannot be used as
an excuse to continue imprisoning nearly 2 million
people and forcing them to live in the ruins of war and
mass deprivation.
In that context, I wish to conclude my statement by
conveying to Council members the depths of the despair,
hopelessness and human devastation that the Israeli
occupation and the ongoing Israeli aggression have
inflicted on our people for decades. They are among
the dimensions that we believe the Quartet report did
not properly, sensitively or respectfully address. But I
hope that today those matters will be heard and felt and
responsibly acted upon as I read to you excerpts from a
letter to the international community from a Palestinian,
Rafat Badran, the father of a young Palestinian boy,
Mahmoud Badran, who was brutally murdered by the
Israeli occupying forces on 21 June. By the way, when
the Secretary-General was in Ramala he met the father,
his wife and his family. These are his words:
“Last Friday, my wife Amal and I lived our
greatest nightmare when we buried our precious
son Mahmoud. He was 15 years old.
“A few days earlier, he was enjoying an evening
of relative normalcy, an occurrence all too rare in
the life of a Palestinian child. It was the holy month
of Ramadan, and after spending time celebrating
with our family, Mahmoud, along with his friends
and cousins, ventured out to a local village pool.
After swimming for several hours, the group piled
into the car to return home, smiling and fatigued,
relishing some relief from the pervasive and cruel
conditions of Israeli military occupation. And
then suddenly, Israeli soldiers riddled the car that
Mahmoud was riding in with bullets, hitting several
of the children. Four of them are still recovering
from their wounds. Mahmoud was killed.
“Mahmoud was a gentle child who focused
on his studies. He had two great ambitions: to
become a doctor and help others and to play for
his favourite soccer club, Real Madrid. He cleverly
planned to attend medical school in Spain so that
he could pursue both of these dreams at once. Now
he is gone, and the sudden void left in our lives can
6/58

12/07/2016

never be filled. It is still impossible to comprehend.
We are left only to ask why.
“The Israeli forces claim they were responding
to stone throwers. Israel considers it reasonable
to respond to children throwing stones with
machine-gun fire, which is itself an inhumane,
extreme policy. But Mahmoud and the other boys
were not throwing stones. They were sitting in a
car, driving home, wrapped in towels and swimsuits
and posing no threat to anyone when they were
ambushed by occupying forces.
“For Palestinians, this sort of tragedy is nothing
new. I have lived under decades of Israeli military
occupation, and my children were born into this
brutal reality and have known no other life. As a
parent, I have struggled each and every day with
how much freedom to allow my children and how to
carve out some semblance of a normal life for them
under wildly abnormal circumstances ... My wife
and I took the former path and hoped for the best,
but now, the worst pain imaginable has arrived on
our doorstep ...
“Time and again, Palestinian civilians — children,
women and men — have been killed by Israeli
fire in situations where lethal force is utterly
unjustified. Recently, the world watched as an
Israeli soldier executed a Palestinian by shooting
him in the head as he lay wounded on the ground
and totally surrounded. Although this coldblooded murder was caught on video and created
controversy in Israel, many rallied to support the
murderous soldier, including Israeli politician
Avigdor Lieberman, who was shortly thereafter
named Defence Minister and is now responsible for
overseeing the military occupation.
“An extremist climate prevails in today’s Israel
and never before has the value of Palestinian life
been so cheap. Our bodies, our minds, our passions,
our very lives and by extension, our deaths, are all
considered lesser, and nothing makes this clearer
to us than our repeated slaying at the hands of
the Israeli military and the subsequent refusal to
bring us justice. It is important to recall that as
the occupying Power, Israel is obligated under
international law to ensure the well-being of the
civilian population — we the Palestinians. Instead,
we have witnessed the ongoing and intensifying
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

brutalization of Palestinian bodies to the point
where our lives are treated as entirely expendable.
“We Palestinians want a life of peace, freedom,
justice and equality. We want the basic human
dignity of not having our lives arbitrarily ended. We
want to be able to know that, if our children leave
the house to do the things children do, like going to
school, playing soccer and going swimming, their
lives are not at risk.
“So many Palestinian parents have lost their
children to Israeli bullets fired in order to preserve
an unjust system of military occupation, denying
an entire nation of people their human rights.
Mahmoud is but the most recent innocent victim. I
write to you today as a grieving father because you,
the international community, who are allowing
Israel to sustain its brutal occupation into its fiftieth
year, can help make sure that Mahmoud is among
the last of the lives taken. I ask that you demand
accountability from both the Israeli Government
and your own and stand with the calls for freedom,
justice and peace”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I am appearing before the
Council today at a particularly troubling time for my
country. Over the past few weeks, Israelis sitting in
a restaurant were massacred while having dinner, a
young girl was stabbed to death in her own bed and
a father was killed and buried by his 10 children after
he was shot to death while driving home for Shabbat
service with his family. These vicious acts of terrorism
did not take place in a vacuum. They are a direct result
of the continuous Palestinian incitement.
Last week, while the Palestinians were embarking
on the latest murderous wave of terror, the Quartet
issued their report on the major threats to achieving
a negotiated peace. From their report, we learn that
Palestinian Authority officials have not condemned
terror attacks against Israelis. I quote, “streets, squares
and schools have been named after Palestinians who
have committed acts of terrorism”. The report also noted
that officials from Abbas’s own Fatah faction referred
to these terrorists as “heroes and a crown on the head
of every Palestinian”. There is a direct line between
the incitement to hatred spread by Abbas’s Palestinian
Authority and the despicable acts of terrorism taking
place in Israel.

S/PV.7736

The hateful rhetoric of the Palestinian leadership
begins at the top. In his recent speech to the European
Parliament, Abbas himself repeated an outrageous
lie that Israel seeks to poison the Palestinians’ water
supply. He said, “certain rabbis in Israel have said very
clearly to their Government that our water should be
poisoned in order to have Palestinians killed”. That
vicious slander is rooted in centuries-old fabricated
accusations against Jews for poisoning wells. It is a
blood libel, pure and simple. No press release can undo
the damage or revoke the call to violence sent with
these hateful words.
In the very same speech, Abbas even went as far
as to blame all terrorism in the Middle East — in
fact, all terrorism in the world — on Israel, saying,
“Once the occupation ends, terrorism will disappear;
there will be no more terrorism in the Middle East
or anywhere else in the world.” Apparently, if it were
not for Israel, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
would not behead innocents in Syria or murder dozens
of people in Istanbul and Bagdad and a terrorist would
not have massacred 50 people at a lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender nightclub in Orlando. With the endless
stream of incitement coming from the Palestinian
leadership, it is no surprise that those words of hate
translate into acts of violence against Israelis.
Less than two weeks ago, Israelis witnessed a
particularly cruel and vile act of terrorism. Early in the
morning, a 17-year-old Palestinian broke into the home
of the Ariel family, locked the door and proceeded to
stab 13-year-old Hallel to death. Hallel, an innocent girl
who was sleeping late after dancing at her recital the
night before, was killed in what should be the safest
place known to any child — her own bedroom, her
own bed.
What can drive a young boy to pick up a knife and
repeatedly stab a 13-year-old child sleeping in her own
bed? The hateful act of that 17-year-old terrorist is the
direct result of years of indoctrination in Palestinian
Authority schools, hate broadcasted on official
Palestinian Authority television and, more recently,
calls to kill Jews in Facebook posts and Twitter feeds.
As the Quartet’s recent report rightly points out, the
international community must send a clear message
to the Palestinian leadership: stop inciting and start
talking. Israelis want and pray for peace, but we cannot
make any progress unless the Palestinians put an end
to terror and incitement and finally agree to direct,
face-to-face negotiations.

16-214307/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Yet, time after time, the Palestinian leadership has
failed on both counts. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
said repeatedly, including only two days ago, that he
would meet with President Abbas any time to work to
end the conflict. Yet, Abbas has made it clear that he
has no time to talk peace. It is therefore no surprise
that, when the President of the European Parliament
invited Abbas to meet with the President of Israel,
Reuven Rivlin, in Brussels last month, Abbas refused
the opportunity. Talking peace with Israel’s President
was not on Abbas’s agenda for his visit to Europe.
He was too busy spreading vile lies and peddling
anti-Semitic conspiracies.
Unfortunately, Abbas’s refusal to negotiate is
incentivized by some in the international community.
Plans for international initiatives that seek to impose
a solution on the two sides send exactly the wrong
message. They tell the Palestinians they can achieve
all their goals while continuing to encourage terror and
refusing to even talk with Israel. Let me be clear — the
only way to achieve peace for the region is by building
a strong foundation. This foundation must consist of
three pillars: an end to all terrorism and incitement,
an end to the Palestinian refusal to recognize Israel as
the nation-State of the Jewish people, and Palestinian
willingness to directly negotiate with Israel. Any
attempt to bypass direct talks will only encourage the
Palestinians to continue to avoid real negotiations.
It is troubling that the Quartet report repeated the
fiction that Israeli construction in Judea and Samaria is
an obstacle to peace. When Israel froze construction in
these Jewish communities, it did not get peace. When
Israel uprooted every Jewish town and village in Gaza,
11 years ago, it did not get peace; it got war. Some
today may try to balance their criticism of Palestinian
terror by condemning Israeli construction. Some might
even criticize construction while ignoring Palestinian
terrorism. Israel strongly rejects any attempt to draw
moral equivalence between construction and terrorism.
We have gathered to discuss the Middle East. It
requires us, today, to discuss one of the main causes
of instability and chaos in the region — the activities
of the internationally recognized terror organization
Hezbollah. Exactly 10 years ago, on 12 July 2006, the
terrorist group Hezbollah, a proxy of Iran, unleashed
a carefully planned attack against Israel. This
unprovoked attack instigated a 34-day war. For 34 days,
the citizens of Israel were forced to run for their lives
8/58

12/07/2016

at the sound of the siren and spend their nights sleeping
in bomb shelters.
When the war ended, the Council, in this Chamber,
pledged that Hezbollah would no longer be allowed to
threaten Israel and hold the people of Lebanon hostage.
Resolution 1701 (2006) required “the disarmament of
all armed groups in Lebanon, so that ... there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than that of the
Lebanese State”.
I have the unfortunate task of informing the
Council today that, 10 years later, the situation has
gone from bad to worse. The implementation of those
critical requirements of the resolution never happened.
The Government of Lebanon never stopped Hezbollah
and Hezbollah never stopped its military build-up.
Moreover, the world simply stopped paying
attention. When resolution 1701 (2006) was adopted,
Hezbollah had 7,000 rockets. Today, they have
over 120,000 rockets and missiles. This is a larger
arsenal than that of all European NATO countries
combined. In simple terms, there are more missiles
hidden underground in the 10,000 square kilometers
of Lebanon than there are above ground in the over
4 million square kilometres of all the European NATO
allies combined. For years, in speech after speech and
in letter after letter, Israel has warned the Council of
the dangers of the illegal smuggling and the continued
build-up in southern Lebanon, but these warnings have
fallen on deaf ears. The results are plain for all to see.
Hizbullah has transformed the villages of southern
Lebanon into terror outposts, placing rocket-launchers
next to schools and hospitals and storing missiles in
living rooms.
We have decided to share with the Council our
latest intelligence about Hizbullah’s activities I would
ask Council members to turn their attention to the last
page in the hand-out that has been distributed in the
Chamber. It contains an aerial photograph of the village
of Shagra in southern Lebanon, just a few kilometres
from the border with Israel. Shagra is a village with
a population of 4,000, and consists of over 1,100
buildings. One out of every three buildings in Shagra
has been turned by Hizbullah terrorists into military
positions. I ask representatives to look at the example
marked “one” in yellow. It shows a Hizbullah rocketlauncher, an infantry position and ammunition depots.
The terrorists chose to hide their positions in-between
homes and to place them just a few metres from the
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

three schools shown in blue. In the example marked
“two” in yellow, representatives will again see a rocketlauncher, arms depots and an infantry position. The
blue square that these weapons of war are next to is a
mosque — a holy house of prayer. Council members
can see it with their own eyes. These are actual pictures
that were taken only recently.
This is exactly what we mean when we say that
Hizbullah is committing a double war crime. Not only
is it attacking Israeli civilians, but it is using Lebanese
civilians as human shields to defend its terror activity.
We are dealing with a terror group that operates as a
State within a State. Hizbullah is a threat to Israel,
to Lebanon and to the entire region. This is not the
assessment of the State of Israel alone. It is the official
stance of the Secretary-General. As the SecretaryGeneral warned in his report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006),
“Should Hizbullah’s possession of arms or attempts
to procure sophisticated weapons provoke conflict,
the consequences are potentially very grave for
Lebanon and for the region” (S/2016/189, para. 66).
Ten years have passed since resolution 1701 (2006)
was adopted, and Hizbullah has only enhanced its
military capabilities. The longer the Council ignores
this threat, the more dangerous it becomes to the entire
region. The United States, the European Union and
the League of Arab States have already condemned
Hizbullah’s terrorist activities. It is about time that
the Council recognized Hizbullah as a deadly terrorist
organization and begin to act accordingly.
There is one regional Power that openly supports
Hizbullah. The lifeline of Hizbullah flows directly
from Tehran. Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah
recently confessed to this fact in his own words:
“Hizbullah’s budget and expenses come from
the Islamic Republic of Iran; our allocated money
is coming to us in the same way we receive the
rockets with which we threaten Israel.”
And Hizbullah is not the only terror organization on
Iran’s payroll. In fact, over 60 per cent of the budget
of the military wings of Hamas and Islamic Jihad also
comes from Iran. It is clear that behind the Ayatollah’s
smile campaign, Iran remains the driving force for
hostility and the engine of instability in the Middle
East.

S/PV.7736

Let me be clear. Should Iran’s proxy, Hizbullah,
make the miscalculation that it did 10 years ago in
2006, Israel will be ready to defend its citizens in the
most vigorous and forceful way possible. For the sake
of the integrity and credibility of this institution, and
for the sake of stability in the region, we expect the
Council to demand that the Government of Lebanon
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) and remove the
Hizbullah terrorists from southern Lebanon. Doing so
would not only be the right thing to do, but would also
distance the prospects of war and increase the chance
for long-lasting stability in our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his sobering
presentation.
Across the Middle East, we see trends moving in
the wrong direction — of rising violence, of political
leaders choosing conflict over peace, of innocent
people paying the price as conflicts fester. Today, I will
discuss those trends in Israeli, Palestinian, Lebanese
and Syrian contexts, and what we can do to help reverse
them. Let me begin with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We share the Secretary-General’s serious concern
about the situation on the ground, especially the violence
against innocent civilians. There is absolutely no
justification for terrorism or for the taking of innocent
lives. That is why we condemn in the strongest terms
the unconscionable terrorist attack last week in the
West Bank, where a 13-year old girl, Hallel Ariel, was
stabbed to death in her own home as she slept. In recent
months, there has been a steady stream of violence on
both sides of the conflict. On 21 June, as we heard, a
15-year old Palestinian boy, Mahmoud Badran, was
killed when returning home from a night out at a water
park in the West Bank, in what the Israeli army said
was an accidental shooting. Shortly thereafter, clashes
broke out at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount during
Ramadan. We offer our most sincere condolences to the
families of Hallel and Mahmoud, and to all victims of
senseless acts of violence.
Israel has just announced the advancement of
hundreds of settlement units in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. If implemented, that would be the latest step
in what seems to be a systematic process of land seizures,
settlement expansions and legalizations of outposts that
is fundamentally undermining the prospects for a two-

16-214309/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

State solution. As the Quartet report makes clear, this
is not just about settlement construction. It is a broader
process that includes not giving permits for Palestinian
development and demolishing the homes and structures
of Palestinians. As the report finds, the population of
settlements has more than doubled since the Oslo process
began in 1993. Settlement activity is incompatible with
a two-State solution and counterproductive to the cause
of peace. The report is clear that Israel should cease
the policy of settlement construction and expansion,
designating land for exclusive Israeli use, and denying
Palestinian development.
The Quartet report reflects our concern about the
trends on the ground that are imperilling a two-State
solution, such as violence, terrorism and incitement to
violence, the settlement construction and expansion,
and the political and humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
are concerned that continuing on the current course will
make the prospects of a two-State solution increasingly
remote and risk entrenching a one-State reality. The
Quartet report’s main objective is to provide a way
forward to achieve the goal that is shared by all on the
Council — a negotiated two-State solution. That way
forward requires both sides to take all necessary steps
to prevent violence and protect the lives and property
of all civilians. The Palestinian Authority should act
decisively to cease incitement to violence and clearly
condemn all acts of terrorism, and both sides must
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric.
Finally, the report rightly recognizes the
challenging situation in Gaza and the threat it poses
to the two-State solution. This includes the build-up of
illicit arms and militant activity in Gaza, which must be
terminated. The report also outlines in detail the very
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, with 1.3 million
Gazans in need of sustained humanitarian assistance.
The international community must accelerate Gaza
reconstruction and assistance. The report stresses the
urgent need for affirmative steps to reverse each of
these trends and calls on both parties to independently
demonstrate through policies and actions a genuine
commitment to a two-State solution. In other words, the
parties should take steps now to move towards creating
a peaceful two-State reality on the ground. The Quartet
report provides a constructive path forward to help
create the conditions for meaningful negotiations.
In Lebanon, the country’s politicians must show
leadership and flexibility by electing a president
in accordance with Lebanon’s Constitution and
10/58

12/07/2016

national pact. Two years of a presidential stalemate have
hobbled the Government at a time when the country
faces profound security risks, as demonstrated by the
recent suicide attacks in the village of Al-Qaa. That is
why the United States is helping the Lebanese Armed
Forces build the capabilities necessary to counter
violent extremism and protect the Lebanese people, an
essential effort that more Governments should support.
In Syria, the Al-Assad regime continues to attack
civilians, besiege cities and prevent humanitarian aid
from reaching those whose lives depend on it. Even
as the regime and opposition committed to refraining
from attacks during Eid Al-Fitr, the Al-Assad regime
violated this commitment by continuing attacks on
Daraya, outside of Damascus, as well as in Aleppo and
Homs. The Al-Assad regime’s attacks over the past
week demonstrate its aim to encircle and cut off access
to Syrians in the eastern part of Aleppo, with potentially
devastating consequences. A besieged eastern Aleppo
City would represent the largest such population in
the country, with hundreds of thousands of additional
Syrians cut off from regular access to aid. Russia, as a
co-sponsor of the cessation of hostilities, should use its
influence on the regime to help stop those attacks.
On the humanitarian front, more than 590,000 people
remain trapped in 18 besieged areas. In most of those
cases, the regime and its allies continue to deliberately
obstruct access to Syrians in desperate need of food
and basic medicine. The regime regularly challenges
the United Nations on the number of beneficiaries who
need assistance in these besieged locations, trying to
argue that the United Nations should be stocking even
less aid in its convoys.
The challenges to accessing these besieged areas
remain immense. Take one example: the town of
Madaya near Damascus, which is besieged by the
Al-Assad regime. The people of Madaya are dependent
on humanitarian deliveries for survival. Otherwise,
they would be putting their lives in great danger if
they tried to leave to get food, medicine or other
basic supplies. According to a report from Physicians
for Human Rights and the Syrian-American Medical
Society, released just today, Madaya is surrounded
by approximately 65 checkpoints. The report explains
that each of those checkpoints can include military
personnel, snipers and heavy weaponry. Between the
town and the checkpoints, the report further notes, up
to 12,000 landmines and a network of dirt mounds and
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

trenches keep the town’s 40,000 residents trapped. That
is one landmine for every three residents.
These conditions are, needless to say, not conducive
to resuming intra-Syrian negotiations. In December
2015, the Security Council unanimously expressed
support for resolution 2254 (2015) for a Syrian-led
political process that establishes credible, inclusive and
non-sectarian governance. Getting a genuine cessation
of hostilities back on track is critical to this goal. The
Syrian people desperately need a reduction in violence
and sufficient humanitarian aid.
In Daraya, another town outside of Damascus
besieged by the Al-Assad regime, Fatima Lahham
recently told a reporter about her 7-year-old daughter,
Maram. Maram is going deaf. While others run for
shelter when regime aircraft approach the town, Maram
just cannot hear them coming. When special batteries
in Maram’s hearing aids run out, Fatima, her mother,
has noticed that Maram will not take the hearing aids
out. According to Fatima, she says, “No, they might
make me hear”. Although a recent aid convoy made it
possible for her to get a new set of batteries, Fatima is
deeply anxious about what will happen to her daughter
when they run out again in a few weeks. Now when
young Maram draws pictures of people running away
from bombs, Fatima sees that there is a little girl who is
not running away, because she cannot hear. Those are
the consequences for just one family of the Al-Assad
regime’s sieges. It is horrifying to think of what will
happen if continued Syrian and Russian air strikes
could force another 300,000 people in and around
Aleppo to endure the same fate.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my delegation, allow me, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the precedency of the
Security Council for the month of July and to thank
France for having guided our work during the month of
June. We also thank you for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, to which we listened carefully
and which we fully endorse.
Once again, Uruguay expresses its emphatic
condemnation of the actions of terrorist groups
operating within the region. We are convinced that
the attacks against the lives and dignity of innocent
civilians carried out through terrorism and violent
extremism must not be tolerated in any part of the world.

S/PV.7736

Uruguay is concerned about the growing destabilizing
impact of such groups, whose actions negatively affect
the possibility of achieving sustainable solutions to the
ongoing conflicts in the region and believes that it is
essential to strengthen international cooperation at all
levels to allow the development of national capacities
necessary to address that threat.
Uruguay maintains a deep friendship with both the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We have not
lost hope that both peoples will be able to overcome
their differences and reach an understanding on the
key issues that separate them. Uruguay reaffirms its
support for the right of Israel and Palestine to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders in an
atmosphere of ​​cooperation and free from any threat
or acts that breach the peace. Uruguay believes that
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) remain in effect.
And I reiterate Uruguay’s position regarding the
unacceptability of the acquisition of territory by force.
In that regard, Uruguay believes that it is essential
that the international community step up its efforts to
support the process and encourages the parties to return
to the negotiating table.
Uruguay considers the recent report of the Quartet
as an important contribution to move forward in
the search for solutions to the Middle East peace
process. However, we are concerned about the trends
that threaten the viability of the two-State solution
identified in the Quartet’s report, such as the ongoing
violence, the terrorist attacks and incitement to
violence; the ongoing policy of settlement construction
and expansion, the designation of land for exclusive
Israeli use and the denial of Palestinian development;
and the increase in illegal weapons and militant
activity and continued lack of Palestinian unity and
the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Uruguay regrets
that those trends continue. We are surprised by the
continued policy of settlement expansion and that, only
four days before the publication of the report, Israel
made public its decision to build 560 new homes in the
West Bank and 240 in East Jerusalem. The continued
policy of settlement construction undermines the
physical viability of the two-State solution. At the same
time, Uruguay condemns the recent terrorist attack
carried out in Tel Aviv, which left four people dead and
several others wounded. We also condemn the loss of
Palestinian lives in equally regrettable situations.
It is necessary to encourage the parties to create
the conditions necessary for the implementation of

16-2143011/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the recommendations contained in the Quartet report
aimed at restarting negotiations between the parties
and adopting actions and policies that demonstrate
their commitment to the two-State solution. In order
to move towards a definitive solution, it is important
for the international community to step up its efforts
to support the process and encourage the parties to
resume dialogue
Uruguay welcomes the final communiqué of
the peace conference for Israel and Palestine held in
Paris on 3 June, which acknowledged the importance
of implementing economic incentives in terms of
cooperation in order to unlock the current impasse
and promote the economic and social development of
the Palestinian people. Strengthening and establishing
national institutions and basic infrastructure are
essential to ensuring the viability of the Palestinian
State, which has embarked upon the path of declaring
itself a fully fledged State.
Unfortunately, there are other conflicts affecting
the Middle East, especially those involving the Syrian
Arab Republic, Yemen, Iraq and Libya, which, albeit
is not part of the region, is related to it. The situation
in Syria is an affront to human dignity, with thousands
of refugees and dead civilians, unremitting terrorist
actions and a complete lack of agreement between the
different parties involved to reach a negotiated political
settlement. Uruguay commends the role that is played
by the Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
and encourages all parties to continue making efforts
to reach an early political solution and respect the
ceasefire that has been agreed to.
Uruguay underscores the efforts of the international
community and particularly those of humanitarian
workers, who despite many difficulties on the ground
continue to work so that humanitarian aid reaches the
neediest people. Uruguay reiterates its condemnation of
the use of hunger as a tactic of war and strongly calls on
all parties to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Uruguay also condemns the deliberate targeting of
medical personnel and medical facilities and urges
compliance with resolution 2286 (2016), which was
adopted by the Council in May.
Increased international efforts are needed to keep
Syrian children from becoming a lost generation as a
result of, among other problems, the lack of educational
opportunities, their recruitment as child soldiers
12/58

12/07/2016

and forced marriage at an early age. For Uruguay,
access to education is a right that must be guaranteed
without distinction.
The only possible solution to the conflict in Syria is
a political solution. To that end, progress must be made
in the peace talks under way, and a transition process
must be facilitated as a way to achieve lasting solutions
to the current conflict. The transition should be led by
the Syrian people, whose interests should be considered,
with the provisions of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268
(2016) being respected and taken into account.
Uruguay recognizes the progress made since the
start of negotiations in Kuwait on Yemen, which was
made possible by the cessation of hostilities reached
in that country and by progress in terms of security.
This has also enabled humanitarian aid to reach areas
that were previously inaccessible. In this task, the
outstanding work done by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, should be acknowledged.
Nevertheless, Uruguay is dismayed at the escalation
of terrorist attacks, particularly those perpetrated by
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the Islamic State,
both of which have benefited from the power vacuum
that has existed in Yemen. For Uruguay, the killing
of children — no matter by whom — is unacceptable.
In this regard, we have followed with concern the
statements made by the Secretary-General with respect
to his motivations for removing the name of a country
from the list of parties responsible for committing the
gravest violations against children published in the
section on Yemen in annex I of his annual report on
children in armed conflict (S/2016/360).
In Syria and Yemen, civilian populations are not
merely incidental victims of the conflicts unleashed
there. They are not what is euphemistically called
“collateral damage”. In Syria and Yemen, civilians are
deliberately targeted by warring factions. This is clearly
demonstrated by the type of weapons used in such
conflicts, which are fired directly on civilians: barrel
bombs, thermobaric explosives, cluster munitions,
white phosphorous bombs, rockets and missiles — some
of which are sophisticated, others are home-made.
Some of these weapons can be produced by the forces
in combat since they are relatively unsophisticated,
and those who make them are not concerned about
their accuracy; all they care about is that they explode
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

somewhere near their supposed targets and cause the
greatest damage possible.
But cluster munitions, phosphorous bombs and
thermobaric explosives are not produced in the back of
a garage or secretly hidden at night in a shed. These
weapons are produced in a relatively limited number
of fairly sophisticated factories, set up in the territory
of an even smaller number of countries, probably all
members of this Organization. By their very nature,
and beyond their evil purpose or their manifest
consistency with international humanitarian law, this
type of weapon is generally reserved for conventional
armed forces, which are subject to a chain of command
and control by State institutions. Their production,
stockpiling, supply, trade and export cannot take place
without the knowledge and control of State entities.
Let us be clear — those States Members of the United
Nations in whose territories such weapons are produced
and from whose territories such weapons are supplied
to conflict zones are equally responsible for their use
against civilian populations, which are helpless victims
trapped in a nightmarish hell. Sooner or later, all those
responsible will be held to account — some perhaps
in court, others will be judged by history, but all will
have to answer to their consciences and ultimately to
their Maker.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We
appreciate the positive efforts that the Secretariat and
the Secretary-General himself have undertaken to
move the Middle East peace process forward. China
has also listened attentively to the statements of the
representatives of Palestine and Israel.
War and conflict continue in the Middle East,
which is deplorable. Efforts to find a solution should
focus on resolving differences through dialogue and
on eradicating instability through development so
that the region can ultimately embark upon the path
of peaceful and stable development. That is where the
responsibilities of the United Nations and the Security
Council lie.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue. Defending the legitimate national
interests and rights of the Palestinian people is the
shared responsibility of the international community.
At present, the Palestinian-Israel peace talks are
deadlocked. The violent conflict has intensified. The
humanitarian disaster is deepening. The two-State

S/PV.7736

solution and the prospect of its achievement have been
weakened. A comprehensive and just solution to the
Palestinian issue is in the interests of all sides. China
proposes that the international community should take
swift action in the following respects.
First, the international community needs to adhere
to the path towards independent statehood, with
Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace. The
establishment of the State of Palestine on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and with full sovereignty, is an inalienable right of the
Palestinian people. It is also the key to the solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli question.
We should adhere to the principle that the peace
talks are the only way out. The deadlock in those
talks can only aggravate differences, incite hatred
and drag Palestine and Israel into an endless, vicious
and ever-escalating spiral of violence. Only with an
early resumption of peace talks can there be peace
and stability in Israel and Palestine and in the region
as whole, which is in the fundamental interest of both
Palestine and Israel. There is a need to adhere to the
principle of land for peace, the two-State solution, the
Arab peace initiative and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, with a view to advancing the peace
process. The afore-mentioned initiatives are significant
outcomes of the excruciating negotiations on the part
of the international community, and as such, are highly
significant in guiding the Middle East peace process.
Secondly, both Israel and Palestine should stop
engaging in violent conflict, and they should exercise
the utmost restraint and refrain from taking any
unilateral actions. In particular, they should altogether
avoid using force against civilians. Israel should stop its
expansion of settlement activities and demonstrate good
will and meet the basic conditions for the resumption
of peace talks. Israel must abide by international law
and the basic norms governing international relations,
lift its blockade against Palestine, especially Gaza,
and rescind its restrictions on aid to Palestine. At the
same time, Israel’s legitimate security concerns must
be respected and addressed.
Thirdly, the international community needs to
jointly explore a broader scope of peace promotion,
drawing lessons from the manner in which the situations
in other Middle East hotspots have been resolved;
explore broader efforts to promote peace on the basis
of the Quartet’s recommendations; and demonstrate the

16-2143013/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

will to promote peace through international synergy.
Existing mechanisms can be maintained, and new
initiatives need to be encouraged. At the same time,
attention should be paid to giving free rein to the
leadership role of the United Nations, and the outcome
of efforts to promote peace should be approved by the
Security Council. The international community should
help relaunch Palestine-Israeli peace talks and establish
follow-up mechanisms to provide robust support and
ensure that the outcomes of peace talks are monitored
and assessed.
In the process of peace talks, the international
community should identify mechanisms to provide
incentives in the light of actions taken by both sides.
There is a need to further support Palestinian capacitybuilding. China has always remained supportive of
the just cause of the Palestinian people to restore their
legitimate national interests and rights. It has always
been committed to promoting peace talks. Earlier this
year, President Xi Jinping of China, when delivering
a speech at the headquarters of the League of Arab
States, called for a resumption of peace talks in the
political arena and for reconstruction to be promoted in
the economic arena.
China welcomes and supports all efforts conducive
to easing Palestinian-Israeli tensions and achieving the
two-State solution promptly. China has long supported
Palestinian capacity-building by providing humanitarian
assistance, training and aid for reconstruction. China is
confident that, as long as the international community
stays the course of promoting peace and as long as
Palestine and Israel continue to choose the path of peace
talks, peace will ultimately prevail. China stands ready
to work with the international community in advancing
a just resolution to the Palestinian-Israeli question at an
early date.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): Venezuela would like to begin by thanking
Japan for having convened this open debate, and we
welcome the participation therein of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who recently visited a
number of countries in the Middle East region. That
was part of his very firm commitment to seeking peace
and stability. Our country endorses the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
This open debate on the Middle East is occurring at
a very complex time on the international stage. Despite
14/58

12/07/2016

the existing difficulties, the international community,
international and regional organizations, and countries
in the region are carrying out efforts to achieve peace
on the various war fronts. Nevertheless, we believe that
one of the fundamental elements needed to achieve
peace in the region is the resumption of peace talks
between Israel and Palestine. Those talks, which have
been stagnant for many years, constitute an ongoing
source of conflict in the region. To that end, with regard
to Palestine, we welcome the efforts made by France,
which resulted in the holding of an international
conference on the Middle East in early June. Similarly,
we take note of the recently released report of the
Middle East Quartet.
We had hoped for much more from that report. Most
of all, we had hoped for a more balanced report that
would have adequately described the disproportionate
Israeli violence against the Palestinian people and that
would have characterized the Israeli occupation as the
root cause of all the violence and conflict. We believe
that, had the Quartet report taken a clearer and firmer
stance, that stance could have persuaded the parties of
the need to resume dialogue and negotiations in order
to put an end to a conflict that has affected regional
stability for decades.
Unfortunately, we must recognize that, in spite
of the good intentions of the Quartet and all of the
diplomatic initiatives taken to create conditions for
dialogue and peace, we continue to face a key obstacle,
namely, the Israeli Government’s refusal to put an
end to its illegal occupation of Palestinian territories
and its criminal blockade on the Gaza Strip. That and
that alone constitutes the main source of disruption
in Palestinian-Israeli relations. Guided by the most
extremist elements in its society, the Israeli Government
is acting in an aggressive and arrogant manner. It
refuses to participate in bilateral dialogue, because it
knows that it has a powerful and disproportionately
large military capacity and the support of prominent
Security Council members.
At previous Security Council meetings, we have
clearly stated our concern at the continually deteriorating
living conditions of the Palestinian people as a result of
the Israeli occupation. The occupying Power’s impact
on the Palestinian people is felt in every aspect of their
lives. That includes the loss of the lives of at least 140
Palestinians since October 2015, deaths that occurred
at the hands of the Israeli security forces. There are
also military operations, clashes, demonstrations and
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

presumed or real attacks against Israeli citizens. We
do, of course, condemn those attacks. We reject and
repudiate the assassinations committed against the
defenceless Palestinian people by the occupying forces,
who are acting in a disproportionate manner and
who, to date, have yet to be held accountable for their
crimes and massive violations of the human rights of
Palestinians and of international law.
We also recall that since October of last year,
some 50 Palestinian minors have died at the hands
of Israeli military and security forces. Not only have
those confrontations been unequal, but in fact, many
boys and girls have died while engaging in activities
entirely unrelated to confrontation. Let us not forget
that, to date, thousands of Palestinians — including
more than 1,300 children — have been wounded since
the last quarter of 2015 as a result of Israel’s actions. It
is outrageous that those actions have not been roundly
condemned and that demands for the occupying Power
to put an end to those abuses are not being made.
In addition to physical disappearances, Palestinians
are also being detained and imprisoned. More than
6,000 Palestinians, 400 of them boys and girls, are
currently detained and are serving sentences in Israeli
prisons. Of the total number detained, some 700 are in
what is known as administrative detention, an arbitrary
means of oppressing Palestinians, in flagrant violation
of their human rights.
The occupying Power is not content to simply
physically oppress the Palestinians. It has also devoted
efforts to negating any possibility for development
in Palestine, making the two-State solution
virtually impossible. The main instrument used by the
occupying Power to obstruct a definitive resolution, as
noted in the Quartet report, is the Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestine, recognized and denounced by
the international community as illegal and as a serious
obstacle to achieving a firm and lasting peace. Right
now Israeli settlers hold some 60 per cent of the land
in Area C, which has some of the most productive land
and the principal natural resources.
More than half a million Israeli settlers are living
illegally on Palestinian land, including 200,000 in East
Jerusalem. They undoubtedly represent the lack of
commitment by the Israeli counterpart to a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the Middle East conflict. The
fact that the Government of Israel says that the Quartet
report perpetuates the myth that Israeli construction in

S/PV.7736

the West Bank is an obstacle to peace only confirms
that Government’s obsession to block any possibility
of a just and lasting solution that will guarantee peace
and security for both peoples and for the region. Israel
continues to act, in violation of international law and
resolutions of this Council, in a brutal and systematic
process of colonization of Palestine.
Israel’s settlement policy in occupied Palestine
has also brought other harmful consequences, like
the violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinian
communities surrounding settlements. The settlers in
the West Bank have harassed, humiliated and violently
attacked Palestinian communities through vandalism
and criminal acts and destruction of Palestinian
property and have done so with total impunity, without
being punished by the Israeli authorities. On the
contrary, the authorities act to support some of those
excesses by the settlements.
To the defenceless position of the Palestinians we
must add Israeli restrictions on the movement of goods
and people to and from the occupied West Bank and the
criminal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip. That further
complicates reconstruction and the normalization of
life in that area. Similarly, it must be considered that
Israel’s activities to modify in its favour the geographic
continuity of Palestine and its demographic composition
are accompanied by actions to alter the cultural identity
of regions that have historically been Palestinian. This
includes a lack of respect for holy sites, such as the
Al-Aqsa Mosque.
This situation of suffocating and intolerable
oppression of the Palestinians cannot be concealed
or compared to other violent acts in the occupied
territories. All that violence is the fault of Israel. It is
the result of the occupation of Palestine — an illegal
and criminal occupation that is constantly inciting and
provoking violence, declining to respect international
law and to seek a political solution that is based on the
two-State solution.
In this context, we call upon the Security Council
to emerge from its state of inaction with regard to the
occupation of Palestine by Israel. Council members
must urgently take up our commitment to this matter
and take action as soon as possible to make an effective
contribution to ending the conflict and to finding a
peaceful, just and lasting solution. We cannot continue
to hear in this meeting those grim accounts of violence
and death in the occupied territories.

16-2143015/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Council must also consider measures to
establish an international system of protection for the
Palestinian population in the occupied territories, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention and
resolution 904 (1994). We also reiterate our call to the
Council to assume its commitment to the Palestinians,
to the United Nations and to the mandate granted it in
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It must demand
the end of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories — the cause of the conflict — while firmly
commiting to support Palestine’s incorporation as a
full-fledged Member State of the United Nations.
With regard to the report of the Middle East Quartet,
we thank its members for the report and for their efforts
in considering the Palestinian question. Obviously, we
share the concerns expressed in the report with regard to
the two-State solution and how it is being compromised.
We agree that we must reject unilateral actions by
any of the parties that may affect the outcome of the
negotiations. We reject extremist violence, terrorism
and incitement to violence by Israelis or Palestinians.
Nevertheless, we should point out that we had hoped
that the document would be more comprehensive and
would have taken a broad perspective on what is a
serious conflict that is affecting the two-State solution.
In that context, we are concerned that the report
dilutes and minimizes Israel’s responsibility as the
Power occupying Palestinian territory, attempting to
assign to Palestine the same level of responsibility in the
conflict, when the fact is that one cannot equate violent
Palestinian actions — which we do condemn — with
the disproportionate response of the Israeli authorities.
We all know of the efforts of the Palestinian
authorities to prevent and condemn violence, restrict
violent rhetoric and reduce tensions, strengthen its
governance and develop their economy. Those actions
appear as recommendations in the report, but none
of them have ended the Israeli occupation. On the
contrary, the aggressions of the occupying Power
have increased with the passage of time. Israel cannot
impose conditions, which we know are imposibile to
meet in the current situation, for the resumption of the
dialogue to find a political solution to the conflict.
The report and its recommendations suggest a
course of action. In the framework of the Arab Peace
Initiative, we must promote the peace process towards
a two-State solution, in which Israel and a free
16/58

12/07/2016

Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, live side
by side within secure and internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. That is the ideal
way to achieve the goal of establishing an independent
Palestinian State that will allow the Palestinian people
to enjoy their legitimate and inalienable right to selfdetermination, and thereby put an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Finally, we urge the Security Council to fully
comply with its responsibilities in this regard. The men
and women of Palestine, and all those in the world who
yearn and struggle for peace with justice and dignity,
can count on the tireless support of Venezuela, within
the Security Council and outside it, for the Middle East
to be a region of peace.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict continues to remain very complex, spawning
ever new tragedies. The incidents on the West Bank of
the Jordan River and ceasefire violations around Gaza
are a clear confirmation of that.
We consider very important the publication on 1 July
of the Middle East Quartet’s report on the situation of
the Palestinian-Israel settlement, in accordance with
the relevant decision of the ministerial meeting of the
Quartet in Munich in February. The document, which
reflects the desire of the international community to
maintain the prospects for a two-State solution, gives a
picture of the real situation on the ground and contains
specific recommendations. The implementation of
those recommendations could help push the peace
process out of the present impasse and contribute to the
resumption of a direct Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.
We attach great importance to the positions set
out in the report on the unacceptability of violence
and incitement to violence by both sides, on putting
an end to the Israel policy of settlement construction
and expansion in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
and on the illegal seizure of territory to the detriment
of the Palestinians living there. It is in that light that
we should examine the decision, recently made public
in Israel, to build an additional 800 housing units on
occupied Palestinian territory.
We deem it important that the report clearly
expresses the need to re-establish inter-Palestinian unity
on the basis of the Palestinian Liberation Organization’s
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

platform and the principles of the Quartet. We also
deem important the confirmation in the report of the
Arab Peace Initiative as a consensual basis on which to
move forward to achieve a comprehensive settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The report does not shy away from the serious
humanitarian situation in Gaza, which contributes
to instability and, ultimately, complicates efforts to
achieve a negotiated solution. It also underscores the
need to unite Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Administration.
Moscow welcomes the initiative by the President of
Egypt, Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, to offer assistance in
achieving peace between Palestinians and Israelis. We
believe that the efforts of Cairo in that context could
produce results. Russia, as a permanent member of the
Security Council and an active participant in the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators, will continue
with its efforts to find a just solution to the Palestinian
question through the creation of an independent
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital and coexisting peacefully
side-by-side with Israel.
The most important priority of the international
community is to resolve the conflict in Syria by having
the parties reach a mutually acceptable understanding
as the outcome of broadly representative negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations. In the
framework of the Security Council and the International
Syria Support Group, a solid basis for a solution has
been developed that has already brought about concrete
positive results, including on the ground. The direct
interaction by the Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group has been very useful. The final word
now belongs the Syrians themselves. However, much
will depend on whether the opponents of Damascus will
set aside their destructive stance, which postpones any
peaceful solution. In that connection, we expect a more
dynamic and, most important, a more positive attitude
from our American partners as well as from influential
regional players. The United States, as a co-Chair of
the International Syria Support Group must, once and
for all, set aside all propaganda and learn to objectively
assess the situation. We call on the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to step up efforts to work with
the parties to the conflict. The negotiating process in
Geneva must be resumed as quickly as possible.
We intend to continue offering support to the
Government of Syria in its efforts to combat terrorist

S/PV.7736

groups led by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
and the Al-Nusra Front. There can be no doubt that
in this fight there should be no delays or incentives.
We expect and hope that discussions are being held
in various capitals, including regional capitals, in
countries that are in a position to make a contribution to
weakening the terrorist threat. For the time being, there
are significant gaps that allow terrorists to cross borders
and acquire money, weapons, materiel, resources and
access to military-grade toxic substances. This must
be stopped.
A very serious destabilization of the region is due
to the conflict in Yemen. We are in favour of resuming
the intra-Yemeni negotiations, under the mediation of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, in Kuwait on 15 July, as the Yemenis
themselves have called for. We believe that compliance
with the ceasefire regime by all the parties to the
conflict is essential to promoting further dialogue. In
that connection, we call on all the parties to refrain
from aggressive rhetoric that could undermine the very
fragile mutual trust that has been achieved among the
Yemeni people.
Libya is still in a very serious situation. It has
not yet recovered from the foreign intervention that
undermined State control. The fight for influence
among various forces has had a negative effect and
the efforts to restore Libyan unity on the basis of the
political agreement concluded in Skhirat are moving
forward very slowly. Of course, the Government of
National Accord will need to be confirmed by the
House of Representatives in Tobruk. That is a step that
needs to be taken.
Dealing with the continuing negative trends in the
Middle East region requires collective efforts by the
entire international community. If we are to help the
Libyans, we need to facilitate genuine reconciliation
among them, and not cling to artificial schemes of
dubious utility. Russia is ready to work in this area, both
in combating terrorism as well as in promoting political
means to resolving existing conflicts in the region.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
extremely difficult to think of any arguments that are
compatible with the conscience of humankind when we
look at the failure of the international community to
deal with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We cannot
remain silent when the Palestinian people are not
enjoying the freedom they deserve and their rights are

16-2143017/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

being systematically violated. We have seen the effects
on the ground and we have seen the loss of life as a
result of the attacks that have occurred, which are a
violation of human rights.
We have reviewed the recently released Quartet
report and we believe that silence is unacceptable. But
we also agree that it is extremely important for us to
think about new approaches, new ways by which we
can revive the peace process and resolve the question
of Palestine.
The Palestinian people are suffering on a daily
basis. They have done so for more than 50 years now, and
that is unacceptable. There is no ethical argument that
can be put forward in support of the present situation.
It runs counter to human logic and international laws
and customs. There is very little hope left for the
Palestinian people.
The roots of the crisis affecting the Palestinian
people need to be recognized. The illegal occupation
must be recognized, and the international community
must make efforts to focus on the root causes of the
situation. We also need to focus on the consequences of
decades of occupation. The two-State solution, which
has been accepted by the Palestinians and the Israelis
alike and supported by the international community,
has fallen victim to the current situation. There have
been a number of factors that have hindered the twoState solution. We would like to reiterate that it is a very
serious error to confuse or conflate the actual causes
of the conflict and to draw equivalencies between
the actions of the Palestinians and the actions of the
Israelis. The Palestinians have an inalienable right to
their freedom and they want to be able to have hope in
their daily lives.
I will not dwell on the effects of the occupation.
We are all well aware of those effects. I also will not
dwell on the determination of the occupying Power
to continue to engage in its settlement policy and to
occupy Palestinian lands. I am not going to dwell on
references to the new generations of Palestinians, who
have ever only known life behind segregation and who
live in isolation under the blockade in the Gaza Strip. I
will not dwell on the lack of respect for holy sites and
their inviolability.
I would like to talk about the scope for hope
and justice for the Palestinian people. Of course,
there have been attempts made by some to blame the
Palestinian people for the occupation, for which they
18/58

12/07/2016

are not responsible. Palestinians are suffering from the
systematic impact of the occupation and the blockade.
We have seen Israel’s systematic policy of settling
Palestinian lands and of separating the West Bank and
Gaza Strip, both geographically and politically. That
has only strengthened the extremists in their actions.
The Palestinian Authority has been unable to
control the situation. They recognize that the occupying
Power has a consistent policy that goes against the twoState solution and the principles of peace. Allow me to
highlight what the Secretary-General has said in this
very Chamber:
(spoke in English)
“as oppressed peoples have demonstrated
throughout the ages, it is human nature to react
to occupation, which often serves as a potent
incubator of hate and extremism.” (S/PV.7610, p. 2)
(spoke in Arabic)
Today we are at a very critical juncture in the Middle
East. International efforts are necessary to resolve the
question of Palestine. Today, we have an opportunity to
again address that key issue in the region. We cannot
squander this opportunity. We must make real progress.
In that context, the Egyptian Government has issued
a call for a just and comprehensive peace between the
Palestinians and the Israelis.
I recall that there a firm and lasting peace has been
established between Egypt and Israel. I would also point
out that it is possible for the Israelis and Palestinians
to achieve the same type of peace. We want to see
an independent Palestine emerge in accordance with
existing international resolutions, and we believe that
the Palestinians and the Israelis should be guaranteed
the right to live in peace.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt therefore
recently made two visits, to Israel and to Palestine.
Egypt is striving to listen to and learn the viewpoints
of both sides in order to enable the parties to resume
negotiations. It is our hope that those efforts will be
successful. We believe that the settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which has raged for many decades
now, would have a very positive impact on the Middle
East region.
Furthermore, I would like to reaffirm that the
situation remains fragile. We have an opportunity here
that must be seized in order to establish peace between
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel and Palestine, and ending the occupation of the
Palestinian territories would be key in that endeavour. I
also believe that the crisis affecting our Syrian brothers
and sisters must be resolved.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this morning’s
debate, especially following the recent publication of
the Quartet report. As we meet today to deliberate on
the issue of Israel, Palestine and the Middle East, the
international community is increasingly losing faith in
its commitment to the two-State solution. We therefore
thank the Secretary-General for his frank briefing to
the Council, following his very fruitful visit to the
region, especially to Palestine.
We are constantly seized with reports of Israel
demolishing Palestinian homes and advancing plans
to build new houses for Israeli settlers, conducting
daily military raids on Palestinian areas, arrests and
detentions, and imposing severe restrictions, among
others, on human rights. The recent decision of Israel
to move forward with new construction in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem is a clear demonstration of
its disregard for the Council’s decisions. We call on
the Israeli authorities to reconsider the long-term
implications of that strategy in the interests of peace and
of a just final status agreement with the Palestinians.
While firmly condemning terrorist acts and attacks
against Israeli citizens, we are of the view that the basic
motivation for such acts results from the protracted
occupation and the ensuing policies applied in the
Palestinian territories, from which derives the main
issue of Israel’s security. The moving narratives that
we heard this morning from the representatives of
Palestine and of Israel should encourage the Council to
move away from the business-as-usual treatment and
approach to the question. The cost of that is too high.
In a revealing opinion piece published on 3 July
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, he
mentions that:
“[t]he Quartet report sounds an alarm bell that we
are on a dangerous slope towards a one-State reality
that is incompatible with the national aspirations of
both peoples”.

S/PV.7736

In the search for a solution to the dangerous and
painful conflict, after the failure of multiple attempts
by the international community to broker direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, it is clear that a simple
adoption of a Security Council resolution will not be
realistic at the present time or have any real influence
on the peoples facing this grim reality on a daily basis.
In our view, we should push for the practical steps
that both sides need to take to de-escalate tensions
and start the slow process of rebuilding trust, which is
essential to an eventual return to direct negotiations.
In that regard, Angola welcomes the recent visit by
the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs to Israel
to re-engage with that country. We also continue to
look forward to the conference that is being organized
in Paris precisely to re-engage the international
community, it is hoped, on a different path towards the
implementation of the vision that we very much would
like to see implemented, namely, the two-State solution.
No party can decide for the Israelis or the
Palestinians what compromises to make and what risks
to take for peace, and none of us can convince them to
trust each other. However, the international community
must be coherent and avoid continuing to take decisions
that systematically allow for the violation of obligations
by the parties, especially Israel. The support and
incentives provided by international and regional
stakeholders must be aimed not at perpetuating the
status quo, but rather at providing incentives leading to
the implementation of the mutual commitments already
made, as well as, among others, resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).
If the political leaders on both sides are skeptical
about the two-State solution and the possibility of that
outcome being implemented any time soon, with a view
to de-escalating tensions in that extremely volatile
region, we call upon the Israelis and the Palestinians to
begin applying confidence-building recommendations
in the expectation that they will lead to negotiations
for resolving all permanent status issues and meet
the Palestinian aspirations to statehood and Israeli
security needs.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today.
I want to begin by welcoming the Quartet’s report
on the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories. I join others in thanking the Quartet Envoys
and principals for all their hard work in producing

16-2143019/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that important analysis on the situation facing
ordinary Israelis and Palestinians. The trends that
the report highlights are, sadly, familiar: settlements,
annexations and demolitions, violence, incitement and
suffering — on both sides. If we cannot reverse those
shocking trends, the report is clear what the future
holds. It is “a future of a one-State reality, of perpetual
occupation and conflict” — and thus a future without
security, a future without Statehood. And that is no
future at all. I know there are disagreements about
some aspects of the report, what it does and what it does
not cover. But I hope that we can all acknowledge that,
whatever our disagreements, it is absolutely clear that
progress must now be made to stop this possible reality
from coming to pass and that we must advance, indeed
save, the two-State solution. There are three messages
that I hope we can all agree on today.
The first is that the violence must stop. Leaders on
both sides must do more to clamp down on inflammatory
rhetoric and incitement. It is simply not acceptable to
stand by while this continues. Sadlly, the violence that
we have seen over recent months continues. Even as
the report was being published, violence was claiming
more innocent victims. As we have heard, last week
it was 13-year-old Hallel Jaffa-Ariel, last month
Mahmoud Rafad Badran. It is almost unspeakable that
future generations of Israelis and Palestinians are now
victims of a conflict and occupation that belongs firmly
in the past. Children like Hallel and Mahmoud should
be looking ahead to seven decades of peace and hope,
not falling victim to seven decades of hate and fear.
This violence is only moving us away from peace, not
towards it.
Secondly, we need to send a clear message today
that it is not enough just to stop the violence. The
shocking trends in the West Bank are unacceptable
and must stop. Systematic settlement expansion deep
into the West Bank, the legalization of outposts,
the re-designation of land as Israeli State land and
the obstruction or outright denial of Palestinian
development in the West Bank — those policies are
steadily eroding the viability of the two-State solution,
something that the report clearly spells out. When a
family in the Old City of Jerusalem is threatened with
eviction from their home of over 60 years, you are not
only eroding their past, you are eroding their future.
You are eroding their faith that they will ever live on
a land of their own and that they will ever coexist
peaceably with Israel. In turn, you are fuelling an anger
20/58

12/07/2016

that will only threaten the right of ordinary Israelis to
live in safety and security. The village of Khirbat Tana,
a community near Nablus, has faced three waves of
demolitions this year. Houses, barns and a school — the
only school — were demolished. What hope is there for
the two-State solution when communities are simply
removed from the map?
My third message concerns the situation in Gaza.
Two years after the latest conflict, ordinary Gazans
continue to live in the direst conditions. This must be
addressed if we are to prevent a resumption of fullscale conflict. We therefore call on Hamas and other
militant groups to commit to ending rocket fire and
other attacks against Israel. Israel’s citizens deserve to
live in peace. In turn, we need to be clear that Israel
must lift restrictions in order to ease the suffering of
ordinary Palestinians and allow the Gazan economy to
grow. Finally, let us be clear that Palestinian leaders
must work together to overcome their differences and
reunify Gaza and the West Bank.
Those messages have been given too many times
before in the Chamber, and I appreciate that some are
disappointed that the Quartet report is not clear about
the exact steps that need to be taken — steps that go
well beyond words from the Security Council. Sadly,
we are not in a position where there is an obvious path
back to meaningful negotiations. But we can, and we
must, use the report to underline the gravity of the
situation and the urgent need for change. It is now up
to the parties to take action. We stand ready to support
them, but they need to show bold leadership if they are
to make progress towards peace. It is long overdue.
Turning briefly to Syria, we are deeply alarmed by
the credible reports that regime forces have begun an
advance into Daraya, a town that Jan Egeland and the
Office of the Special Envoy for Syria have confirmed
has no significant presence of Da’esh or Al-Nusra front
elements. That is not only a breach of the cessation
of hostilities, it clearly undermines the regime’s own
declarations of a period of calm. As we all know, Daraya
has been besieged by the regime for years, receiving
much-needed aid convoys earlier this year, only then
to be subjected to further bombardment by the regime.
Such punishment attacks following aid deliveries are
utterly sickening. At the same time, the regime has
effectively cut the last supply route into east Aleppo
City. The encirclement of the city threatens the lives
of 300,000 people, potentially increasing the number
of besieged people in Syria to over 800,000. We have
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

already seen the intensity in the Aleppo countryside,
causing many thousands to flee to the Jordanian border
and increasing the pressure on stretched resources there.
We therefore repeat our call once again for those States
that have influence with the Syrian regime to ensure
an immediate halt to those offensives and to respect
the cessation of hostilities in place. Those attacks are
unconscionable and without justification.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Today’s meeting
provides an excellent opportunity for the United Nations
membership to pronounce itself on the recently released
Quartet report. While Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union,
let me provide my delegation’s views on the report and
on other Middle East-related issues.
Despite the fact that the report obviously did not
meet the expectations of all sides, we consider it as
an important step that serves the overall purpose of
reconfirming that the international community has not
abandoned this long-lasting conflict and has not given
up hope of achieving a final solution. Yet what we see
now affords no room for optimism. The lack of direct
dialogue and a snail-paced political process create an
extremely unpredictable and explosive situation. The
negative trend on the ground puts at risk the prospects
for peace and a two-State solution. In that regard the
scores are even, as both sides have contributed to the
current state of affairs and the diminishing prospects
for peace.
While the international community is trying to
find a way out of the current deadlock, the parties
to the conflict should show their strong will to
find common ground about the prospects for their
future coexistence. The two sides, together with the
international community, must to make genuine efforts
to reach a lasting peace. Ukraine calls on political
leaders on all sides to work together and to take visible
actions to de-escalate the situation and to restart
direct dialogue. Ukraine reiterates its position that any
workable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement should
be guided by, and based on, the relevant provisions of
respective Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. There is no
doubt in our mind that a compromise resolution to the
conflict is possible only on the basis of the peaceful
coexistence of two States, ending the violence and
halting settlement activity.

S/PV.7736

The recently published Quartet report sounds
an alarm bell that we are on a very dangerous track
towards a one-State reality. This long-lasting conflict
is a complex issue, which makes any expectation of a
quick fix unrealistic. Nevertheless, we should continue
to make every possible effort towards a peaceful
settlement through a negotiated two-State solution
that brings about reconciliation in the region. Ukraine
welcomes any international effort aimed at bringing
new dynamics to the Middle East settlement and
seeking opportunities for the resumption of negotiations
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides.
We should not lose track of other conflicts that
continue to inflame the region. The Syrian crisis is
probably the gravest regional and one of the biggest
global challenges the world is facing right now.
Ukraine stands for an immediate end to the bloodshed
and resumption of the negotiations to resolve the
conflict. We believe that sustainable peace in Syria will
be possible only after an internationally recognized
political transition based on the principles of Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
We are convinced that the only way out of the
current impasse is a result-oriented discussion on the
establishment of a credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governing transitional body, followed by a new
constitution and elections. However, it appears that
the willingness of the Syrian Government to engage in
such genuine discussions is lacking now, which makes
prospects for the start of the transitional period in Syria
on 1 August as remote as they were in December 2015,
when the resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted.
We are particularly concerned that with the direct
assistance of its regional and international allies, the
regime seems to believe more and more in the prospect
of military victory over its opponents. Unless there are
major changes in the behaviour of the Syrian authorities
and their allies, there is a solid risk of the Syrian conflict
further deepening and bringing even more havoc to the
entire region.
We remain convinced of the urgent need to put an
end to violence in Yemen. Therefore, we express our
consistent and unwavering support for the intra-Yemeni
peace talks hosted by Kuwait. While recognizing
the progress made by the parties towards a common
understanding of the road map to a peaceful solution,
we are rather dismayed by the fact that the parties
have not yet reached an agreement. Nevertheless,

16-2143021/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the absence of a final agreement so far should not be
interpreted by the parties as a pretext for attempts to
change the front line. The ceasefire must be upheld
and strengthened. We therefore call on the parties to
resume direct talks without preconditions on 15 July,
as specified in the statement of commitment, and to
conduct these negotiations in the most flexible and
constructive manner that would enable them to swiftly
reach a final and comprehensive agreement.
Present-day terrorist organizations such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaeda
have outgrown their regional dimension and now pose
a global threat that challenges international peace and
security. Ukraine stands united with the international
community in its determination to eradicate such
terrorist organizations and remove any fertile ground
for terrorism in the region. We are encouraged by the
substantial progress achieved by the Coalition against
ISIL in Iraq and Syria in the past couple of months.
At the same time, we are concerned that despite
some serious military setbacks, ISIL remains a serious
threat to regional and global security. We are convinced
that pending the conventional military defeat of ISIL,
there is an urgent need to elaborate a day-after strategy,
with regional actors playing a leading role to prevent
a resurgence of ISIL clones. As we embark on this
endeavour, we have to take into account the fact that a
rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism surpasses
the boundaries of any region. While we counter this
threat by military means, the underlying root causes of
the terrorism phenomenon cannot be ignored.
Without a clear way out of the multiple crises that
are tearing the Middle East apart, and without closing
the Pandora’s box of deepening, region-wide sectarian
confrontation, it would be impossible to contain the
growing threat of violent extremism and international
terror groups. We are convinced that it is in everybody’s
interest that these conflicts do not re-enact the fate of
the whole Middle East peace process, which has been
ongoing for decades. We simply cannot afford the
terrible prospect of continuous fires all over the region
setting the wider Middle East ablaze.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
has for several months noted a trend that, unfortunately,
has been increasingly confirmed. The status quo does
not exist. It is but an illusion cloaking a daily backslide
that we cannot accept. Given the humanitarian
consequences of the situation on Palestinian and Israeli
22/58

12/07/2016

civilians, we must recognize the harsh reality on the
ground that, if nothing is done, the fragile prospects
of the two-State solution will disappear and the risk of
widespread conflagration will grow.
The Quartet report presented to the French
presidency of the Security Council strengthened our
assessment of the situation, based on two elements. The
first is that the two-State solution is sorely threatened
with disappearance. We must have the courage to
say so. While there is enough blame for this to go
around, the Quartet report unequivocally confirms
that Israeli settlement is one of the main threats to the
very sustainability of a future Palestinian State. Acts
of violence, incitement to violence and terrorism also
undermine the prospect of two States — a State of Israel
and a Palestinian State — living side by side in peace
and security. Progress towards the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation is indispensable.
The second element — a mirror of the first — is
the need to take steps to preserve the feasibility of the
two-State solution through specific action. It would
seem indisputable that without the resolute action of the
parties and the international community, this solution
would give way to other scenarios that would in no way
guarantee a just and lasting settlement of the conflict
and would, on the contrary, threaten to precipitate
armed clashes.
Faced with this relentless conclusion, our message in
recent months has focused steadily on the need to recreate
a political horizon to save the two-State solution. That
is the only way to address the legitimate aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis to independence and security.
The ministerial meeting held in Paris on 3 June marked
the first stage of an international mobilization to save
the two-State solution. That important meeting gave
rise to three complementary advances.
The first is political mobilization in favour of the
peace process. For the first time since the Annapolis
conference in 2007, an international meeting was held
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That first meeting
brought together 29 partners committed to peace. While
the peace process has been partially overshadowed by
the serious crises in the Middle East, our first goal
was to put the conflict at the heart of our collective
priorities. The Paris meeting contributed significantly
to that end.
The second advance was the collective reaffirmation
of support for the two-State solution. In a context in
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which the situation continues to deteriorate, our wish
was to reiterate that this solution is the only possible
outcome to the conflict and to thereby re-establish
political prospects capable of halting and reversing
the downward spiral that we have seen on the ground.
The conclusions arising from the Paris meeting are
especially clear on that point.
The third advance obtained in Paris is the promotion
of an international commitment to the relaunch and
completion of dialogue between the parties. Everyone
knows that only the Israelis and Palestinians will be
able to make peace, but it is also necessary to recognize
that conditions are not ripe today for a resumption
of direct negotiations. Our initiative therefore seeks
to build a consensus and promote a convergence of
initiatives in order to recreate a climate conducive to
successful dialogue.
The activities of France and of the Quartet are
mutually complementary. Their common objective
is to seek the resumption of credible negotiations
conducive to reaching a final status solution. The
report of the Quartet is an important contribution to the
remobilization of the international community on behalf
of the peace process. Bearing in mind the eminent role
of the Quartet, France and all its partners will therefore
pursue its efforts in a flexible and inclusive way. The
Paris meeting is only the beginning of a process that
still requires a lot of collective efforts in three areas.
We are going to begin by working on the
preparation of a package of incentives that could be
proposed to the parties in the event of a peace accord,
during which time France will play a role of flexible
coordination. That work will permit, we hope, the
inclusion of several countries that were not present
at the Paris meeting. Naturally, all contributions of
goodwill will be welcome. Work in various directions
has been proposed, in particular economic incentives,
the strengthening of Palestinian institutions and links
between Israeli and Palestinian civil societies.
That will, in turn, build on other ongoing
efforts. In the first place, the implementation of the
recommendations of the Quartet report will be essential
in promoting rapid improvement on the ground.
Moreover, following up on certain considerations in the
Arab Peace Initiative, to which the 3 June communiqué
assigns a central role, need to be pursued.

S/PV.7736

Finally, we will continue our dialogue with the
parties to prepare the convening at the end of the year
of an international conference with the parties.
France is, of course, aware of the difficulties posed
by this conflict, one in which so many efforts and so
much goodwill have failed. We consider, however, that
it is our collective responsibility not to give up and
never to quit the fight. Our ambition is realistic. We are
not claiming to be the only ones able to succeed where
others have stumbled. We are urging something in the
nature of a coalition for of leveraging our experience
and our affiliations with the parties and the region to
bring into view a consensual method to construct a
substantive agreement for the purpose of progressing
in this way towards peace.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his presence and
his briefing at this important meeting.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
My delegation also welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recent visit to the Middle East region, including
to Gaza, which highlighted the unsustainable situation
on the ground. Malaysia also welcomed the convening
of an international interministerial conference on 3 June
in Paris. We fully support the French initiative, which
complements the efforts of the Middle East Quartet
and seeks to galvanize international support to recreate
the political horizon for a two-State solution. We look
forward to follow-up actions that advance the prospects
for peace, including the identification of meaningful
incentives to the parties and the holding of another
international conference later this year involving the
parties in conflict.
My delegations acknowledges the efforts of the
members of the Middle East Quartet in coming up with
its first-ever report earlier this month. The report was
timely, given the deteriorating situation on the ground,
which, if left unchecked, might soon render a two-State
solution unattainable. Like everyone else, Malaysia had
high expectations for the report. The least we expected
of the report was for it to be based on the principles
and values of the United Nations, the rule of law and
relevant Security Council resolutions. In that regard,
we regret the fact that the report completely sidesteps
the question of the illegality of the Israeli settlements,

16-2143023/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

despite comprehensive discussion of the issue of the
settlements in the report. The Quartet report describes
only the outposts as illegal, and not the settlements,
which reflects the erroneous positions of the occupier
on the matter. Subscribing to that position would
undoubtedly tarnish the integrity and impartiality
of the Quartet. It is indisputable that the settlements
are illegal under international law and therefore not a
matter of negotiations. That has been clearly laid out in
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the Hague Convention
respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land, the
Council’s own resolutions and the 2004 decisions of the
International Court of Justice.
We must not stay silent on the crucial issue of the
settlements, as the settlements constitute the main
threat to the viability of the two-State solution and
the main source of frustration, anger and despair that
feeds the continuous cycle of violence. It is foolhardy
not to express that truth. Just days after the publication
of the report, the Israeli authorities announced new
settlement expansions in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and the additional financing of nearly
$13 million for Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank. Indeed, by being silent on the illegality of the
settlements in such an important document, we end up
shielding and perpetuating illegal actions that erode the
two-State solution.
In trying to identify threats to the two-State solution,
the Quartet report focused on the symptoms rather
than the root causes of the conflict. Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon said earlier this year that “it is human
nature [for oppressed people] to react to occupation”
(S/PV.7610, p. 2). And, as the representative of Egypt,
echoing the Secretary-General, also said, that “often
serves as a potent incubator of hate and extremism”.
However, conspicuously missing and glaringly absent
from the report’s recommendations was the need to end
half a century of brutal, repressive, discriminatory and
racist military occupation by Israel.
While we categorically do not condone any acts of
violence and terrorism, regardless of the perpetrators
and victims, we need to address the factors that trigger
the widespread anger, frustration and despair in the first
place. Burying our heads in the sand and pretending that
the violence exists in a vacuum defies sound logic and
common sense. Until the root causes are addressed, we
will be stretching our imagination rather too far if we
expect the Palestinians to stop resisting the occupier.
24/58

12/07/2016

There are those who expect the Palestinians to
engage in solely peaceful resistance to the repressive
occupation, but in order to successfully engage
in peaceful resistance, there need to be legal and
legitimate avenues and platforms to channel their
resistance away from violence. Such a platform would
take the form of an impartial judicial system, to which
the Palestinians could turn to when their homes are
illegally demolished, their lands seized or their family
members killed extrajudicially. It may also consist of
a political platform for meaningful negotiations to
resolve the final status issues or for the exercise of
their democratic rights, or a multilateral platform to
provide protection from gross violations of human
rights. Sadly, they have no recourse to justice. The
stark reality is that, when the Palestinians go to the
Israeli courts to seek legal regress, such as for violence
perpetuated by Israeli forces or settlers against them
and their property, 94 per cent of the cases are simply
closed without prosecution. When civil society and the
media have tried to highlight gross violations of human
rights perpetuated against the Palestinians, they have
been arrested, intimidated, defamed or shot down.
When
Palestinians
engage
in
peaceful
demonstrations against the illegal policies of the
occupier, they, even children, have been shot at and
killed by the Israeli forces. At the international level,
when the Palestinians try to seek accountability and
justice in regard to war crimes and crimes against
humanity by turning to the International Criminal Court,
many try to block them and criticize their attempts as
unilateral measures. A similar rebuff occurred when
the Palestinians have turned to the United Nations to
seek protection, even if the effort is completely in line
with international law. Needless to say, any attempts to
bring their legitimate grievances to the Security Council
would be vetoed. Furthermore, when the Palestinians
seek peace through the comprehensive Arab Peace
Initiative, they found no genuine partner on the other
side seeking to bring about a two-State solution and no
honest broker with a moral standing to take an objective
position and pressure both sides to reach an agreement.
Even the French diplomatic initiative has been rejected
outright by the occupier.
Such are the contextual realities for the occupied
Palestinians that have been fomenting anger and
despair. Unfortunately, they have found no one who
could make a difference to bear witness to their
suffering and relieve them from the dehumanizing acts
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that they are being forced to endure. Yet, ironically, we
demand of the Palestinians that they cease violence,
while at the same time we keep closing all doors to
legal and legitimate avenues to enable them to achieve
their legitimate aspirations through peaceful means.
The tragic circumstances of the Palestinian people
are nothing new. This Chamber has laboriously debated
it for decades. It is time for a change. The conflicting
parties need to take affirmative steps to reverse the
threats to the two-State solution identified in the report.
The role of the Security Council is crucial in overseeing
the implementation of the affirmative measures
and in creating the conditions for the resumption of
meaningful negotiations.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, while
the Council has endorsed the Middle East Quartet’s
mediation of the peace process, that does not mean that
the Council has abrogated its responsibility with regard
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Instead, the Council
should use the various tools at its disposal to strongly
support the Quartet’s efforts to vigorously influence the
parties’ behaviour and to salvage the two-State solution.
Malaysia stands ready to engage constructively with
other Council members in responding to the SecretaryGeneral’s message that surely they deserve a horizon
of hope.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal would like to thank the Japanese presidency
of the Council for having organized this open debate,
which gives us the opportunity to examine the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
following the publication of the Quartet report. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his important briefing.
The situation in Palestine remains tragic,
characterized by the seizure of lands, the demolition
of homes and rampant settlement expansion. These
actions fuel hatred and extremism within both Israel
and Palestine and, as a result, have fostered the
escalation of violence and insecurity. The unacceptable
blockade of Gaza and the arbitrary detention of many
Palestinians, not to mention the strategies for the
geographic, demographic and cultural modification

S/PV.7736

of Jerusalem, only exacerbate the conflict, which has
lasted for decades.
Unfortunately, to further tarnish this scenario, since
October, over 200 Palestinian victims, including many
children, and 30 Israelis, have been recorded owing to
the violence. Such a situation should further push the
Security Council to act so that, with the support of the
Quartet, it can fulfil its obligations to the Palestinian
people, who, like the Israeli people, have the right to
an independent State with secure and internationally
recognized and guaranteed borders. In that spirit we
commend the efforts of the Quartet members, which
have led to the recent publication of the report. It is a
consensus-based document with the goal of establishing
bridges between Palestinians and Israelis by seeking, at
this stage, to avoid outstanding difficult issues, as it
happens, the political, legal, humanitarian and security
aspects. We also endorsed the recommendations in the
report that aim to achieve a two-State solution.
However, we regret what seems to be a trend of
lumping Israelis and Palestinians together. because
we think that Israel’s occupation of the territories
designated for the creation of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State remains the main reason for
the prolongation of the conflict. Nonetheless, we think
that this document can contribute to the peace process
on the condition that the strong recommendations are
effectively and quickly implemented and because it
calls for an in-depth correction of the current trends
that seriously threaten a lasting peace, in particular an
end to the settlement and related activities in the West
Bank, including Jerusalem.
According to the report, since the 1994 Oslo
Accords, more than 570,000 Israelis have settled in
Area C, which was supposed to be a main part of the
future independent and sovereign Palestinian State.
From 2009 to 2014, more than 80,000 settlers moved to
the West Bank, a situation that utterly calls into question
Israel’s commitment to a two-State solution. Evidence
of this is the Israeli authorities’ recent announcement,
two days before the publication of the Quartet report,
of the building of settlements in the West Bank.
Administrative restrictions on construction permits
that affect Palestinians in Area C have also been issued,
which clearly demonstrates the fait accompli policy
pursued by the Israeli Government.
Under these conditions, the destruction of
Palestinian homes and structures, including those

16-2143025/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

belonging to Bedouins, as well as many physical and
administrative restrictions, have killed the Palestinian
economy and only exacerbate tensions. We urge Israel,
as the occupying Power, in accordance with its reiterated
commitments to a two-State solution, to put an end to
the settlements and related activities in order to begin
genuine negotiations for a lasting peace that meets the
security needs of Israel and the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people for a sovereign State, based
on the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Furthermore, my delegation echoes the Quartet’s
appeal to the Israeli Government to implement the
previous agreements to transfer authority to the
Palestinian Authority, in particular in Area C, in order
to promote the awaited progress in the areas of housing,
access to water, energy, communications, agriculture
and natural resources.
While we reiterate our condemnation of hatred,
violence and terrorism, regardless of who the
perpetrators or what their motivations are, we recall the
words of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who said
that it is people’s nature to confront occupation. Indeed,
we believe that the lack of a political horizon favours
the emergence of extremists on both sides — extremists
whose acts of violence have targeted both Israeli and
Palestinian civilians. Administrative detentions,
collective punishment, the disproportionate use of
force by the Israeli army and extrajudiciary killings,
in addition to being violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights, exacerbate
Palestinians’ feelings of humiliation about the past
50 years of occupation and stoke hatred and violence
between the two populations.
The catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Gaza — a small enclave of 36 square kilometres that
has been besieged for nine years and where more
than 2 million people live, 70 per cent of whom
require assistance — should call to our collective
conscience. The prevailing extreme poverty, the high
rate of unemployment and the lack of any prospect for
development, in particular the collapse of businesses
and Israeli restrictions on fisheries, are scourges likely
to bring about the resurgence of serious conflict, which
the report warns us about.
On this occasion, we repeat our encouragement
for the ongoing discussions between the Palestinian
political actors, namely, Fatah and Hamas, to achieve
26/58

12/07/2016

the formation of a Government of national unity, in
the dynamic of the Cairo agreement. Furthermore, we
reaffirm the central role of the countries of the region,
and we renew our support for the Paris communiqué as
a contribution to a definitive solution to the conflict,
based on the previous processes such as the Madrid
conference, the Oslo Accords, the Quartet road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which, it should be recalled,
recommends, beyond Palestine, a normalization in the
relations between Israel and the States of the region.
In that regard, the idea of an expanded Quartet is
certainly something that deserves serious consideration.
As for the Security Council, we believe that it should play
the role of guarantor of international peace and security
by being more engaged in achieving a definitive solution
to this decades-long conflict, which has generated only
terrorism, extremism, and threats to the wider world
beyond the region. Lastly, my delegation believes that
it is up to the two parties and, in particular, up to Israel
to comply with all previous commitments, including
putting an end to the occupation and the construction
of settlements, in order to promote the peace process.
Mr. Oyarzun Maechesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and for his presence today. As
the majority of speakers before me have done, I would
like to focus my remarks on the Quartet report and on
the road before us at this moment. Spain welcomes the
publication of the report at long last for two simple
reasons. First, the report states that the two-State
solution will no longer be viable if the status quo is
maintained. Secondly, the report calls for the urgent
implementation of a series of recommendations by the
parties. At the same time, it recognizes the role that is
to be played by the international community.
Throughout today’s open debate, we have heard
various assessments of the report, and there will be
more assessments to come during the course of the day.
Nevertheless, there is an essential element that I think
we can all agree upon, and that is the fact that the twoState solution is becoming ever more distant with every
passing day. Political, territorial and socioeconomic
concerns are leading to that distancing.
Spain rejects the use of violence and terrorism under
any circumstances. Attacks and incitements to violence,
as documented by the report, are unacceptable. Our
primary responsibility is to avoid a situation in which
there continue to be direct victims of the conflict. We
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

cannot allow for any more Mahmouds or Hallels. We
simply owe them that. We must also realize that we are
at risk of reaching the point of no return, at which we
will forever lose hope for a just and lasting solution in
the Middle East. I believe that no one wants to reach
that point, hence the need for urgent measures. The
utility of the Quartet report depends, to a great extent,
on its ability to serve as a tool to revitalize the peace
process. That is why we propose that we rebuild a viable
political horizon in the region.
To that end, I would like to highlight the following
next steps, namely, respect for international legal
frameworks, international initiatives in support of a
two-State solution and the role of the Security Council.
Respect for international legal frameworks,
including United Nations resolutions, is very important;
we have said so in previous debates but find it necessary
to reaffirm it today in the light of the Quartet report. The
construction of settlements in the occupied territories
is illegal under international law and contravenes
several Security Council resolutions. Israel must also
stop the demolition of houses, the seizures of land and
the designation of that land for exclusive Israeli use.
By way of example, the Quartet report indicates that
60 per cent of Area C is currently held for exclusive
use by Israel. The construction of settlements is not the
only threat to the two-State solution, but it is the most
difficult one to reverse.
As the report indicates — in one of the more positive
statements that I have read in the report — we need
to prevent a situation in which the two-State solution
is no longer viable. Both parties to the conflict and
the international community have the duty to call for
compliance with existing international law and to
work towards a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. That is why, in October of last year, Spain
indicated that the international community should hold
an international conference in order to enable us to
revitalize the peace process from a broader perspective.
We fully support the joint communiqué issued on
3 June. At the Paris conference, a number of possible
guidelines that could contribute to preparations for
such an international conference were discussed,
including that of providing economic incentives for the
parties in the context of a peace agreement, building the
capacities of the future Palestinian State and working
with both Palestinian and Israeli civil societies.

S/PV.7736

Our Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
indicated that Spain stands ready to host a meeting of
religious leaders in the Holy Land. Its purpose would
be to bring their leadership and influence to bear in
order to send a message of tolerance, dialogue and
non-incitement to violence between communities.
We are, of course, ready to be actively involved in
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and in the formation of
a democratic Government of national unity under the
auspices of the Quartet. The return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza is a key factor in overcoming the
impasse. Finally, I would like to note that we agree
with the Quartet report’s reference to the importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative, which has the potential to
establish a regional security framework.
Looking towards the future, we cannot forget the
essential role that the Security Council could play at
the opportune time in laying the foundation for the
negotiation process. We want the Council’s action to
be firmly rooted in the international community, hence
the need to advance along parallel tracks, in a coherent
manner, in three directions, namely, by lending our
support to the work of the Quartet, preparing the
international peace conference and implementing
the Arab Peace Initiative. The Security Council must
pay particular attention to the implementation of the
recommendations of the Quartet in the coming months.
It is only in that manner that we will be able to gradually
rebuild confidence on the ground and create conditions
for the parties to reach an agreement.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Our remarks
today will address only the Israeli-Palestine conflict.
We will comment separately on other Middle East
issues when the opportunity arises. Today’s open debate
is particularly important because it gives Council
members and the wider United Nations membership the
opportunity to reflect on the long-awaited report issued
by the Middle East Quartet on 1 July. I want to begin by
paying tribute to the clarity and gravity of the briefing
provided by the Secretary-General. We endorse his
assessment fully.
The Quartet report confirms what we all know,
namely, that current trends on the ground pose a
major threat to the continued viability of the two-State
solution — a solution that would see a secure Israel and
an independent Palestine living side by side in peace.
That is the vision that was called for long ago when
the State of Israel was first established. It is one that

16-2143027/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Council has been working towards for many years.
Unless and until it is achieved, it is unlikely we will
ever have true peace in the region.
The Quartet report lays bare the reality that much of
the West Bank has been appropriated by Israel. Seventy
per cent of Area C, which constitutes 60 per cent of
the West Bank, is either occupied by Israeli settlers or
otherwise taken by the Israeli State. Meanwhile, Israel
is systematically denying Palestinian development. To
any dispassionate observer, the Quartet’s conclusion
that those developments are steadily eroding the
viability of the two-state Solution is unanswerable. It
also reflects what New Zealand and others have been
saying in the Security Council for a long time. That
is not to justify the violence and incitement, to which
the report also rightly calls attention. Terror tactics and
intimidation are reprehensible, whoever carries them
out. Leaders on both sides have responsibilities in that
regard.
We acknowledge the concerns that have been
expressed about the report. Some have expressed
disappointment that the recommendations do not go far
enough. Both parties have accused the report of lacking
balance. Certainly from New Zealand’s perspective,
the report does not go as far as it would have liked.
But we nonetheless believe that it provides a useful
analysis of the most significant threats to the peace
process. It is especially noteworthy that four significant
stakeholders — the United States of America, the
Russian Federation, the European Union and the
United Nations — have put their names to the common
diagnosis of the current situation.
The report also contains recommendations with
which it is hard to disagree. It reinforces the need
to address the wide range of critical issues facing
Israelis and Palestinians, including halting settlement
activity, strengthening the capacity and authority of
the Palestinian Authority, addressing the situation in
Gaza and reducing tensions and preventing violence
and incitement. That must provide a useful basis for
further discussion. But of course, no Quartet report on
its own will change the realities on the ground. What is
required is for the parties to demonstrate the political
will to negotiate with each other and make the difficult
compromises necessary to reach an agreement. We
welcome all efforts to generate that political will and
momentum. The Security Council has a fundamentally
important role to play in that regard.
28/58

12/07/2016

We were deeply disturbed by Israel’s recent
decision to advance plans for 800 new housing units
in settlements in East Jerusalem and the West Bank.
Such settlements are an affront to the Council and
the Quartet, and take us further from peace. But they
must not divert the Council from carrying out its
responsibilities. We hope that the Council will be able
to adopt a short and balanced statement in response
to the Quartet’s report. Such a statement must affirm
the centrality of a two-State solution. But any Council
statement, like the report, cannot be the end of our
ambition. Like the report, any statement can only be
a useful but necessary waypoint. It is not sufficient in
itself to resolve the conflict.
The time is coming — indeed, many would say that
it has long come — when the Security Council must
live up to its responsibility and play its part to support
the parties back to negotiations, including by providing
guidance to the parties on the issues that must be
resolved. As we have said, if the goal is to generate the
political will to negotiate, we believe that it is important
that the international community engage in a balanced
way that reflects and addresses the real concerns of
both parties, whether it is through the Security Council,
the Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative, an international
conference or any other initiative.
We also pay tribute to the efforts that Egypt is
carrying out, particularly highlighted by Minister
Shoukry’s recent visit to Israel. The proposal to host
confidence-building talks between the two sides would
be an important step to encouraging the parties and their
domestic constituencies to move back to negotiations.
New Zealand remains committed to Council action, at
the right moment, aimed at making the promise of two
States, Israel and a Palestinian State existing side-byside in peace, a more realistic possibility.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Japan.
The Middle East is in turmoil, plagued by a
whole series of challenges, such as terrorism, social
unrest, political turmoil and prolonged conflicts that
are causing the innumerable deaths of innocents and
leading to millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons throughout and beyond the region. The
situation in the Middle East is undoubtedly a crucial
issue that the international community must face up to,
as the region’s instability casts a shadow over the entire
world, most notably by triggering and spreading violent
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

extremism. The menace of terrorism is greater than
ever and crises in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen are
causing intolerable humanitarian situations. The work
of the Security Council has never been as important as
it is today.
Behind all that has been the weakening of — or,
in some cases, the collapse of — governance in recent
years. Most of the problems that the region now faces,
including the conflicts and the spread of violent
extremism, were initiated or exacerbated by the
weakening of governance. Today many views have
been and will be expressed as to what is to be blamed
for the problems or what immediate actions need to be
taken by certain parties. But I would like to focus my
statement on what the international community should
and can do today to deal with the failure of governance,
which is key to solving the problem.
The restoration of governance and strengthening of
social cohesion in the Middle East, whether in Syria,
Iraq, Yemen or Libya, is vital to tackling the spread
of violent extremism and improving the humanitarian
situation. With regard to Syria, the Security Council
bears a primary responsibility to facilitate a political
transition to establish a credible, inclusive and
non-sectarian Government as stated in resolution 2254
(2015). As for Iraq, we are witnessing the ongoing
operation to counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, but much remains to be done to stabilize the
freed areas and achieve national reconciliation. The
utmost efforts must be made to strengthen governance
in the Middle East in order to prevent a cycle of violence
and the growth of violent extremism. The Security
Council must underline this point and encourage efforts
to achieving that objective.
The key factors for a stable society in the Middle
East, a region of remarkable diversity, are inclusiveness
and coexistence. In that regard, the efforts towards
national reconciliation, administrative reform and
fiscal consolidation, such as the efforts pursued in Iraq,
would be an important achievement for creating a form
of governance and society sustained by inclusiveness
and coexistence. Marginalization and exclusion are
what we must strive to eradicate in order to realize
inclusiveness and coexistence.
Two years ago, a Syrian man, Abu Sultan, and his
family escaped from their country and managed to
make their way to a refugee camp in Mafraq, Jordan,
overcoming one hardship after another. For a man

S/PV.7736

who had been a teacher for 25 years in Syria, it was
disheartening to see how children at the camp were
idling at the camp all day. In a situation where turmoil
and uncertainty weighed heavily on people’s minds,
providing education for children was not necessarily
a natural priority for parents. Mr. Abu Sultan, who
managed to find a relatively stable foothold at the camp
after he registered for the World Food Programme,
supported by Japan, decided to give children education
opportunities, starting with teaching them how to
read and write. Education is a great equalizer. It helps
children in conflict zones stand on common ground
with those less affected by the conflict and helps
alleviate the risk of marginalization. We must support
people like Abu Sultan and potential partners like him
to stand up and help others stand on their own.
Under the principle of “the best way is in the
middle”, which Prime Minister Abe announced,
Japan is carrying out efforts to contributing to
building a tolerant and stable society in the region.
Our contribution reflects the guiding principles of
inclusiveness and coexistence. We believe that such
efforts should include three primary focal points. First,
we must focus on assistance towards social stability
and enhancing governance in the region. Secondly, we
focus on humanitarian assistance, including supporting
the return and reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons and assistance for the social stability
of the neighbouring host countries. In reality, this is
sadly lacking.
Thirdly, we focus on developing human capital which
would contribute to preventing the marginalization of
people caused by unemployment or lack of education.
In concluding, I would like to stress that dialogue
and trust-building are also critical for restoring order
in the region. These include those between Israel and
Palestine, and Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well as crosssectarian dialogue at every level of society. There have
been efforts made in this regard. Unfortunately, more
efforts need to be made. The international community
must continue to deploy its utmost efforts in order make
such dialogue possible. Japan is ready and willing to
work to that end.
I would like to reiterate that, as a member of the
Security Council, Japan will vigorously work towards
the peace, stability and prosperity of the Middle East
in close cooperation and coordination with the United
Nations and the international community.

16-2143029/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber. I would like
to appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
reasonable speed so that interpretation may be provided
accurately. I wish to inform all concerned that we will
be carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Raúl Morales Moscoso, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala.
Mr. Morales Moscoso (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his detailed
briefing and the delegation of Japan for coordinating
today’s open debate in the framework of its presidency
of the Security Council.
Guatemala aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We view with great concern the recent acts of
violence and terrorism that have occurred in the past
few weeks in the Middle East, including in Israel and
Palestine, which is why we consider today’s open debate
as timely. We wish to take this opportunity to reject
and vigorously condemn the attack on the shopping
and amusement mall in Baghdad, reiterating our
firm repudiation of all forms of terrorism. Guatemala
expresses the deepest solidarity with the people and
the Government of Iraq for these reprehensible attacks
in which men, women and children were killed.
Furthermore, we are concerned at the remark made by
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, that attacks on shrines have the
objective of igniting sectarian tensions in the country.
This could have devastating effects, with a return to the
dark days of sectarian conflict in Iraq.
Guatemala rejects and strongly condemns the
attack that occurred on 28 June at the Atatürk Airport,
in Istanbul, in which numerous deaths and wounded
were reported. We express the deepest solidarity with
the people and the Government of Turkey for such a
reprehensible attack aimed at civilians.
30/58

12/07/2016

With respect to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, we welcome all efforts to achieve the
keenly awaited peace in the country, in particular the
efforts of the International Syria Support Group to
hold meaningful negotiations with a view to finding
a political solution to the conflict. Since March 2011,
more than a quarter of a million Syrians have died, more
than 1 million have been injured, and 4.8 million have
been forced to leave the country, while 6.5 million have
been internally displaced, making the Syrian situation
the largest displacement crisis in the world.
In that regard, we share the concern expressed by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
with respect to the unfolding situation in Aleppo, in
particular that of the approximately 300,000 people
trapped in the eastern part of the city, as a result of
heavy fighting along the Castello road, the only road in
or out of that part of the city. Heavy fighting in recent
days has continuously exposed civilians to the risk of
death and injury and prevented humanitarian access
to people in need of assistance. Air strikes, shelling
and heavy fighting have caused many deaths and
wounded as well as damage to schools, hospitals and
other civilian infrastructure. It has also hampered relief
operations. All of the foregoing is in clear violation
of human rights, international law and international
humanitarian law.
On the issue of Israel and Palestine, Guatemala
strongly condemns the murder of the 13-year-old girl
stabbed to death in her home in the settlement of Kiryat
Arba and the murder of a 48-year-old rabbi, shot by a
Palestinian commando. These are deplorable events
that should not recur. At the same time, Guatemala
shares the Secretary-General’s concern at the decision
by the Israeli authorities to move forward with its
plans to build in the West Bank settlement of Ma’ale
Adumim and in East Jerusalem. This affects the faith of
the parties in negotiations and the vision of two States
living side by side in peace and generating stability in
the region.
The international community should not lose hope
that an agreement between Israel and Palestine could be
negotiated. For that to happen, however, the necessary
political will is required. Accordingly, I would like to
echo the words of the Secretary-General delivered at
Tel Aviv University on 27 June. He said that
“responsibility is more than taking ownership for
one’s actions — it is about seeing your actions
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

through the prism of other’s concerns — and
seeking to understand their needs as your own. This
wisdom teaches us that we cannot be a world of ‘us
and them’. We must be a world of ‘we the peoples’
as the Charter of the United Nations describes”.
All of us have a responsibility to build that future
in harmony.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Time and again, we have
warned the Security Council of the dangers of the
continued construction of Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories. Over and above their flagrant
violation of public international law, international
humanitarian law and numerous Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, such activities
have come to constitute the most serious obstacle to
any negotiated political settlement. In fact, with his
recent approval of the construction of 800 new housing
units in the occupied territories, how could anyone
take Mr. Netanyahu’s statements that he is ready to
negotiate a political settlement with the Palestinians
more seriously than that of the man who pretends to
negotiate over the sharing of a pizza while he keeps
eating it?
With the ongoing acts of collective punishment,
best illustrated by the systematic campaign of house
demolitions in the West Bank, and the increasingly
inflammatory and provocative rhetoric of Israeli
officials, such as Mr. Naftali Bennett’s call for the
kidnapping of Palestinians, the situation on the ground
remains very gloomy indeed. However, I welcome the
meeting convened in Paris at France’s initiative on
3 June and the joint communiqué which reaffirmed
the need to end the Israeli occupation that began in
1967 and which highlighted the importance of the
implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative. We were
encouraged by the mention in the communiqué of “the
prospect of convening before the end of the year of an
international conference”, and would like to stress in
that respect how critical to its success would be the
participation of all directly concerned parties and their
full engagement in the required preparatory works.
Allow me now to recall that on this very day of
12 July, 10 years ago, Israel launched a 33-day war
against my country that according, to a Human Rights
Watch report dated 5 September 2007, resulted in

S/PV.7736

“at least 1,109 Lebanese deaths, the vast majority
of whom were civilians, 4,399 injured, and an
estimated 1 million displaced”.
An important feature of this war was Israel’s massive
resort to one of the most vicious and disgusting weapons
of all times — cluster bombs. The estimated number
of cluster submunitions fired into my country during
the 2006 war was between 3.2 to 4.6 million, according
to another Human Rights Watch report of 16 February
2008, in which we also read:
“Research in more than 40 towns and villages
found that the IDF’s use of cluster munitions
was both indiscriminate and disproportionate, in
violation of international humanitarian law, and in
some locations possibly a war crime. In dozens of
towns and villages, Israel used cluster munitions
containing submunitions with known high-failure
rates. These left behind homes, gardens, fields and
public spaces — including a hospital — littered
with hundreds of thousands and possibly up to
1 million unexploded submunitions. By their
nature, these dangerous, volatile submunitions
cannot distinguish between combatants and
non-combatants, foreseeably endangering civilians
for months or years to come.”
I would like to take this opportunity to also
recall my Government’s firm commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), which
helped put an end to the Israeli aggression, and to stress
the need to move from the precarious situation of a
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire. While
Israel claims to abide by the terms of resolution 1701
(2006) — which first and foremost calls for respect for
Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity — over
the past 10 years it has committed no fewer than 11,856
violations of my country’s sovereignty — 8,561 by air,
1,024 by sea, and 2,274 by land. All these violations
have been recorded and documented in tens of letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
issued as official documents of the United Nations.
We reiterate today our call on the Security Council to
strongly condemn all these violations and to compel
Israel to put an immediate end to them.
Moreover, Israel continues its occupation of the
northern part of Al-Ghajjar, in violation of Lebanon’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and in a deliberate
dismissal of the two initiatives launched by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in 2008 and 2010 to

16-2143031/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ensure Israel’s withdrawal from that area. We would
also wish to reiterate on this occasion our readiness to
work with the Secretary-General to close the chapter
of the Shab’a Farms and Kfarshouba hills occupation
by Israel and to recall that my Government welcomed
the territorial definition of these farms as published
in his report S/2007/641 of 2007 as a starting point to
address this issue, while Israel has not yet responded to
the Secretary-General on this matter.
In April, I informed the Security Council (see
S/PV.7673 Resumption 1) that based on the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and on
paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006), my Government
sought the good offices of the Secretary-General in
the matter of the delineation of the disputed maritime
border and exclusive economic zone between Lebanon
and Israel. Considering the Secretary-General’s reply,
we now look forward to the role to be played in that
respect by his Special Coordinator in Lebanon.
Finally, need I recall that during its 2006 war on
Lebanon, in July Israel bombarded the Jiyyeh power
plant, causing an unprecedented oil spill on Lebanese
shores, with heavy environmental impact, especially
on fisheries and biodiversity? This is why, for 10
consecutive years, the General Assembly has adopted,
by an overwhelming majority of States from all regional
and cross-regional groups, a resolution requesting Israel
to offer prompt and adequate compensation to Lebanon
for the damage related to the oil spill it caused. Let me
clarify, in this regard, that the amount of $856 million
adopted by the General Assembly, and which Israel
has been requested to pay in compensation, is simply
drawn from a report of the Secretary-General, which
relied on independent studies, mainly conducted by the
World Bank, to quantify the said damage.
I am sure that Council members will agree that it
is almost impossible to maintain peace and security if
States are not held responsible for their internationally
wrongful acts. It is therefore our firm belief that it is
now the responsibility of the Council, as the main organ
entrusted under the Charter of the United Nations to
maintain peace and security, to act without delay to
ensure that Israel compensate Lebanon for the damage
related to the oil spill it caused.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to participate
in this debate, Mr. President, under your eminent
32/58

12/07/2016

leadership of the Security Council. We thank the
Secretary-General for his frank and revealing briefing.
It honestly portrays the grim picture of the vortex
of violence that is the Middle East today. Conflict
and chaos have been endemic in the enduring ArabIsraeli dispute. Palestine’s suffering is epic. It is our
conviction that enduring peace in the Middle East
cannot be restored until there is a just resolution of
the Palestinian-Israeli dispute. The basic prerequisite
for a just solution is the creation of an independent,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine, based on
the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. Unfortunately, that appears to be a more distant
prospect than at any recent time.
The report of the Middle East Quartet reflects the
fact that the most serious impediment to a solution is
the continued illegal construction of Israeli settlements
on occupied Palestinian land. After the report was
issued a week ago, Israel announced the building of 560
additional housing units in the West Bank settlement.
Unless Israel’s illegal settlements are halted and
reversed, it will be impossible to create a Palestinian
State that is contiguous or viable.
While creating those unilateral facts on the ground,
the present Israeli Government has obfuscated on the
revival of the peace process, posing conditions that no
Palestinian leadership, no matter how accommodating,
could be expected to accept. Meanwhile, the oppressive
occupation of the Palestinians continues. Protests
evoke brutal responses. Gaza remains a virtual prison.
Conditions in the West Bank continue to become more
chaotic and more violent. The international community
cannot continue to shirk its responsibility to promote
a just solution to the problem. The Security Council
cannot continue to avoid its obligations under resolution
242 (1967) and its successors to enforce a just solution
to the conflict, which is at the core of the challenges
that confront the Middle East today.
Even as the world has failed to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian problem, violence and war have spread
to engulf all of the Middle East region and beyond.
The violence and suffering of the Iraqi people began
under a cruel dictatorship, escalated during external
intervention and persists today in a grinding fight
against terrorism and sectarian violence. Iraq’s tragedy
has been joined by that of the people of Syria, with
hundreds of thousands killed in a brutal and complex
war and millions displaced internally or externally
as refugees in neighbouring countries, or flowing in
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7736

great masses, often with tragic consequences, to the
ostensibly safe borders of Europe.

action and, above all, strong political will to build
lasting peace.

In both Iraq and Syria, ISIS has emerged as a
principal adversary. The brutal brand of its ideology
and reign of terror must be defeated. Welcome advances
have been made on the ground in facing that monstrous
movement. Pakistan supports the steps being pursued
by the international community to roll back ISIS from
its strongholds and restore peace over the large tracts of
Syria and Iraq that it continues to occupy.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.

As it retreats on the battlefield, ISIS has shifted
strategy to undertaking terrorist attacks on civilian and
security targets within and outside the region. Pakistan
condemns the brutal terrorist attacks that have killed so
many innocent people in Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Lebanon
and Saudi Arabia. To defeat ISIS, it is essential first
for the States bordering Syria and Iraq and the external
Powers that have become involved in these conflicts to
reconcile their own divergent objectives and priorities
and evolve agreed measures to overcome the political,
religious and ethnic divisions within those suffering
countries. Only then will it be possible for all the
concerned parties to concentrate their efforts to defeat
ISIS and the threat it poses to regional and international
peace and security.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy and encourage his endeavour to secure
a cessation of hostilities that would enable the easing
of humanitarian suffering and the evolution of political
structures for a transition to peace. The regional and
major Powers have a heavy responsibility to evolve a
viable and agreed plan to realize these objectives.
Yemen, too, has been in the throes of a war whose
origins were internal but which has been exacerbated
by the external armament and encouragement of certain
groups. It has not been easy to restore legitimacy,
reconciliation and peace in Yemen. It is terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida and ISIS, that have exploited the
war to secure a more prominent presence in Yemen.
The restoration of peace through political reconciliation
and respect for international law is in the vital interest
of the people of Yemen, all of its neighbours and the
international community. My country supports all
genuine efforts to this end.
The lesson of history — indeed, of recent
history — is that protracted conflicts can be resolved.
The recent example of Colombia is an inspiring case
in point. What is needed is firm resolve, concerted

Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
am honoured to speak on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I would like to express
our sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month. We
wish you every success.
This meeting is taking place against the backdrop
of a serious deterioration of the conditions of the
Palestinians because of Israel’s hostile and destructive
practices and its systemic violations of international
law in its dealings with them and their territory. It also
coincides with the French initiative that we welcome
very much. We support the French efforts aimed at
establishing an international support group and holding
an international peace conference that would involve
all international parties, set a clear and credible path
towards negotiations aimed at ending the conflict and
arriving at a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
With regard to the report of the Middle East Quartet
that was issued on 1 July, we find it unfair that the report
equates the responsibilities of an occupied people with
those of an occupying military Power. In addition, the
language of the report, which is unbalanced and unfair,
became a guise for the decision by Israel, two days later,
to build hundreds of settlement units in different parts of
the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. That
is new proof that we need to follow a more resolute path
to end this conflict in the only way possible, namely,
to end the occupation. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation reiterates in particular the obligations of
the Council, as per the Charter of the United Nations
and many of its resolutions requiring it to deal seriously
and urgently with this prolonged tragedy.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
systemically kill and extrajudicially execute unarmed
Palestinians in the occupied territories, as it has done
for almost five decades. The number killed by soldiers
of the occupying Power during the past few months
has reached 216 Palestinian civilians, including 50
children, some of whom were newborns. In addition
to State terrorism by the Israeli war machine, gangs of
terrorist settlers continue to attack Palestinian civilians,
including setting aflame Palestinians, their homes and
their crops. That is very similar to what Da’esh is doing,

16-2143033/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with the difference that this is happening in front of
occupying Power and with its consent.
Those acts could all constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity that have no statute of limitations.
No generation will forget such acts. Everyone who
perpetrates such crimes must face international justice.
In that context, the OIC reiterates its call to the Security
Council to add the leaders of extremist Israeli factions,
including gangs known as the Hilltop Youth movement
and Make Them Pay, to the list of terrorists wanted by
States and the international community.
We express our deep concern at Israel’s continuing
falsification of the historical record through its
illegitimate confiscation of Palestinian land and the
imposition of policies and measures that can be equated
to ethnic cleaning against Palestinians, in addition to
the continued attacks against praying congregations and
sanctuaries — Christian and Muslim — particularly the
Al-Aqsa mosque and a number of churches in Jerusalem.
That has led to a disastrous and tragic situation that
requires the Council to interfere to stop those attacks,
which only feed into extremism and racism and create
religious conflict in the Holy Land.
We reiterate that Israel must lift its siege of Gaza.
We commend the statement by the Secretary-General
during his visit to Palestinian land in June that the
Israeli siege of Gaza must be lifted immediately.
Once again, I take this opportunity to reiterate the
support of OIC for the Palestinian people in its pursuit
of its inalienable rights, including its right of return
and self-determination and to establish an independent
State on Palestinian land that has been occupied since
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida:I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union is an active member of
the International Syria Support Group, and we are
doing everything in our power to ensure the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 2254
34/58

12/07/2016

(2015) and 2268 (2016) and the provisions of the
Geneva communiqué. A Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political transition in accordance with the documents
I mentioned is needed to bring lasting peace to the
country, defeat Da’esh and all terrorist organizations in
Syria and enable Syrians to return to their homes in
safe conditions and contribute to the reconstruction of
their country.
Conditions need to be created urgently for serious
direct talks to agree on a broad, inclusive, non-sectarian
transitional governing body with full executive powers,
as stated in the statement of the International Syria
Support Group of 17 May. To that end, all parties to the
conflict need to respect the cessation of hostilities, make
progress on the issue of arbitrarily detained persons
and work to ensure immediate, secure, sustainable
and country-wide humanitarian access to all people in
need. The level of humanitarian aid, including medical
equipment and supplies, needs to be significantly
enhanced to meet the needs of all vulnerable people,
including internally displaced persons (IDPs) and host
communities throughout Syrian territory.
Without real and significant improvements in the
conditions necessary for serious negotiations, both the
political process and the cessation of hostilities are
at risk.
The European Union condemns all violations of
international humanitarian law and attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, in particular
against medical facilities, schools, markets and IDP
camps. The EU strongly condemns excessive and
disproportionate attacks committed by the Syrian
regime against its own people, including the starvation
of civilians through the besiegement of populated areas.
The EU reiterates its strong support for transitional
justice and accountability for all serious human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law, including any that may constitute a war crime
committed in Syria by any party, including Da’esh.
The EU renews its call to the Security Council to
refer the situation to the International Criminal Court.
The EU welcomes the renewal of the mandate for the
Commission of Inquiry and calls for the cooperation
of all parties, in particular the Syrian regime to grant
necessary access.
Serious negotiations are required to reach an
agreement by 1 August on a political transition. Only a
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

real commitment on both sides of the political track can
lead to an agreement.
The EU is stepping up its support to the Syrian
opposition, and in particular the High Negotiations
Committee, as the opposition delegation in the United
Nations-brokered talks in Geneva. The EU encourages
unity among opposition groups and welcomes the fact
that the opposition has intensified its coordination and
preparations for negotiating a peaceful solution to the
Syrian conflict.
The EU urges the Government delegation to finally
lay out its plan for truly implementing a genuine political
transition. Speeches such as that by Bashar Al-Assad
of 7 June that reject the political process, reject the
legitimacy of the opposition delegation and advocate
a military solution seem calculated to undermine the
Support Group process, and with it the best hope for
peace in Syria.
There cannot be lasting peace in Syria under the
present leadership, and until the legitimate grievances
and aspirations of all components of Syrian society
are addressed.
The EU is ready to increase its support even
more to both the humanitarian work and the political
negotiations, in full coordination with Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura. We are ready to rapidly provide
support to stabilization, reconstruction and the return
of refugees and internally displaced people to their
homes in safe conditions once a political transition
has started.
The EU would like to pay tribute to the victims of
the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq.
The surge of terrorist activities that we have
witnessed recently is a sign that Da’esh is losing ground
on the military front. However, every attack that results
in loss of life is a breeding ground for further sectarian
tension, in a country and a region that require cohesion
and unity in the face of a complex crisis.
The EU continues its firm support for Prime Minister
Al Abadi’s efforts to build an inclusive Government
and for his programme of reforms. The EU commends
Iraqi progress particularly regarding stabilization. Only
a Government that can provide safety, services and
opportunities for all its citizens will be able to build a
strong, unified Iraq. The EU will continue to support
the Iraqi Government in that endeavour.

S/PV.7736

As far as the Middle East peace process is
concerned, we may have reached a critical juncture. It
is time for international initiatives to become a coherent
collective effort to revive the two-State solution. For
the EU, as outlined in previous Council conclusions,
there is no alternative to a negotiated two-State solution
that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
permanent status issues in order to end the conflict. It
remains the only realistic way of ending the conflict
once and for all. It offers the prospect of a secure State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition.
However, we are currently concerned that the twoState solution could be slipping beyond reach. That is
why the European Union is united in its determination to
work alongside international partners and the region to
reinvigorate the Middle East peace process. That is the
very reason that the Middle East Quartet, in its report
published on 1 July, outlined the dangerous trends on
the ground imperilling the two-State solution. The EU
welcomes the publication of the Middle East Quartet’s
report. The EU endorses the recommendations outlined
in the report as a contribution to creating the conditions
for the two-State solution, and asks the SecretaryGeneral to report on their implementation.
The EU expresses concern at the trends on the
ground and calls on the parties to swiftly engage with the
Quartet and other relevant stakeholders and implement
the recommendations in full. Such implementation
would demonstrate a genuine commitment to a peaceful
solution by rebuilding mutual trust and creating the
conditions for direct and meaningful negotiations that
resolve all final status issues. The EU stands ready to
support the parties in that process.
The EU welcomes also the joint communiqué on the
Middle East peace initiative adopted at the ministerial
meeting in Paris on 3 June. Inclusiveness is now
needed in the follow-up to the Paris meeting and the
Quartet report. Those major international initiatives
must proceed hand-in-hand and in a well-coordinated
and well-sequenced so that they constitute a coherent
collective effort to rescue the two-State solution, while
paving the way for direct talks.

16-2143035/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The European Union also encourages discussion in
the context of the Arab Peace Initiative, which holds
out hope for a permanent regional settlement.
We are deeply concerned by the continuing cycle
of violence. Violence costs human lives. It causes grief
and resentment and exacerbates mistrust and mutual
recrimination, thereby undermining prospects for
a peaceful solution. While our thoughts are with the
families of the victims, we urge the parties to work
towards the de-escalation of tensions, to refrain from
actions in the form of incitement and provocation
that serve only to fuel further tension, and to observe
international humanitarian law and adhere to the
principles of necessity and proportionality in the use
of force.
We also recall that only the re-establishment of a
political horizon and the resumption of dialogue can stop
the violence. Security measures alone cannot stop the
cycle of violence. The underlying causes of the conflict
need to be addressed. Israel’s ongoing settlement
policy, which is illegal under international law, and the
actions it has taken in that context, such as evictions
and forced transfers of populations, demolitions and
confiscations, including demolitions of EU projects,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threatens to make a
two-State solution impossible.
Palestinian unity is essential for a viable Palestinian
State. President Abbas must be fully behind efforts
to achieve reconciliation, which is fundamental for
progress towards a permanent resolution and key to
improving the security of the Palestinians and Israelis.
Militant activity and the dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza feed the general instability and impede efforts to
achieve a negotiated solution.
We need bold leadership on the ground to reverse
those trends. That requires an end to both settlement
expansion and violence. The EU therefore regrets that
Israel’s response has been the approval of hundreds of
additional settlement units in the occupied Palestinian
territory. A fundamental change of policy by Israel with
regard to the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly
in Area C, would significantly increase economic
opportunities, empower Palestinian institutions
and enhance stability and security for both Israelis
and Palestinians.
Palestinian leaders should consistently and clearly
condemn specific terrorist attacks. We encourage the
Palestinian leadership to show its opposition to the
36/58

12/07/2016

incitement to violence and clearly distance itself from
such actions. In the interest of addressing the needs of
the Palestinian population, the EU urges all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process, on the basis of the Palestine Liberation
Organization platform, democracy and the rule of law.
The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce
a fundamental change in the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
In conclusion, the EU will continue to work with
its Israeli and Palestinian counterparts, along with
the Quartet and other stakeholders, in the region and
beyond, in order to make progress towards a just and
lasting peace based on a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, for presiding over the work of the Council during
this month.
Year after year, the General Assembly has adopted
scores of resolutions on the Palestinian question. Our
international Organization has adopted dozens of pivotal
resolutions, such as General Assembly resolution 194
(III) on the right of return of refugees to their homeland,
as well as Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 478 (1980). All of those resolutions reject
the occupation in Palestine and confirm the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right
to self-determination and to establish their own State,
the right to return and the right to sovereignty over its
natural resources. All of those resolutions consider
the Israeli decision to annex Jerusalem null and void,
illegal and illegitimate, and confirm the illegality of
colonization, condemn Israeli violations of human
rights law and humanitarian international law and call
for the cessation of those violations.
After the adoption of all those resolutions and
nearly a half-century of occupation by Israel of Arab
territories, we have the right to question the credibility
of meetings such as today’s, aimed at addressing the
important Israeli-Palestinian dossier now that it has
been transferred from the Security Council to the
Middle East Quartet. We have the right to question
the seriousness of certain powerful States that claim
to seek a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

question that is comprehensive and compatible with the
aforementioned United Nations resolutions.
We would ask the following questions. When will
the Palestinian people enjoy a life of dignity in their
long hoped-for independent State? We have posed that
question for the past 70 years, ever since the United
Nations was established. When will our people in
the occupied Syrian Golan be able to return to their
homeland, Syria? When will the Israeli occupation of
our lands in the Golan, which began in 1967, end? We
have raised another question for the past 50 years: When
will Israel withdraw from other occupied territories,
in particular the Lebanese territories? And here is yet
another question that we have raised for more than 10
years: Is it not time for all effective, powerful forces
to find a useful formula to implement the resolutions
dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict? These are
questions that we would like the Governments that
claim to cherish the precedence of international law
and the credibility of the United Nations to answer.
I speak before the Council today as a party to
the Middle East conflict, because parts of the Syrian
territory are under Israeli occupation. In that context,
Israel continues to ignore all relevant United Nations
resolutions in regard to the Syrian Golan, particularly
resolution 497 (1981), which declared Israel’s decision to
impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the
Syrian Golan as null and void and lacking legal value.
The occupation authorities pursue their systematic
violations of human rights, settler activities and policies
of oppression against Syrian nationals. Israel steals the
natural resources of the Golan, including oil and water.
The American firm Afek Oil and Gas has begun to
explore for oil in the occupied Syrian Golan, close to
the so-called nature settlement.
Moreover, the Israeli occupation authorities have
confiscated thousands of dunums of land from the
Golan to distribute among people who will be brought
in to settle the confiscated lands with the purpose
of establishing agricultural projects. Under this socalled farms project, the Israeli occupation forces
have established 750 new farms in the occupied Syrian
Golan. This year alone, 90 families have been brought
in to settle those farms. Planning is under way to bring
in another 150 families; so there will be a total of
750 families to settle those farms. All of those Israeli
measures represent a blatant violation of international
law, the Geneva Conventions and resolution 497 (1981).
Such practices must be brought to an end immediately.

S/PV.7736

They leave us with no other option than to resist that
occupation through all the legal means guaranteed by
the Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, Israel continues to arrest many of the
Syrians under occupation, including the Syrian Mandela,
Mr. Sedqi Al-Maqet, who has been detained by Israel
for over 27 years, which is the same amount of time that
Nelson Mandela spent in prison under apartheid. Some
might not know that Israel has detained Al-Maqet yet
again because he worked to document and show, with
sounds and images, Israeli support for Al-Nusra, which
is linked to Al-Qaida, and the so-called Al-Yarmouk
Martyrs Brigade, which is part of the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham. All of this, in addition to the meeting
that was held by the Israeli Government in the Syrian
Golan, was not enough to concern the Secretariat or the
Department of Political Affairs, let alone the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority.
Syria confirms that the stability of the region and
the credibility of the Organization require the United
Nations and the Security Council to adopt measures
to implement international resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981), by forcing the Israeli occupation
to commit to putting an end to its aggressive and hostile
practices and to withdrawing from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the line of 4 June 1967.
Israel is not satisfied with practicing all the hostile
policies which I referred to. It has started dealing with
terrorists, including Al-Qaida-affiliated groups in
the zone of separation, such as Al-Nusra Front. Israel
provides support, including by treating their wounded
in Israeli hospitals and covering their costs, which is
also, according to reports by the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, in
violation of the Disengagement Agreement of 1974. It
has exposed the members of the Force to danger and
provided increased freedom of movement for terrorist
groups in the separation zone. Terrorist groups have
been able to kidnap some peacekeepers from the
Philippines and Fiji more than once. Therefore, I stress
once again the need to address this grave situation with
the seriousness and importance that it deserves.
I will not respond to some of the improper
comments made by some speakers with regard to
my country, Syria, in particular those made by the

16-2143037/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Permanent Representative of the United States and the
observer of the European Union. Those comments seek
to detract our attention from this agenda item, lure us
into quixotic argument and tilt at windmills instead
of working seriously to put an end to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine in a just and
comprehensive manner.
The observer of the European Union seems
to have forgotten that the item under discussion is
primarily dedicated to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the
Palestinian question. It is not focused on the situation in
Syria, which was precipitated by some European States
involved in Syrian bloodshed by exporting European
takfiri terrorism to my country, Syria. Some States
used to refer to these types of terrorists as jihadis and
moderate opposition members when they targeted my
people in Syria.
However, when those terrorists started acting up in
European capitals they became terrorists. This is well
known. Mr. Laurent Fabius said as much at the 2012
Morocco summit at which participants claimed to be
establishing an opposition entity. The same statement
was repeated by the Foreign Minister at the time, who
is now the Prime Minister of France. They both said,
in December 2012, that European terrorists who were
sent to Syria from France were called “French jihadis”.
They used the term “French jihadis”. Those jihadis
who were sent to Syria returned to France, violated
its security and killed innocent French citizens owing
to the lack of concern of the French Government and
its sponsorship of terrorism early in the Syrian crisis.
Some other European States regrettably did the same,
and they had to pay for it later. That is exactly what
my country, Syria, has suffered during the years of
the crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Sætre (Norway): Together with many others,
Norway welcomes the publication of the Quartet’s
report and we would like to thank France for convening
the Paris conference. The key message from both is
the urgency of decisive action to save the two-State
solution. There is no other credible path to durable
peace. Nevertheless, the trends on the ground point
unequivocally towards a one-State reality that is
not compatible with that vision nor with the parties’
stated interests.
38/58

12/07/2016

Norway urges the parties to address the imminent
threats to the two-State solution by implementing the
recommendations in the Quartet report. The parties
must demonstrate their serious commitment and show
leadership in reversing the most disturbing trends,
such as settlement expansion and the continuation of
violence. Settlement expansion and related activities
must stop. They are major obstacles to peace and
are corroding the prospects for a two-State solution.
Violence and terror must be curtailed.
The international community cannot assume
the parties’ responsibility to resolve the conflict.
Nevertheless, we must play an active role in developing
a credible framework, based on existing agreements and
United Nations resolutions, for resolving all final status
issues. While we continue to encourage the return to
negotiations, the world urgently needs to rally around
the task of building the two-State reality.
Through our chairmanship of the international donor
group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Norway remains actively engaged
in preparing Palestinian institutions for statehood
and sustaining the Palestinian economy on a pathway
towards greater self-reliance and independence. These
efforts are helping to pave the way towards a two-State
reality and are crucial to keeping this vision alive.
Effective mechanisms for direct economic cooperation
between the parties, combined with an international
capacity for regular monitoring and reporting on the
Palestinian economy — the essence of the AHLC’s
work — have proven to be worthwhile. This remains an
exceptional model in the region.
At the latest AHLC meeting in Brussels, the parties
agreed — together with the donors — on a two-year
strategy that includes consolidating the budget by
closing fiscal gaps and facilitating long-term economic
development, including private sector investment.
The next ministerial AHLC meeting is planned for
19 September, on the margins of the General Assembly
in New York. The need to find a political solution to the
conflict in Syria is more urgent than ever. Norway fully
supports Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s efforts in
this regard. All sides bear a heavy responsibility to
turn the talks into a credible negotiating process that
can lead to a genuine political transition. The parties
must start tackling the difficult questions set out in
resolution 2254 (2015).
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In Libya too, a political solution is key to defeating
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and building
a lasting defence against this scourge and future
mutations that may arise. Now is the time for all parties
to come together under one legitimate Government
of National Accord, in accordance with the Libyan
political agreement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). I will present a summary of my
statement; the full version will be circulated. I convey
the Movement’s appreciation to the Japanese presidency
for convening this open debate at this critical juncture
for the Palestinian people and the Middle East. I also
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for his briefing.
Each and every time this Council holds an open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestine question, NAM appeals for urgent
international attention and action to address the illegal
and brutal Israeli occupation that is causing so much
anguish to the Palestinian people and dangerously
inflaming tensions in an already volatile situation. How
can the Council remain silent as Israel deliberately and
systematically continues its repression of the Palestinian
people, its denial of their rights and its colonization and
de facto annexation of Palestinian land?
During the last open debate we — along with the
whole international community — condemned Israel’s
declarations that it was designating 370 acres in the
West Bank as so-called State land as part of its ongoing
illegal settlement campaign. This has now been followed
by yet another decision by Israel to advance plans for
the construction of at least 800 more settlement units in
and around occupied East Jerusalem, in grave breach
of international law and in total contempt for Security
Council resolutions and the calls of the international
community to cease those violations. It should be
noted that this announcement was made in the days
immediately following the release of the Quartet report,
further highlighting the inadequacy of such efforts to
compel Israel to halt that illegal practice.
Emboldened by that impunity and by Security
Council inaction, Israel, the occupying Power, has
intensified its illegal, oppressive measures against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population, including,

S/PV.7736

inter alia, the use of excessive force against Palestinian
civilians, including children and women, causing more
death and injury and depriving them of their right to
protection. The destructive impact of such Israeli
violations is immense, as reflected in rising tensions
and deteriorating socioeconomic conditions, and that
impact is deepening among the Palestinian civilian
population living under this nearly half-century of
Israeli occupation. Any justification for such criminality
must be rejected and action on the matter — in line
with United Nations resolutions, international law
and our moral responsibilities towards the question of
Palestine — is long overdue.
NAM once again takes the opportunity to urge
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, to take a decisive, historic and long-overdue
step towards ending the occupation of the Palestinian
and other Arab lands and paving the way for fulfilment
of the rights and independence of the Palestinian people
and for a just and peaceful settlement to the conflict,
including a just solution to the plight of the Palestine
refugees, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. Here, we must once again caution that the
status quo cannot be sustained forever.
In that regard, we recognize the ongoing regional
and international efforts to generate the political will
and momentum needed to resolve the conflict, including
the 3 June 2016 ministerial meeting convened in Paris
in support of Palestinian-Israeli peace and the pledge to
convene an international peace conference toward that
objective in the coming months. We call on the Security
Council to perform its rightful role.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement
seizes
this
opportunity to reaffirm its longstanding solidarity
with the Palestinian people, recognizing their decades
of resilience despite so much suffering and injustice.
NAM reiterates its support for the realization of
their legitimate national aspirations and inalienable
rights, including self-determination and freedom in
an independent and viable State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for finding a
just solution to the plight of the Palestine refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
Lebanon continues to suffer from successive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions into its
territory, followed by year after year of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions

16-2143039/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and that
prevents Israel from violating Lebanese sovereignty on
a daily basis.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this open debate. I also wish
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and acknowledge the interventions of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine.
The ongoing conflict in Syria continues to generate
appalling and preventable civilian suffering. Reports
of renewed military offensives and counter-offensives
by nearly all parties to the conflict, in violation of
the cessation of hostilities still in force, are deeply
worrisome.
Brazil has long held that the war needs to be and
should be solved through a political process that is led
and owned by the people of Syria. While reaffirming
our strong support for the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, we cannot help but express our
concern at the apparent lack of progress of the recent
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva. All parties and their
supporters must demonstrate the readiness to act
constructively in the rounds to come and advance
towards a political transition based on credible,
inclusive and non-sectarian governance and towards
the drafting of a new constitution, as established by
resolution 2254 (2015).
Brazil vehemently condemns all war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of terrorism and other
40/58

12/07/2016

serious violations committed in Syria and stresses the
need for accountability. In that regard, I underscore the
latest report of the Independent International Inquiry
Commission on Syria, led by Professor Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro, which depicts a horrifying range of atrocities
perpetrated by Da’esh against the Yazidi community in
Sinjar, atrocities that may constitute a case of genocide.
We also urge all parties and their supporters to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including the prohibition on the deliberate targeting
of civilians. Resolution 2286 (2016) was an important
step towards strengthening the legal framework for
the protection of medical and humanitarian personnel
and facilities in armed conflict. That is highly relevant
in Syria.
The recent release of the report of the Iraq
Inquiry, a comprehensive report on the circumstances
surrounding the 2003 military intervention of Iraq
and its aftermath, is a sobering reminder of the perils
of military action in the absence of a clear mandate
issued by the Security Council. The repercussions of
misguided and ill-informed choices made 13 years
ago still threaten the security and stability of Iraq and
the Middle East region in particular, but their overall
negative effects on other parts of the world cannot be
overlooked.
Brazil condemns, in the strongest terms, the terrorist
attacks of 3 July, which killed more than two hundred
people in Iraq — the deadliest in the country since the
2003 invasion — as well as the recent attacks that took
place in Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and Yemen. Brazil conveys its condolences to all those
affected by terrorist attacks and reiterates that there
can be no justification for terrorism. Terrorism, which
runs counter to all principles and values for which the
United Nations stands, requires a coordinated response.
In that regard, we commend the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 70/291 at the fifth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
held on 1 July, and expect it to play an important role in
guiding our collective efforts for the future.
We took good note of the report of the Middle East
Quartet, which scrutinized the main impediments to
a lasting resolution to the Palestinian-Israeli dispute
and offered concrete recommendations in that regard.
Brazil believes that the report should have highlighted
the illegality of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories and the challenges they pose to a peaceful
resolution of the dispute. We acknowledge that steps
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

must be urgently taken to reverse current negative
trends and advance towards the implementation of
a two-State solution. We also draw attention to two
important events held last month to discuss strategies
to revitalize the peace process: a ministerial meeting
in Paris, hosted by the Government of France, and a
multilateral conference organized by the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, in Geneva.
Brazil expects that those developments will
inspire the Security Council to fully exercise its
responsibilities and actively lead international efforts
to pursue, without further delay, the creation of a
free, independent, sovereign and viable State for the
Palestinian people within its 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and harmony
with Israel. Regrettably, it has been more than seven
years since the Council last adopted a resolution on this
paramount issue.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
remains dramatic, and acts of violence, which Brazil
rejects unequivocally, continue to be committed by
both sides. Brazil strongly condemns the recent wave
of attacks in Israel and in the occupied territories,
which have targeted mainly innocent civilians over the
past several weeks. We join the Secretary-General in
condemning and expressing disappointment over the
recent announcement by Israel of its intention to expand
the construction of settlement units in both the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. Over the past few years, the
international community has been given compelling
evidence that such negative cycles of violence and
retaliation against innocents will not contribute to
fulfilling the aspiration of the majority of the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples for sustainable peace.
In Libya, the Government of National Accord is
still challenged by the need to consolidate its political
authority and territorial control. Brazil urges all parties
that have yet to comply with the Libyan Political
Agreement to do so as early as possible in order to
allow the restoration of the national unity of Libya. We
reiterate our support for Special Representative Martin
Kobler in these complex circumstances and express our
hope that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
will soon be able to re-establish its presence in Tripoli.
While the humanitarian situation in Yemen
remains dire, we are hopeful that ongoing negotiations
between Yemeni parties in Kuwait, facilitated by the

S/PV.7736

United Nations, will soon lead to a positive outcome.
Brazil took note with interest of Special Envoy Cheikh
Ahmed’s peace road map, as well as his proposal to
strengthen the Office of the Special Envoy in order
to advance towards a comprehensive settlement of the
conflict. We encourage all parties and their external
supporters to cooperate in this endeavour and join
efforts to restore peace and stability in Yemen, thereby
leading to a draft Constitution, electoral reform and
timely general elections, as determined by resolution
2201 (2015).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): The situation in the Middle East
region remains of serious concern and is becoming
increasingly fragile and unpredictable. The growing
threat of terrorism and radicalism has added to the
complexities of the situation in the region, which is
mired in protracted conflicts. The most long-standing
of these conflicts involves Israel and Palestine and
remains strained, with the peace talks suspended for
more than two years now, with no signs of resumption,
at least in the near future. The situation appears to be
getting worse, with escalating violence on both sides and
lack of restraint and moderation. The dire humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories and violence in
Israel demand urgent and sustained efforts on the part
of the global community to resume peace talks.
We welcome the recent visit of the SecretaryGeneral to Israel and Palestine. As the SecretaryGeneral has said, courageous steps are necessary for a
negotiated two-State solution in order to bring lasting
peace, security and dignity for the people of both Israel
and Palestine. A two-State solution is the only viable
option for sustaining peace in the region. It is the
responsibility of the two sides to ensure that they move
closer to a solution rather than farther away from one.
In that regard, we stand with others in emphasizing that
the international community must be firm in its resolve
to assist the people on both sides wherever required.
The Security Council must take a lead in this endeavour.
In that context, we welcome the first report of the
Middle East Quartet on the impediments to a lasting
solution and its recommendations to advance the twoState solution through negotiations. We also welcome
the French peace initiative and the international
conference held last month in Paris aimed at reviving
the peace talks. We hope that the efforts by the

16-2143041/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international community can lead to building some
common ground and generate mutual understanding
and a common political horizon, on which the two sides
can start the talks again. We are of the firm belief that
there can only be a politically negotiated solution to
this issue for a lasting and durable peace.
India has a long-standing record of solidarity with
the Palestinian people, support to the Palestinian cause
and assistance for Palestine’s nation-building, humanresource development and capacity-building efforts.
A just solution to the issue must result in a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet road map and relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Our continued commitment to the Palestinian
cause and our friendship with the Palestinian people
are reflected in the ongoing engagement with the
Palestinian leadership and the recent high-level
exchanges, including visits to Palestine by Indian
leaders, including at the level of President and Minister
of External Affairs.
On Yemen, we welcome the announcement of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, last week about an agreement on the guiding
principles for the Yemen peace talks. We hope that the
United Nations-supported talks, which will enter a new
phase in the coming weeks, will lead to a consensusbased solution.
On Syria, India welcomes the briefing by United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr Staffan de Mistura.
We hope for a comprehensive political resolution of
the conflict with the participation of all parties. We
further hope that the intra-Syrian talks under United
Nations auspices will ensure a Syrian-led and Syrianowned inclusive political transition, bringing an end to
the violence in Syria, and contribute to stabilizing the
country and the region. The humanitarian situation in
Syria remains a serious concern and has to be addressed
effectively. India remains committed to providing
bilateral humanitarian assistance to Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Japanese
presidency for having convened this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East.
42/58

12/07/2016

Since this is the first statement of my delegation
in the Security Council after being elected as a
non-permanent member on the Council for 2017 and
2018, I would like to thank delegations for supporting
the candidature of Kazakhstan, which my country
considers a solemn and serious responsibility. It is
significant that one of our first statements to the
Council following the elections is on this challenging
agenda item.
We give great importance to the Middle East region
and pay particular attention to the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. In his latest report on assistance
to the Palestinian people (A/71/87-E/2016/67), the
Secretary-General points to the negative trends on the
ground which, according to him, make the two-State
solution more distant. We share his concerns and those
of the report of the Middle East Quartet released earlier
this month. My delegation therefore urges the Quartet
to pursue its mediation efforts even more robustly
and arrive at negotiations in order to ensure stability
however uphill the task may appear.
My delegation also shares the view of other Member
States that the two-State solution, recognition of the right
to self-determination of Palestinians and the creation of
an independent State of Palestine peacefully coexisting
with Israel within the 1967 borders are the only means
for achieving a durable peace. We also stand for
promoting Palestine’s full-fledged membership in the
United Nations and encourage Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate the political commitment needed
to reach a historic peace agreement.
The Government of Kazakhstan fully endorses the
long-standing proposal of establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East. Establishing such a zone is dictated
by the pivotal role it would play in ensuring both
regional and global security. Once again, we call upon
all interested parties to exercise understanding and
trust to overcome the different viewpoints that militate
against the creation of such a zone.
Kazakhstan fully supports the Syrian peace
process within the Geneva III peace talks and the
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We
call on Member States to endorse the measures of
the Secretary-General, the Arab League and the
International Syria Support Group to find viable
solutions. To make our contribution, Kazakhstan
hosted two rounds of Syrian consultations in Astana in
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2015. These were attended by the leaders of different
opposition groups and representatives of Syrian ethnic
and religious minorities.
Given the current trends, our world, and the Middle
East in particular, are once again in danger. The risks
cannot be underestimated. It is from this perspective
that, in April 2016, President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan presented a new security paradigm
document entitled “Manifesto: The World. The TwentyFirst Century”. The Manifesto is significant as it takes
a momentous stand on the issues of war and peace.
To implement it, President Nazarbayev proposed
establishing a global coalition of States for peace,
stability, trust and security under the auspices of the
United Nations. The shared task of this coalition for
the next decade would be to end wars and conflicts in
Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, Syria and eastern
Ukraine, as well as the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation.
Our President also emphasized that if the world is
to be free of conflict, the injustices created by global
policies, which are the root cause of tensions and
which impede development, must be removed. At the
same time, the principles of international law must be
reaffirmed, respected by all countries and accompanied
by decisive steps towards demilitarization. All of
these aspects are highly relevant to the situation in the
Middle East.
As a step towards religious unity, at the recent
thirteenth summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, held in Istanbul in April, the leadership of
Kazakhstan, together with Turkey as the host country,
initiated the process of Islamic reconciliation as a new
paradigm of relations in the Muslim world. This process
is aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement of disputes
and strengthening the unity of the Islamic Ummah. We
therefore call on the Governments of all countries in
the region to take the necessary measures to prevent
the further escalation of sectarian tensions through
dialogue among and with religious leaders.
Finally, we reiterate Kazakhstan’s commitment to
joining the multilateral effort to ensure peace in the
Middle East.

S/PV.7736

commitment to the cause of peace in the Middle East
and its support for the efforts of the international
community to resolve outstanding conflicts in the
region through peaceful methods delineated under
international law for the settlement of disputes.
The fact that in the second decade of the twentyfirst century, the independent State of Palestine has not
yet been established or joined the United Nations as a
full-fledged State Member, as set forth in the partition
plan contained in General Assembly resolution 181 (II)
of 29 November 1947, makes resolving this issue the
fundamental and priority duty of the Organization.
We are therefore concerned about the lack of effective
action by the Security Council, the indifference of the
Powers directly involved and the obstinacy of extremist
sectors in the State of Israel that have been encouraged
by external supporters.
At the same time, we are encouraged that, in its
latest report, the Quartet has reiterated that
“a negotiated two-State outcome is the only way to
achieve an enduring peace that meets Israeli security
needs and Palestinian aspirations for Statehood and
sovereignty, [and] ends the occupation that began
in 1967”.
The report also offers a glimmer of hope that in the form
of the laudable efforts of France, with its initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle East.
Finally, we reiterate the continued support of
the Government and the people of Ecuador for the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State with the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. If the international community
had resolved this issue with due timeliness, it would
have spared us a great deal in terms of terrible human
suffering and we would have avoided the rise of the
reprehensible terrorist acts that are disrupting world
peace today. We are facing a highly political issue that
requires political solutions, even though it has involved
gross violations of international law and serious
attacks on human rights and has had reprehensible
humanitarian consequences.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.

Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We take the floor at today’s important open debate of
the Security Council to reiterate Ecuador’s historic

Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
commends the Japanese presidency for once more
bringing the difficult situation in the Middle East to the

16-2143043/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

attention of the international community, in the light of
the release of the Quartet’s 1 July report on the Middle
East and in the context of the continuing violence in
Syria, the deadly sectarian violence in Iraq and the
stalled Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
The Palestinian question has remained without
an answer that is satisfactory to both the Israelis and
the Palestinians. Almost 69 years after its adoption
by the General Assembly, resolution 181 (II), of
29 November 1947, remains only half-fulfilled.
Decades of negotiations have failed to achieve the
creation of a Palestinian State. The time is long overdue
to put an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
has become increasingly unacceptable as it becomes
increasingly intractable.
My delegation would not miss this occasion to
underline once more that, for the Holy See, the twoState solution holds the best promise. Durable peace
will remain a distant dream, and security will remain
an illusion if Israel and Palestine do not agree to exist
side by side, reconciled and sovereign, within mutually
agreed and internationally recognized borders. Let the
two States be created now for the sake of the Israelis
and Palestinians who, in the depths of their hearts,
desire nothing greater than peace and security. It is
time to act on the recommendations of the 1 July report
of the Quartet by bringing peace and security to the
citizens of Israel and the State of Palestine and to the
people of the world.
The situation in Syria remains one of unspeakable
suffering for the Syrian people who are being killed,
forced to survive under bombs or flee to less-ravaged
areas. My delegation feels duty-bound to call the
Council’s attention once again to the continuing
persecution of Christians, Yazidis and other ethnic and
religious minority groups by non-State actors in parts
of Syria and Iraq.
Pope Francis has denounced in the strongest
possible terms all those responsible, from whichever
side of the conflict in Syria they may come, for the
senseless slaughter of civilians. The Pope has also
denounced those who supply substantial amounts of
money and weaponry to fighters who kill and maim the
innocent population and destroy civilian institutions
and infrastructure. One cannot but lament the duplicity
of simultaneously talking peace while supplying arms
to those who kill on every side of the conflict. Pope
Francis has asked: How can you believe in someone
44/58

12/07/2016

who caresses you with the right hand and strikes you
with the left?
My delegation avails itself of this opportunity to
plead once more to the weapons-producing States to
strictly limit the supply of arms to client States and
monitor their use. In particular, my delegation asks
the international community to stop the illegal supply
of arms to non-State actors who have been lately
responsible for crimes against humanity, other forms of
mass atrocity and egregious violation of human rights.
Statistics have clearly shown that it is the civilian
population which is disproportionately victimized
by ever-more technologically sophisticated weapons.
Remote-controlled assassinations without the due
process of law and so-called collateral damage to
civilians by lethal autonomous weapons systems bring
to the fore ethical and legal questions that merit careful
review and perhaps even a challenge on the basis of
international humanitarian law.
The Holy See believes that peace processes do
not depend solely on formal negotiations, no matter
how indispensable they may be. As the cradle of great
civilizations and the birthplace of the three main
monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam, the Middle East has the cultural, intellectual and
religious resources that make it a fertile ground for civil
society and track II diplomacy, including faith-based
informal diplomacy, to play their role in promoting the
values of encounter and mutual acceptance, thereby
equipping all citizens to become active protagonists in
peacemaking and peacebuilding in the region. Religions
and believers, in particular, must prove themselves
worthy of their rightful place in the whole process of
pacification in the region.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset,
Mr. President, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate you and your country on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month and
ensuring sustained attention in the debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
South Africa fully supports the Security Council’s
convening of regular open debates on this matter, as it
allows all Member States an opportunity to express their
views and to inject greater impetus into the negotiations,
as this is one of the most protracted matters on the
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council’s agenda. We also express our appreciation
to Japan’s predecessor, the French Republic, for the
manner in which it led the deliberations of the Council
during the month of June, as well as its continued
commitment to finding a lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
While we reiterate that the central responsibility
for achieving peace is primarily in the hands of
Palestinians and Israelis, the international community
does have a responsibility to support and encourage
the parties towards that endeavour. South Africa is of
the opinion that the basis of the negotiations, which
has been the two-State solution, is being threatened
by the increasing construction of illegal settlements in
occupied territories, as well as by heightened tension
and sporadic acts of violence between Palestinians
and Israelis.
The French initiative endorsed by the international
community in Paris in June is welcome as an effort
to resuscitate the peace process and thereby prevent
the two-State solution from slipping away. As South
Africa’s Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation stated at the Paris meeting, “this initiative
is like the first raindrop after a long drought, and we
hope it will nourish the peace process”.
South Africa would like to highlight the views
of the participants in Paris, stressing that both sides
should demonstrate their commitment to the two-State
solution and resolve all permanent status issues through
direct negotiations based on resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We also welcome the Paris communiqué,
recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, further
highlighting the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative
and the key role of the Quartet, and welcoming the
French offer to coordinate an international conference
before the end of the year. It is essential that the General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map constitute the international legal framework
of those initiatives.
The Quartet report that was released last week was
eagerly anticipated to provide leadership and direction
for moving the peace process forward. The report
rightfully calls upon each side to
“independently demonstrate, through policies and
actions, a genuine commitment to the two-State
solution and refrain from unilateral steps that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations”.

S/PV.7736

However, the reaction of the parties, in particular
the Palestinians, is indicative of some level of
disenchantment with the Quartet.
For a long time, our responsibility has been
deferred to the Quartet, to which the United Nations
provides moral legitimacy. In the light of the Quartet’s
recent report, the international community must assert
its moral and legal weight by insisting that the IsraeliPalestinian peace process take place in accordance
with the international legal framework whereby the
United Nations will play its role as neutral arbiter.
The international conference proposed in Paris is an
opportunity for the international community to play
such a role.
The Security Council, in turn, must play its part
in support of the international efforts. The Council
has been known to support other peace processes with
resolutions demanding compliance with international
obligations. That approach has led to successful
conclusions of conflicts as parties to the conflict
recognized that non-compliance would result in
punitive measures. The same is needed in the IsraeliPalestinian context.
We deplore the fact that four days following
the release of the Quartet report, Israeli authorities
announced plans to build additional housing units in the
West Bank. That has detracted from any progress made
in resolving the conflict. As the Secretary-General has
stated, the continuing construction of settlements
“raises legitimate questions about Israel’s long-term
intentions, which are compounded by continuing
statements of some Israeli ministers calling for the
annexation of the West Bank”.
The fact that Israel was able to make that announcement
immediately following the call in the Quartet report
for a halt in settlements further undermines the
effectiveness of the Quartet.
The message emanating from Paris is that the time
has come for the parties to resume negotiations with the
full support of the international community, based on
the existing international legal framework, and to work
towards a two-State solution. The Council must play its
part in dissuading unilateral measures that may impede
the realization of the two-State solution that has eluded
the peoples of the region for too long. It is high time
that the Security Council assume its full responsibility
with respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

16-2143045/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

12/07/2016

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Morocco.

and restoring hope in finding a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace, based on the two-State solution.

Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We trust in your ability to promote the
principles of peace and harmony, and commend your
initiative to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, during Japan’s
presidency. That clearly reflects your country’s interest
and concern for this topic and a readiness to focus the
necessary attention to this problem. This is a subject to
which my country accords great importance owing to
our Arab and Muslim loyalties.

Morocco has taken note of the recently issued
report of the Middle East Quartet. We continue to hope
that the Quartet will live up to its role and overcome
the stagnation and the vicious cycle of violence, which
leads youths of the region to extremism and terrorism.
We therefore call upon the Quartet to redouble its
efforts and to work with both parties and all the
relevant stakeholders to push forward the peace process
in order to achieve the two-State solution based on all
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The situation in Palestine, and in Jerusalem in
particular, is deteriorating. We find that the international
community is being distracted by other developments.
But the importance of those developments must not
deter us from finding a solution to another important
conflict that has continued for many years, namely,
the Palestinian question, which is the pivotal issue par
excellence in the Middle East and the key to resolving
all other issues. We commend and support the French
efforts to address the situation and to find a means for
the parties to return to the negotiating table in order
to find a solution based on the two-State solution. The
Kingdom of Morocco and His Majesty the King support
the French initiative for peace in the Middle East, and
His Majesty has expressed that support more than once.
Our Minister for Foreign Affairs participated alongside
his colleagues from the Kingdom of Jordan, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Egypt, as a representative
of the Arab side, in the deliberations of the ministerial
conference held in Paris on 3 June. That meeting
culminated in an important communiqué that expresses
support for the two-State solution and underscores
the importance of returning to negotiations. Morocco
looks forward to the outcome of the French initiative
via an international conference to be held in the coming
months to revive the peace process in order to achieve
the two-State solution and an independent State for
Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders.
It is worth mentioning that, at the summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation hosted by Turkey
recently, His Majesty King Mohammed VI endorsed
the call by President Abbas of Palestine to convene
and international peace conference to end the Israeli
occupation. He deemed that as an essential step towards
ending the tragic and explosive situation in Palestine
46/58

The Kingdom of Morocco, headed by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, has reiterated on several
occasions the need not to Judaize Jerusalem and not
to violate the holy site of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. That
will not serve peace or regional security, but plays
into the hands of terrorists. We also reiterate that the
Arab Peace Initiative, based on the establishment of an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and within the pre-1967 borders, is the only way to
resolve the situation.
In conclusion, we reiterate that, more than ever,
the international community must endeavour to
reinvigorate the peace process and set a clear time
frame on the basis on legally binding resolutions of the
Council. As ever, Morocco is committed to participate
actively in any initiative aimed at promoting the peace
process in order to achieve peace, security and stability
in the region and to establish a State of Palestine based
on the pre-1967 borders, living side-by-side with Israel
in peace and security. That is the only way to resolve the
Palestinian question and to achieve peace in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I believe that
your able leadership, Sir, will guide the Council in
the right direction in the fulfilment of its mandate on
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive and informative briefing this morning.
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would also like to extend the Republic of Korea’s
heartfelt condolences to the victims of the recent
terrorist attacks in Istanbul, Dhaka, Medina, Jeddah,
Qatif and Baghdad, as well as our best wishes for the
speedy recovery of the injured. The Republic of Korea
condemns those heinous and cowardly terrorist attacks
in the strongest terms and will continue to join the
international community’s counter-terrorism efforts.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the series of
efforts undertaken by the international community to
facilitate the resumption of the peace process between
Israel and Palestine, including the Paris conference
held on 3 June, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s visit
to the region in late June and the Middle East Quartet
report released on 1 July. All those efforts share the
same purpose, namely, revitalizing the two-State
solution process. Unfortunately, however, the reactions
of the parties to the Quartet report are raising questions
as to whether they have a genuine intention to enter into
serious negotiations to realize the two-State solution.
In particular, we express strong concern over the
recent decision by the Israeli Government to advance
plans to build more settlement units in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. The Republic of Korea believes
confidence-building measures, including ending
settlement expansion in the occupied territories, are
urgently required to safeguard the two-State solution.
We call on the leaders of both parties to demonstrate
genuine commitment to the two-State solution through
policies and actions, as described in the Quartet report.
On Syria, the Republic of Korea commends the
efforts by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and concurs with his view
that a nationwide ceasefire, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access and a parallel political process are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In that
regard, a recent agreement on a nationwide ceasefire
for the Eid Al-Fitr holiday and improvement in
humanitarian access are commendable steps. However,
the situation on the ground — including frequent
ceasefire violations, “stop-and-go” humanitarian access
and the ongoing use of siege tactics — shows that the
efforts of the parties to the conflict are still falling short
when it comes to abiding by their existing commitments
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In addition to the joint letter dated 14 June
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Presidents
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
co-sponsored by 59 Member States, including the

S/PV.7736

Republic of Korea, we once again urge all the parties
to strictly comply with the cessation of hostilities, and
the Syrian Government to guarantee full, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access. Those concrete
actions will pave the way for a negotiated political
transition, which is the only way to end this war.
Turning to Yemen, the Republic of Korea hopes that
the peace talks, to be resumed on 15 July in Kuwait,
will produce concrete outcomes, such as resolving
the differences between the parties over key issues
of the road map proposed by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We
also call on the parties and key regional players to step
up their efforts to maintain the cessation of hostilities
during the negotiations, and beyond.
While the situation in the Middle East remains
chaotic and has resulted in enormous human suffering,
the international community’s efforts to end the
protracted conflicts and achieve sustainable peace
continue. Through previous experience we learn that
what matters most is not the repetition of words but
concrete actions to make real changes on the ground..
The Republic of Korea urges all the parties to
conflict to take the necessary measures to resolve those
conflicts and bring about peace. The Republic of Korea
will continue to play a constructive role to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We express our
appreciation to the Japanese presidency for convening
this open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
Bangladesh welcomes the fact that the Palestinian
question is being discussed in the Security Council
periodically in the wider context of the Middle East. This
should help build impetus for resuming negotiations
to resolve all the final status issues, as also envisaged
for the international conference to be convened in the
coming months.
We stress the need for upholding the spirit of the
joint communiqué issued by the ministerial meeting
in Paris on 3 June. The overriding message is that the

16-2143047/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

world expects the Council to act in a determined, visible
and sustained manner to find a just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian question. The continued occupation
of the Palestinian territories, the systematic human
rights violations, the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and the expansion of illegal settlements by
Israel, the occupying Power, constitute an affront to the
values and principles that the Organization stands for.
The Council must demonstrate its resolve to address the
Palestinian question as a matter of urgency.
The
continued
breaches
of
international
humanitarian law and the occupation of Palestinian
territories have given rise to an egregious culture
of impunity. In the absence of any international
accountability or sanctions, the occupying Power
continues to kill Palestinian citizens, especially youth
and children, imprisoning and abusing scores of
Palestinians in its detention centres and injuring and
displacing thousands of Palestinian families through its
construction and expansion of illegal settlements. It is
obvious that the settlements and the wall in and around
occupied East Jerusalem are being deliberately pursued
in order to fundamentally change the character, status
and demography of the occupied Palestinian territories.
That will serve only to indefinitely postpone the Middle
East peace process, and thus destabilize the prospects
for a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders.
The Council has a moral obligation to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlement
regime in the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the
blockade of the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms
of occupation. Immediate priority must be given to
ensuring international protection for the Palestinian
people, who have suffered for decades from Israel’s
policy of collective punishment.
The recently released Quartet report provides a
rather dismal assessment of the humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories. Yet the report
has probably only covered part of the concerns that
continue to characterize the lives of Palestinians in
the West Bank and Gaza. As has been noted, Israel
continues to announce and implement its settlement
expansion plans in the occupied territories, including
in and around East Jerusalem, even in the aftermath of
the release of the Quartet report. That casts a shadow
on the possibility of moving towards implementing the
recommendations of the report.
48/58

12/07/2016

We have stated a number of times here, and will
continue to do so, that the continued injustice with
regard to the Palestinian question remains at the root of
a number of scourges that bedevil international peace
and security. Among a host of potential scenarios, the
resolution of the Palestinian question will help dry
up the ideological reservoir that many international
terrorists and violent extremist groups tend to draw on.
The moral and ethical issues involved in the Palestinian
question need to be unequivocally upheld in order to
defeat the twisted and corrosive massaging used by
violent extremists to serve their own vested agenda.
That was recently brought home to us in Bangladesh
in the most gruesome manner, as we have witnessed
an expansion in the demographics of our home-grown
terrorists, now also being drawn from a section of
educated cosmopolitan youth. Initial investigations
show that some of those young people had been exposed
to narratives that tend to build a case for extremism
under the pretext of religion, on the basis of real or
perceived injustices suffered by people in the Middle
East and elsewhere, especially in Palestine. That is a
challenge that we are not in a position to deal with on
our own. If we are to succeed in our efforts to address
the internal and local drivers of violent extremism
and terrorism, we need the international community’s
meaningful support and commitment to resolve the
external drivers, including foreign occupation and
protracted conflicts.
In line with our constitutional commitment, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh maintain
their unwavering support for the just and legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side-by-side with Israel. Our Prime
Minister, Sheik Hasina, has consistently articulated
that in her annual address at the General Assembly.
We continue to urge all key actors to remained seized
of efforts to pursue a comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question, consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
principle of land for peace.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our support
for a draft resolution of the Council to revive political
efforts aimed at achieving the desired two-State solution
and at the convening an international conference to
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

address the multidimensional aspects of the Palestinian
question in a focused, structured and holistic manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank
the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The Middle East region remains steeped in
conflict and crisis. Despite determined efforts by the
international community, the suffering of millions
of civilians continues. Neighbouring countries to the
conflicts continue to be severely impacted. Among
the intractable problems facing the region, the IsraeliPalestinian conflict should be soluble, but actions by
both sides have continued to undermine the only viable
path to peace, namely, the two-State solution.
We welcome the Quartet report, which provides a
clear description of the principal threats to achieving
a negotiated peace in the form of a two-State solution.
Violence and incitement to violence on both sides
receive due attention. The wave of violent acts against
ordinary Israelis, settler violence against Palestinians,
rocket attacks from Gaza and disproportionate security
action by Israeli forces all widen the gulf that will need
to be bridged.
The report also describes the detrimental effects of
settlement expansion, land designations for exclusive
Israeli use and the denial of Palestinian development and
demolitions of Palestinian structures, and urges Israel
to implement positive and significant policy shifts,
including transferring powers and responsibilities in
Area C.
We welcome France’s initiative to assist in finding
a way for the parties to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
to achieve peace, as well as France’s offer to coordinate
an international conference before the end of the year.
The Quartet report provides a basis for action,
first of all by the parties to the conflict. The
10 recommendations are addressed mainly to them.
But the report also provides a basis for concerted
action by the Security Council. The report calls upon
each side to independently demonstrate, through
policies and actions, a genuine commitment to the
two-State solution. But breaches of commitments have
been ongoing. There is an opportunity for the Security
Council to back up the recommendations of the Quartet

S/PV.7736

with clear instructions to the parties. It is time that the
Council put its weight behind the Quartet’s conclusions
that continuing on the current course will make the
two-State solution increasingly remote. The alternative,
according to the Quartet, is entrenching a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation and conflict that is
incompatible with realizing the national aspirations of
both peoples.
We encourage the Security Council to take action
and to back the recommendations of the Quartet by
way of a draft resolution. We also join in encouraging
both parties to foster a climate of tolerance that can
strengthen the foundations for peace and counter
violent extremism.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Wilfried Emvula, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Mr. Emvula: The Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes
recent efforts to break the political stalemate. These are
the first rays of hope since bilateral negotiations came
to a halt in the spring of last year. The Government of
France brought key international stakeholders to Paris
in June, who agreed on multilateral efforts to help
advance the prospects for peace, including by providing
meaningful incentives to the parties to make peace.
Two weeks ago, the Middle East Quartet published
its long-awaited report, in which it highlighted
major threats to the two-State solution and provided
recommendations on how to create the conditions
for meaningful peace negotiations. The Committee
underscores the need for strong and determined steps to
reverse the negative threats immediately. In all of those
efforts, the international community is unanimous in its
view that the only way to achieve an enduring piece will
be on the basis of relevant resolutions, including of the
Council, and a negotiated two-State outcome that meets
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty
and Israeli security needs, ends the occupation that
began in 1967 and resolves all permanent status issues.
The Committee fully and expressly supports
peace efforts. On 29 and 30 June, we organized
and international conference in support of IsraeliPalestinian peace in Geneva under the theme “Peace
Is Possible — Frameworks for a Way Forward”.
It assembled experienced peace negotiators and
international experts, including from the State of

16-2143049/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine and Israel, to discuss lessons learned and past
initiatives and to discuss new ideas.
To facilitate a similar exchange of ideas, in early
May, the Committee also organized a conference
on Jerusalem, which is at the heart of a peaceful
settlement to the question of Palestine. I have describe
those recent international efforts as the first rays of
hope. Too often we have seen such rays vanish because
we, the international community, the United Nations
and the Council did not do enough to support and
bolster previous efforts, or because the international
community prioritized other seemingly more urgent
issues. However, in doing so, we overlooked one key
issue, namely, that the long-standing inability to find
a durable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
one of the reasons for radicalization in the Middle East
and beyond.
In the same vein, visions of security for Israel
without a just and sustainable peace with Palestine are
delusory. Collective punishments, such as the blockade
of Gaza, demolitions of houses of suspected terrorists
and the denial of working permits, do not produce
acquiescence. They produce resentment and resistance.
Likewise, preventing Palestinian development in
Area C of the occupied West Bank, building illegal
settlements and the taking of land for exclusive Israeli
use only increase a sense of frustration and hopelessness
and call into question Israel’s commitment to a twoState solution.
A recent example is the decision by the Government
of Israel on new settlement construction in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, just two days after the Quartet
report was published. Unilateral security measures also
can never be enough to resolve the underlying causes
of violence. What is needed is leadership, providing a
political horizon and immediate changes on the ground
so that Palestinians can start regaining hope. What is
needed is a fundamental return to agreed negotiating
principles and parameters as reiterated the Arab Peace
Initiative, at the Paris ministerial conference and the
various Quartet reports. In this, the State of Palestine
is a partner for peace. However, its capacity and ability
to deliver are severely hampered by the continuing
occupation and by the destruction of its physical and
social infrastructure.
In May, our Committee held a seminar in
Stockholm on assistance to the Palestinian people, at
which experts reviewed the challenges and constraints
50/58

12/07/2016

to the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals for the State of Palestine under the Israeli
occupation and looked at ways of building resilient
and sustainable economic growth while addressing
humanitarian needs. A main focus of the seminar was
on long-term investment in youth and women as a key
to building a peaceful and inclusive society. It was
encouraging to hear the voices of Palestinian youth,
as well as testimony by Ms. Hanan Al-Hroub from the
West Bank, the recipient of the 2016 Global Teachers
Prize, who is teaching Palestinian children traumatized
by the constant violence against them that saying no to
violence is the right path towards a good future.
The de facto political division of Gaza and the
West Bank continues to affect Palestinian society and
efforts towards a peaceful solution of the conflict.
The Committee welcomes recent reconciliation talks
and expresses its hope that they will soon come to
fruition. However, this division cannot be an excuse for
international inaction or a delay in donor support for
Gaza reconstruction. The people of Gaza deserve better.
The Committee also welcomes the call for local
council elections in October of this year and hopes that
they will be held throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in Gaza. Good governance and
transparent political structures are essential for
Palestine and Palestinians to develop their State and its
institutions and to take their rightful place among the
nations of the world. For those efforts to be carried out,
the continued and increased support of the international
community is needed. The notion that development must
wait until the humanitarian crisis is over or a political
solution is reached is short-sighted, as is the one that
the beginning of development projects indicates that
there is no longer any need for humanitarian aid. There
is no law that prevents education programmes, health
care and the creation of livelihoods from starting even
while the rubble is being cleared.
Today, I have deliberately focused on the rays of
hope shining against the backdrop of all the violence
and despair in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem and the region beyond. It is very
tempting to adopt a bleak and morose view. We must
fight that temptation. As was said at the Committee’s
conference last month in Geneva, peace is possible, but
it requires the efforts of everyone and leadership. Both
peoples, Palestinians and Israelis, expect and depend
on it from their own leaders and all of us. Let us not
disappoint them.
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): As we approach the fiftieth
year of the occupation of the Palestinian territories,
the prospects for a lasting peace remain grim. The
revitalization of the peace process is not only necessary
to grant a dignified life to the Palestinian people, but
also a fundamental requirement for achieving stability
within the region. We are very concerned about the
deteriorating situation on the ground. The expansion of
illegal settlements, land confiscations, the displacement
of native communities, denying the Palestinians’ right
to use natural resources and the prevailing culture of
impunity erode the viability of a two-State solution.
The total area allocated to settlements has doubled
since the Oslo peace agreements, as part of Israel’s
policy to keep East Jerusalem isolated from the West
Bank and Gaza. As recently as the beginning of July,
the Israeli Government advanced new plans for 800
additional housing units in illegal settlements. In
addition, 10 per cent of the West Bank is cut off from
the rest of the territory by the separation wall. The
current situation is neither acceptable nor sustainable.
The Israeli Government’s practices in contravention
of international law must stop. Furthermore, the
preservation of the status and sanctity of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif are essential for stability and future harmony.
The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people is fuelling resentment, alienation and radicalism
in and beyond the region. The only way out of this
impasse is to convince the Palestinians that their future
will be better than today. That can be achieved only
if the Palestinians sit at the negotiation table as the
State of Palestine with equal standing with Israel. In
that regard, the recognition of the State of Palestine
by more than 137 countries and its full integration
into international forums would raise hopes for the
possibility of a two-State solution on the basis of the
Arab Peace Initiative. In addition, initiatives such as
the Paris ministerial conference, in which we also took
part, represent important opportunities at a time when
the revival of the peace process has become an urgent
necessity. Last but not least, to reach a lasting peace,
it is also crucial for the Palestinians to voice their
legitimate demands for unity. Turkey will continue its
efforts aimed at Palestinian reconciliation.
Empowering the Palestinian people and improving
their living conditions through development assistance

S/PV.7736

and investments is more urgent than ever. In that
understanding, Turkey’s $200 million pledge for the
period from 2014 to 2017 is channelled into various
projects, such as the construction of an industrial
zone in Jenin in the West Bank, a hospital in Tubas
and a girls’ dormitory for Al-Quds University.
The agreement to normalize our bilateral relations
with Israel was concluded on 26 June in Rome, in
accordance with the parameters put forward following
the Mavi Marmara incident.
That will be instrumental to further increasing our
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation in the
occupied territories, particularly in Gaza. As a follow
up to that, the first shipment of our humanitarian aid
reached Gaza on 4 July through the port of Ashdod. In
addition, the Turkey-Palestine Friendship Hospital, with
a 200-bed capacity, will be ready to provide services
following the installation of medical equipment. The
construction project for 320 housing units in Gaza will
also soon be finalized.
The establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, continues to be the only
viable solution. Turkey’s commitment to supporting the
Palestinian people to that end will never cease.
The ongoing grave situation in Syria, in particular
the devastating humanitarian conditions, continues to
unravel the very principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Turkey continues to shoulder a large part of the
burden of the ongoing devastation. The humanitarian
and security repercussions of the crisis constitute
a direct threat to our national security. The chaos in
the northern part of Syria has played into the hands
of terrorists, targeting our citizens as well. We have
a common interest in bringing peace and stability to
Syria through a genuine political transition. However,
no substantial progress has been made on the following
fronts, upon which the efforts of the international
community have been concentrated.
The cessation of hostilities, which is systematically
violated by the regime and its supporters, has actually
ceased to exist. The talks on establishing a ceasefire in
Aleppo go hand in hand with the regime’s attempts to put
the city under siege. That is what the word “ceasefire”
means to the regime. The humanitarian situation is no
different. The provision of basic needs continues to
be interrupted. Its timing, content and geographical
scope are almost completely left to the mercy of the

16-2143051/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

regime. The regime continues to use barrel bombs and
attack civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as
hospitals, mosques, markets and camps for internally
displaced persons. The Security Council must ensure
the implementation of all the measures envisaged by its
very own resolutions.
If the picture on the ground is to remain unchanged,
there will be no prospect for a successful outcome in
the next round of talks in Geneva. The opposition,
represented by the High Negotiations Committee
cannot be expected to negotiate under fire. In addition,
attempts to dilute and weaken the opposition will
only harm the process. Without further delay, the
regime should be pressured to talk about the political
transition with concrete timelines, a new Constitution
and elections. A transitional governing body with full
executive powers should be established. After six years
of brutality and crime, the Syrian people cannot be
expected to settle for anything less.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Missaoui (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your wise
presidency of the Council for this month, and thanking
you for convening this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I would like to align my delegation with the
statements made on behalf the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the non-aligned countries.
I would be remiss if I failed to condemn the recent
terrorist attacks in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Iraq, Turkey and Bangladesh. I would like to offer our
condolences to those brotherly and friendly countries.
The first report of the Quartet, published early this
month, affirms that the ongoing occupation policies,
the expansion of settlements in the West Bank and
Gaza, and the confiscation of Palestinian property by
Israelis imperil the current search for a settlement.
Israel continues to unilaterally claim territory. There
are some 370,000 settlers living in Area C in the
West Bank. The report confirms that such practices
undermine the potential for a two-State solution desired
by the international community, raising questions
about Israel’s intentions and commitment to a twoState solution, especially in the light of the position of
certain Israeli Ministers who reject the establishment
of a Palestinian State.
52/58

12/07/2016

Despite calls in the Quartet’s report for an end to
settler activities, the occupation authorities declared,
only days after the report was published, that they
intended to build 560 residential units in addition to 240
previously announced units in East Jerusalem, which
was criticized by the Secretary-General in his briefing
this morning. These practices violate all international
laws and conventions and confirm beyond any doubt
that Israel is continuing its fait accompli policy to gain
more time, annex more Palestinian territory and force
the population out. The policy impedes any attempt to
open new horizons for peace consistent with the twoState vision. Such a vision has eroded and with it so
have the prospects for peace.
Regrettably, all these practices continue unabated
while the international community, in particular
the Security Council, remains silent. However, my
delegation believes that it is no longer acceptable to
remain silent before these faits accomplis. The time has
come for the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to shoulder its responsibility and put
an end to the unprecedented occupation and the settler
activity. We all agree that the settlements are illegal
and illegitimate. We further agree that they are the crux
of the matter and the true reason for the tensions in the
territories and in the region.
The time has come for a real change in the way the
Security Council addresses the question of Palestine.
It is time for the Council to deliver justice to the
Palestinian people and enable them to recover and fulfil
their legitimate rights. The current situation is clearly
threatening to create further tensions in a region that has
already had enough. Continued feelings of resentment
and helplessness before historical injustices are what is
causing extremism and violence.
There is no hope if we do not address the
situation in a just manner. First and foremost, we must
seriously and responsibly work to put an end to settler
colonialism as a precondition for achieving a just and
comprehensive solution. Only this will guarantee the
Palestinian people’s ability to build a State on its own
land, on contiguous territories, on territories that have
been occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid terms of reference.
My delegation supports any international effort that
can contribute to achieving this objective. We welcome
France’s call at the Paris meeting on 3 June for the
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

convening of an international conference on this issue.
The final communiqué of the Paris meeting stressed the
need to end occupation as well as the importance of
the Arab Peace Initiative in the realization of a peace
consistent with the vision of the two States. Tunisia
supports the Palestinian demand for protection for its
civilians in the Palestinian territories, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and international humanitarian
law, including the Geneva Conventions and other
international conventions. In addition, my delegation
welcomes the intention of the Special Rapporteur to
visit to the region for the purposes of preparing a report
to be submitted to the General Assembly in October.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the general
and comprehensive peace process in the Middle East
region needs to be a comprehensive one. Peace cannot
be achieved without Israel’s complete withdrawal
from all Arab and Palestinian territories, including
the Syrian Arab Golan and the territories that are still
under occupation in southern Lebanon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Japan on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I would also like to express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.
Our region is witnessing great intellectual and
political challenges due to an indescribably bitter
reality. Our words will never be able to match the
suffering and devastation that has been seen in our
region, be it in Syria, the Palestinian territories or
Yemen. These challenges force us to ask ourselves if
the international community is doing enough to resolve
these conflicts, pursuant to international agreements
and law. Indeed, are we doing everything possible to
achieve peace and stability?
Through its recent membership in the Security
Council, Jordan exerted great efforts and was able to
bring the question to the fore in an attempt to resolve
all conflicts in the Middle East. We have expressed our
thoughts on how to resolve conflicts in the region and
have often reiterated that the main issue continues to be
the Palestinian question, with its absence of peace and
the lack of a just and lasting solution. This conflict is
constricting all other efforts to achieve peace anywhere
else in the Middle East.

S/PV.7736

The relationship between peace in the region and
the Palestinian question is clear. What we need is a
comprehensive approach to resolving this issue, as
well as a real effort on the part of the international
community to resolve it permanently. We cannot allow
violent and extremist groups to take advantage of this
conflict and exploit the gaps it creates with a view to
expanding their influence in the region and the world
as a whole.
Every day, the Israelis violate international law,
destroy homes and expel populations. Their goal is to
change the reality on the ground. They categorically
reject all efforts to achieve a systemic settlement. We
are therefore obligated to ask the Council to live up
to its responsibilities and end the settlement activity
immediately. The settlements in Jerusalem and the
West Bank are in violation of international law, and
what Israel does on the ground contradicts its public
statements. On the way to relaunching negotiations
between the two sides, it places greater obstacles to any
possible success.
Nevertheless, in this context, Jordan reiterates the
importance of resuming serious negotiations based on
the two-State solution, but with a deadline, with a view
to establishing an independent, completely sovereign
Palestinian State on Palestinian soil and within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with international law and the Arab
Peace Initiative. This goal is consistent with Jordan’s
interests, as my country is vitally connected to all
aspects of the Palestinian question.
His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein has
always given and will continue to give attention to a
related question of grave concern, namely, attacks
on Palestinian and Muslim holy sites. His Majesty is
using all his considerable influence to oppose Israel’s
attacks on our sanctuaries. Indeed, in line with our
historical custodianship of the region, Jordan will stand
up to anyone who tries to commit acts of transgression
against holy sites. We will take any and all measures,
diplomatic and legal, to counter Israeli violations in
Jerusalem. All Israeli acts in this area are null and void
and without any legal consequence because they have
been authorized by an illegitimate occupying Power.
Regional or international initiatives designed
to solve the Palestinian question will not be realized
without genuine political will and the commitment to
push such initiatives forward. But, more importantly,

16-2143053/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

12/07/2016

their success will depend on the seriousness of Israel and
the sincerity of its intention — or the lack thereof — to
achieve a lasting peace.

We trust that peace, security and stability can
be achieved in the Middle East. We in Jordan are
determined to contribute to those efforts.

The practices of Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories must stop. This is not just a Palestinian
demand, but an international demand to give the
Palestinian people the right to live in peace and
sovereignty on its soil. The situation requires greater
efforts by all parties to give momentum to the
negotiations to allow for a political resolution to be
achieved, particularly based on resolution 2254 (2015).

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.

Jordan continues to support the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
the International Syria Support Group. We hope that
the negotiations will succeed and that we will reach an
agreement for the transitional phase in Syria that will
allow peace and stability to return to that nation and
for the Syrian refugees to return to their homeland and
contribute to its reconstruction. Perhaps the increased
number of refugees and their continued flow from
Syria to neighbouring countries and to Europe is proof
of the scope of the humanitarian crisis in Syria, which
is affecting the entire region. Jordan continues to act
based on its moral obligation to the Syrian refugees.
That is taking its toll on our limited resources. We are
under great pressure. This requires the international
community to fulfil its obligations and to provide
greater support, in accordance with the promises made
in London last month. Syrian refugees are facing
great difficulties.
We are deeply concerned that terrorist
organizations continue to control areas of Syria, Iraq
and Libya. Such groups also continue to act based on
extremist ideologies and to perpetrate attacks in Saudi
Arabia, Iraq, Belgium, Turkey and on the borders of
Jordan and Syria. Those developments confirm that the
war against those deviant factions has become, as His
Majesty King Adbullah II has said, a third world war
using different means, which requires international
coordination among all the nations of the world. Terrorist
organizations have warped the image of Islam — again,
necessitating coordination and cooperation among all
countries in confronting terrorism. We must show
strong determination to unify our efforts and implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions to face up to
those gangs, in particular the the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham.
54/58

Ms. Naeem (Maldives): Let me begin by thanking
Japan’s presidency of the Security Council for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East.
The Middle East remains one of the world’s most
volatile regions and continues to pose a daunting
challenge for international peace and security. While
continued efforts are under way in the fight against
terrorism, violent extremism continues to spread
throughout the region, as demonstrated by the recent
attacks in Istanbul, Baghdad, Medina and beyond,
which are particularly heinous for having been carried
out during the Holy month of Ramadan. The Maldives
strongly condemns those attacks, and extends its
condolences and sympathies to the victims and the
people who were affected by those acts of terrorism.
We also note with grave concern the continued
repression of the rights of Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and the escalation of violence
against Palestinians, including assaults, vandalism
and the destruction of property. Despite the Israeli
Government expressing support for an amicable twoState solution, it continues to violate its commitments
under the Oslo Accords, and continue to designate the
West Bank as an integral part of the State of Israel in
its laws, official statements and the media. Numerous
Israeli politicians have even expressed support for
the complete formal annexation of the West Bank.
Therefore, it is evident that in practice Israel does not
recognize the right of a sovereign Palestinian State
to exist.
Furthermore, Israel continues to implement
settlement expansion policies in violation of
international law. We are witnessing a complete
and total de-legitimization of the grievances and
aspirations of the Palestinian people, as their rights
are being progressively denied through the expansion
of such illegal settlements. The denial of the right to
development of Palestine is a clear contradiction of the
aspirations set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1),
which the entire world agreed to last year. The failure
to remedy that situation creates a dangerous precedent
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7736

for the future. Therefore, the Maldives calls upon the
Security Council to devise a practical, immediate
and sustainable solution to that conflict and to take
immediate action. The solution is not to have circular
debates in the Council about how the current measures
are not working, but rather to find a new approach that
would produce practical results.

end to its aggressive policies and settlement practices.
The inaction of the Council in the face of such practices
is alarming. It is unacceptable that the Security Council
continue to be held hostage to the veto, or the threat
thereof, by the United States to prevent this organ from
fulfilling its mandate and protecting the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

The Maldives, together with the majority of the
international community, reaffirms its commitment to
establishing an independent Palestinian State, based on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and taking its rightful place as a full Member of the
United Nations.

Cuba reiterates its call on the Security Council
to fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security and to adopt the necessary measures
to demand that Israel immediately put an end to its
occupation of Palestinian territory and other Arab
territories, end the blockade against the Gaza Strip, stop
the construction and expansion of Israeli settlements,
cease the construciton of the separation wall on
occupied Palestinian territory, halt the destruction and
confiscation of Palestinian lands and property, end
the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian families and end the transfer of settlers into
occupied Palestinian territory, among other violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and United Nations resolutions.

In addition to the grave violations against
Palestinians, the Maldives also condemns the Israeli
violations of the territorial and sovereign rights of
Lebanon and the occupied Syrian Golan. We call
upon Israel to abide by the relevant Security Council
resolutions and immediately cease those actions, which
are further compromising peace and security in the
Middle East and violating international law.
The present instability in the Middle East is to a
large degree rooted in long-standing political, social,
ethnic and religious disputes that have no easy solution.
Changing geopolitical conditions have brought various
people into conflict, and they will ultimately have
to learn, or re-learn, how to tolerate differences and
live peacefully alongside one another, in accordance
with the principles of international law, which is the
cornerstone of world peace. Therefore, we cannot allow
any State to continue to blatantly disregard those viable
solutions for sustainable peace and to perpetuate the
situation of conflict in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba supports the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The situation in the Middle East region remains
a matter of constant concern for the international
community. That has been reflected in the many
previous debates held by the Security Council. However,
despite repeated open debates in the Council on the
issue, where we have witnessed overwhelming support
for the Palestinian cause, this organ has so far failed to
adopt a draft resolution demanding that Israel put an

The Council should also hold Israel accountable for
its aggressions and flagrant, massive and systematic
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian people,
and for its war crimes and collective punishment
against that people. The Israel’s settlement campaign
and prolonged impunity threaten the viability of a
Palestinian State and affect the possibility of resolving
the conflict in a fair, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful manner.
Cuba welcomes the regional and international efforts
being made to resume peace talks between Israelis and
Palestinians, including the French peace initiative for
a multilateral peace conference and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We take note of the report of the Middle East
Quartet. In this regard, we deplore attempts to equate
the responsibilities of a people under occupation with
those of the occupying Power. We reiterate that the
Security Council must fulfil its obligation to promote a
negotiated solution that guarantees an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory.
The only possible solution to the Palestinian
question is the peaceful coexistence of two independent
States, with the establishment of an independent,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, with its capital
in East Jerusalem and within the pre-1967 borders,

16-2143055/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in which the Palestinian people may exercise all their
rights, including the right to self-determination. Cuba
is convinced that the settlement of this long-standing
conflict would help to greatly reduce the tensions
experienced today the Middle East.
With respect to Palestine’s 2011 application for
recognition as a State Member of the United Nations,
Cuba reaffirms its full support for the admission of
Palestine as a full Member of the Organization and
calls on the Security Council to consider and accept
that request without further delay. That is the will of the
vast majority of States Members of the Organization.
Otherwise, the General Assembly should act resolutely
to decide the case.
On the situation in Syria, Cuba reiterates that it
will be possible to achieve peace in that country only
by respecting the right of the Syrian people to decide
their own destiny. A political solution, reached through
dialogue and negotiations without preconditions, is
the only viable solution to the conflict in Syria. Cuba
welcomes the extension of the cessation of hostilities
and the new paths that it has opened with a view to
acheivingt a political, peaceful and negotiated solution
to the conflict.
We support the Syrian people’s aspirations to live
in peace and choose their own destiny without outside
interference. Those who have fueled the conflict from
the outside, with the declared aim of imposing regime
change, are responsible for the thousands of civilian
victims of the conflict. We regret the loss of innocent
lives as a result of this situation and condemn all acts of
violence against the civilian population of that country.
The threat posed by extremist groups in Syria,
some of which practice terrorist methods, is the main
challenge facing the Arab nation. The fight against
that scourge requires the assistance of the international
community. Cuba reiterates that an interventionist
agenda must not be promoted under the pretext of fighting
terrorism. We demand the cessation of violations of the
sovereignty of Syria and the withdrawal of a foreign
military presence that does not enjoy the consent of or
operational coordination with the Syrian Government,
the only legitimately elected authority in the country.
We recognize the efforts and cooperation of the Syrian
Government in facilitating access to humanitarian aid,
while reiterating that humanitarian assistance must be
delivered in strict compliance with General Assembly
resolution 46/182.
56/58

12/07/2016

The Council is called on to promote a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the conflicts in the Middle
East that will safeguard the sovereignty, security and
territorial integrity of all States of the region. The
peace, security, welfare and development deserved by
all peoples, including those of Middle East, depend
on the decisive action of this organ, under the powers
conferred by the Charter of the United Nations. The
General Assembly should also exercise all its powers
under the Charter.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the presidency of Japan for convening this open debate
and the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements by
the representatives of Iran and Kuwait on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
The United Nations was founded to pursue
international peace and security and to promote the
equal rights and self-determination of people, among
other things. Much progress has been recorded by
the United Nations in those areas, including by
assisting the liberation of peoples living under foreign
occupation. Yet we must not be complacent. Resolving
prolonged conflicts and ending foreign occupation
remains the greatest challenge confronting the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, which bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Palestine-Israeli
conflict is one such.
For far too long, the international community has
witnessed inconsistency, and even betrayal, in the efforts
to resolve the Palestine-Israel conflict. The Council
alone has adopted 89 resolutions on the conflict, some
of which call for withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
force. Regrettably, none has been respected, even by the
institution that adopted them. Many times Indonesia has
stated in the Council and many other relevant forums
that ending the Israeli occupation is indispensable to
resolving the Palestine-Israeli conflict. The Palestinian
people must be accorded the opportunity to exercise
their inalienable right to establish an independent State
of Palestine, in accordance with the two-State vision.
In that regard, Indonesia underlines the importance
of the ministerial conference held in Paris last month,
16-21430

12/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which reflected the enduring international commitment
to peace between Palestine and Israel. As a participant
in the ministerial conference, Indonesia stands ready
to work with all relevant stakeholders on its follow-up,
including in putting together packages of incentives for
the resumption of the peace process. We will also work
to ensure the successful convening of the international
peace conference by the end of this year.
Indonesia takes note of the report of the Middle
East Quartet with respect to the peace process between
Palestine and Israel. While we appreciate the role of
the Quartet in pursuing peace, Indonesia considers the
report to be a disappointment. It fails to capture the
very reason behind the Palestine-Israeli conflict, which
is no other than the Israeli occupation. We should call a
spade a spade. For over 60 years, the Palestinian people
have been without a homeland. They have been robbed
of their dignity and forced to live in subjugation. We
do not condone violence, but failure to recognize the
link between the violence and the prolonged occupation
amounts to a denial of the frustrations of the Palestinian
people. If we are to restart a credible peace process,
the grief, anger and sense of despair of the Palestinian
people must be acknowledged. I reiterate that violence
cannot be condoned, but the longer the occupation takes
place, the more violence the world is likely to see.
It is also disappointing to see the report place
equal blame on Palestine and Israel, neglecting the
fact that Palestine is under occupation. This notion
of equal responsibility between Palestine and Israel
is also inconsistent with the Geneva Conventions and
various United Nations resolutions, including those of
the Council, which assign to Israel the responsibilities
of an occupying Power.
It is regrettable that such conclusions emerged in
the Quartet report. In our view, they run counter to all
the efforts to pursue peace between Palestine and Israel.
However, our disappointment aside, Indonesia agrees
with the Quartet that more efforts must be dedicated
to advancing the two-State solution. A climate of
trust must continue to be forged. The expansion
of settlements must stop — not only is it illegal, it
complicates the efforts to build trust. Along that line, it
is very upsetting that the report says nothing about the
illegal nature of the settlements.
On a different matter, all acts that contribute to
the building and strengthening of cordial relations
between Palestinian and Israeli communities must be

S/PV.7736

promoted. The desire for peace must come from within
both communities for it to be durable. Needless to say,
violence must also be prevented. The Security Council
must engage more energetically in the pursuit of peace.
By continuing to remain on the sidelines, the Council
allows the two-State solution to fade further away.
Worse still, the Council’s inaction adds to the sense of
grief and anger of the Palestinian people and further
undermines their belief in a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. We certainly cannot let that happen, as we
owe to the children of Palestine the basic promise of
peace and human dignity that is at the foundation of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Once again, some of the
speakers in the Chamber today have demonstrated
that they will not let the facts confuse them when they
decide to falsely attack Israel, rather than to establish
a sincere, meaningful conversation about the situation.
The remarks in the Council today can be interpreted
only as a clear lack of knowledge or an explicit choice
to perpetuate the biased approach against Israel in
this house.
In our statement this morning we stated that the
some might try to balance the criticism of Palestinian
terrorism by condemning Israeli construction, and
that some might even criticize the construction while
ignoring Palestinian terrorism. Unfortunately, that
prediction has came true too many times. Israel strongly
rejects any attempts to draw moral equivalents between
construction and terrorism. It is not only morally false,
but it has also provided justification for terrorism.
The Iranian representative sat here and blamed
Israel for all that is wrong in the Middle East, when in
fact the true destabilizing force in the region is Iran. Not
only is Iran the world’s leading sponsor of terrorism, it
also makes no secret about its intentions to seek the
destruction of another Member State. I do not need to
remind the representatives sitting in the Chamber today
that this is the same Iran that launched a ballistic missile
with the words “Israel should be wiped off the face of the
Earth” written on its side. Just a week ago, Iran held its
yearly demonstration of hate for Israel. Among crowds
of people burning the Israeli and American flags and
chanting “Death to Israel”, the Iranian Revolutionary
Guards’ second in command threatened that its proxy,

16-2143057/58

S/PV.7736

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Hizbullah, had more than 100,000 rockets in Lebanon,
ready to be launched at Israel.
Hassan Nasrallah, the head of internationally
recognized terrorist group Hizbullah, does not miss any
opportunity to thank its main benefactor, Iran. Nasrallah
admits that Hizbullah’s funds and rockets come from
the same source, that is, the generous Ayatollah of
Tehran. To the Lebanese delegation, I would like to say:
those living in glass houses should not throw stones.
And those with terrorist organizations as part of their
Governments should not criticize the most progressive
and liberal democracy in the Middle East.
The representative of Kuwait, speaking on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
the very same organization that just a week ago tried

58/58

12/07/2016

to make the case that attacks against Israel were not
terrorism, today had the audacity to compare Israel to
Da’esh. Are there no limits to what the OIC is willing
to say?
Lastly, to my Palestinian colleagues in the
Chamber, I would like to say that the only way to
address the outstanding problem between the two sides
is by joining us for direct negotiations. That is the only
way to turn the vision of the two States for two peoples
into a reality. Israel wants and prays for peace, but we
cannot make any progress unless we put an end to terror
and incitement and finally agree to direct, face-to-face
negotiations. Peace will not come by evading tough
decisions and compromises.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

16-21430
