148

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/193. Assistance to the Comoros
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/209 of 20 December 1983
and its previous resolutions on assistance to the Comoros,
in which it appealed to the international community to
provide effective and continuous financial, material and
technical assistance to the Comoros in order to help that
country overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the
Comoros as an island developing country and as one of the
least developed countries,
Noting that the Government of the Comoros has given
priority to the questions of infrastructure, transport and
telecommunications,
Noting also the economic difficulties arising from the
country's scarcity of natural resources, compounded by the
recent drought and cyclones,
Noting further the grave budgetary and balance-of-payments problems facing the Comoros,
Bearing in mind the holding at Moroni, from 2 to 4 July
1984, of the first international solidarity conference for the
development of the Comoros,
Having examined the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 103
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for the
Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by various
Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other organizations to its appeals and those of the
Secretary-General for assistance to the Comoros;
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance
thus far provided continues to fall short of the country's
urgent requirements and that assistance is still urgently
required in order to implement the projects described in
the report of the Secretary-General;
4. Appeals to those States and organizations which participated in the first international solidarity conference for
the development of the Comoros, to put into effect as soon
as possible their declaration of intent;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, programmes and organizations of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial
institutions, to provide the Comoros with assistance to
enable it to cope with its difficult economic situation and
pursue its development goals;
6. Requests the appropriate programmes and organizations of the United Nations system to increase their current programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to
report periodically to him on the steps they have taken
and the resources they have made available to help that
country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
103 A/39/392, sect. IV.
104 Official Records of the General Assemhlr. Thiro·-n,nth Session. P/enan
Meetings, 30th meeting, paras. I 16-157.

(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme offinancial, technical
and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, the regional and other
intergovernmental organizations and international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985,
of the status of the special programme of economic assistance for the Comoros;
(c) To report on the evolution of the economic situation of the Comoros and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special programme of economic
assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/194. Special economic assistance for Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision 1984/
I 06 of IO February 1984, in which the Council requested
the Secretary-General to send an inter-agency mission to
Swaziland to assess that country's priority needs in the
light of the cyclone of January 1984 and its medium-term
and long-term implications for the economy,
Having heard the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Swaziland on 11 October 1984, 104 in
which he expressed appreciation for the assistance rendered by Governments, the United Nations system and
other organizations during the difficult period following
the cyclone,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 105 to which was annexed the report of the inter-agency
mission which visited Swaziland from 30 April to 5 May
1984,
Noting from the report the serious damage to the economic infrastructure of Swaziland and the efforts made by
the Government and people of Swaziland to cope with the
problems of reconstruction,
Taking note of the recommended programme of assistance for Swaziland drawn up by the inter-agency mission,
in consultation with the Government, concerning priority
projects designed to permit the resumption of normal economic activity,
I. Draws attention to the urgent need for international
action to assist the Government and people of Swaziland
in their efforts for reconstruction and rehabilitation;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his prompt action and for the report of the inter-agency
mission on the economic situation of Swaziland and the
additional assistance required by that country to cope with
the problems of reconstruction and rehabilitation;
3. Expresses /Is gratitude to all States and organizations that have provided emergency assistance to Swaziland;
4. Endorses the assessment and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission contained in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
lllS A 391598.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
l4_9

Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to Swaziland, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in his efforts to organize an effective international programme of assistance and to report to him by
mid-1985 on the steps they have taken and the resources
they have made available to help that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations as well as international financial
institutions to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance for Swaziland or,
where one is already in existence, to the expansion of that
programme;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of international
assistance for Swaziland;
(b) To keep the situation regarding assistance to Swaziland under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, the specialized agencies, regional and
other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session
of 1985, of the current status of the special economic
assistance programme for Swaziland;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Swaziland and in organizing and implementing
the programme of assistance for that country in time for
the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its
fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/195. Special economic assistance to Chad
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/214 of 20 December 1983
and its previous resolutions on assistance in the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad, emergency humanitarian assistance to Chad and special economic assistance to that country,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
on special economic assistance to Chad, relating, inter a/ia,
to the economic and financial situation of Chad, the status
of assistance provided for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country and the progress made in organizing and executing the programme of assistance for that
country, 106
Gravely concerned by the unprecedented drought which

is wreaking havoc in Chad at the present time, compounding the already precarious food and health situation
and thus compromising all the country's efforts at reconstruction,
Considering that the drought has occasioned a massive
displacement of population,
Taking note of the appeal of the Secretary-General dated
l November 1984 107 and the numerous appeals launched
I06 A/36/261, A/36/739, A/37/ 125 and Add. L A/3812 I 3 and A/39/392.
sect. III.

by the Government of Chad and governmental and nongovernmental organizations regarding the gravity of the
food and health situation in Chad.
C·ons1dering that Chad is one of the least developed
countries and therefore entitled to the benefits provided
for in the various relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly,
Recognizing the need for emergency humanitarian
assistance to Chad,
Also recognizing the need for assistance in the reconstruction and development of Chad,

Taking note of the intention of the Government of Chad
to organize in 1985, with the assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme, a conference of donors
and contributors of funds, as agreed at the International
Conference on Assistance to Chad, held in November
1982.
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States and governmental and non-governmental organizations which
responded and are continuing to respond generously to the
appeals of the Government of Chad and of the SecretaryGeneral by furnishing assistance to Chad;
2. Further expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to make the international community aware of the difficulties of Chad and to mobilize
assistance for that country;

3. Appeals to the international community to provide
the necessary emergency humanitarian assistance to the
people of Chad who have suffered from the war and the
drought:
4. Renews the request made to States, appropriate
organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and international economic and financial institutions
to contribute to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Chad:
5. Again requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to give all the necessary
assistance to Chad for the preparation and organization of
the conference of donors and contributors of funds, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 38/214;
6. Invites States and governmental and non-governmental organizations to take part in the conference of
donors and contributors of funds and to accord particular
attention to the projects to be presented there with a view
to financing them;
7.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To continue his efforts to organize the special programme of economic assistance for Chad;
(b) To monitor, in close collaboration with the humanitarian agencies concerned, the humanitarian needs, particularly in the areas of food and health, of the people displaced by the war and the drought;

(c) To mobilize special humanitarian assistance for
persons who have suffered as a result of the war and the
drought and for the resettlement of displaced persons;
(d) To keep the situation in Chad under review and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
107 A/39/627; see also Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtr·
n,nth 'ie,swn Plenary Meetings, 4 7th meeting, para. I.
•
•
