5. Urges all States, and in particular the producers
of plastic or sheet explosives, to intensify research into
means of making such explosives more easily detectable, and to co-operate in this endeavour;

International Civil Aviation Organization and other
competent international organizations, an international regime for the marking of plastic or sheet explosives for the purpose of detection.

6. Calls upon all States to share the results of such
research and co-operation with a view to devising, in the

Adopted unanimously at the
2869th meeting.

CENTRAL AMERICA: EFFORTS TOWARDS PEACE

ary 1988 at Alajuela, Costa Rica 88 and on 14 February 1989 at Costa del Sol, El Salvador,89
Aware of the importance which the Central American
Presidents attach to the role of international verification as an.essential component for the implementation
of the above-mentioned instruments, including, in particular, their commitments relating to regional security,
especially non-use of territory to support destabilization of neighbouring countries, and democratization,
especially free and fair elections, as well as to the voluntary demobilization, repatriation or relocation of irregular forces, as agreed in the Costa de) Sol accord of
14 February 1989,
Aware also that the commitments enshrined in the
Guatemala agreement 87 form a harmonious and indivisible whole,
Noting with appreciation the efforts undertaken to
date by the Secretary-General in support of the Central
American peace process, including his assistance in the
establishment of appropriate mechanisms to verify
compliance with the provisions of the Guatemala agreement and of the Joint Declaration adopted by the Central American Presidents at their meeting held in El
Salvador on 14 February 1989,89 and particularly the
Secretary-General's agreement with Nicaragua to deploy a United Nations observer mission to verify the
electoral process,
l. Commends the desire for peace expressed by the
Central American Presidents in signing on 7 August
1987 at Guatemala City the agreement on "Procedures
for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in
Central America" 87 and in the Joint Declarations subsequently signed in pursuance of it;
2. Expresses its firmest support for the Guatemala
agreement and the Joint Declarations;
3. Calls upon the Presidents to continue their efforts to achieve a firm and lasting peace in Central
America through the faithful implementation of the
commitments entered into in the Guatemala agreement
and in the expressions of good will contained in the
Joint Declaration of 14 February 1989;
4. Appeals to all States, in particular to those which
have links with the region and mterests in it, to back the
political will of the Central American countries to comply with the provisions of the Guatemala agreement and
of the Joint Declaration, particularly that regional and
extra-regional Governments which either openly or co-

Decision
At its 2871st meeting, on 27 July 1989, the Council
discussed the item entitled "Central America: efforts
towards peace".

Resolution 637 (1989)
of 27 July 1989

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 530 (1983) of 19 May 1983
and 562 (1985) of 10 May 1985 and General Assembly
resolutions 38/10 of 11 November 1983, 39/4 of 26 October 1984, 41/37 of 18 November 1986, 42/1 of7 October 1987 and 43/24 of 15 November 1988, as well as the
initiative that the Secretary-General of the United Nations undertook on 18 November 1986 together with the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States,
Convinced that the peoples of Central America wish
to achieve a peaceful settlement of their conflicts without outside interference, including support for irregular
forces, with respect for the principles of self-determination and non-intervention while ensuring full respect
for human rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
26 June 1989 submitted in pursuance of Security Council resolutions 530 (1983) and 562 (1985), 86
Recognizing the important contribution of the Contadora Group and its Support Group in favour of peace
in Central America,
Welcoming the agreement on "Procedures for the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central
America" signed at Guatemala City on 7 August 1987
by the Presidents of the Republics of Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua87 as the
manifestation of the will of the peoples of Central
America to achieve peace, democratization, reconciliation, development and justice, in accordance with their
decision to meet the historical challenge of forging a
peaceful destiny for the region,
Welcoming also the subsequent Joint Declarations
issued by the Central American Presidents on 16 Janu86
Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fourth Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1989, document S/20699.
87
Ibid., Forty-second Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1987, document S/19085, annex.

88 Ibid., Forty-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March J9R8, document S/]9447, annex.
89
Ibid., Forty fourth }'rnr, Supplement for January, February and
March 1989, document S/20491, annex.

19

to collect the weapons, materiel and military equipment of members of the Nicaraguan resistance and
to keep them in its custody until the five Presidents
decide where they should be sent. This is not a task
which can be taken on by civilian personnel or the
United Nations no matter who they may be. In the
view of the Secretariat, this task should be entrusted
to military units equipped with defensive weapons.
The launching of such an operation is clearly within
the competence pf the Security Council.
"I must also emphasize, as Secretary-General, that
execution of this task must be envisaged on the basis
of a voluntary handing over of the articles in question.
It is quite clear that. prior to undertaking this task,
we would take every necessary precaution to obtain
the assurance that the resistance was indeed determined to agree to being demobilized. That is why we
have agreed, with the Secretary General of the Organization of American States, to contact the resistance
as soon as possible in order to explain to it how we
interpret the Plan and our role as International Commission, and to hedr what its position is on the issue.
''In the light of these considerations, it would seem
prcmatun.: to ask the Council to take steps to cstah
lish such a force, particularly since I am not in a
position to estimate its needs in personnel and in
equipment. This assessment can only be made after
we have undertaken a technical reconnaissance in the
resistance camps, and we arc not yet assured of having access to them.
"I therefore propose to contact the Council later,
once the conditions described in the present letter
have been met."

vertly supply aid to irregular forces or insurrectional
movements in the area immediately halt such aid, with
the exception of the humanitarian aid that contributes
to the goals of the Costa del Sol accord;
5. Lends its full support to the Secretary-General to
continue his mission of good offices, in consultation
with the Security Council, in support of the Central
American Governments in their effort to achieve the
goals set forth in the Guatemala agreement;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council regularly on the implementation of the
present resolution.
Adop1ed unanimously al rhe
287lsl mecrinf.:.

Decisions

In a letter dated 28 August 1989, 90 the SecretaryGeneral informed the President of the Council as follows:
"The Security Council has examined the agreement reached on 7 August 1989 by the Presidents of
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and
Nicaragua at their meeting at Tela, Honduras, regarding a Joint Plan for the voluntary demobilization,
repatriation or relocation in Nicaragua or third countries of the members of the Nicaraguan resistance
and their families and for assistance for the demobilization of all those involved in armed actions in the
countries of the region when such persons voluntarily
request it. 91 I have since received an official request
dated 14 August 1989, 92 from their five permanent
representatives, for the establishment, with the Secretary General of the Organization of American
States, of an International Support and Verification
Commission, to be set up within 30 days of the signature of the Tela agreement, and entrusted with executing and implementing the Plan.
"At a meeting which took place on 25 August 1989,
at United Nations Headquarters, the Secretary General of the Organization of American States and I
agreed to establish the International Commission as
of 6 September 1989. We wrote that day to the five
heads of State informing them of the decision, and
we also wrote to the five Ministers for Foreign Affairs, in their capacity as Executive Commission of
the Esquipulas II and subsequent agreements, to
make certain comments and to give them certain
details regarding the execution of, and timetable for,
the Plan, and the conditions required for its successful execution.
"The tasks entru3ted to the International Commission comprise several components of interest to various programmes of the Organization and other
agencies of the system. However, the question of
demobilization as such concerns the Security Council
particularly, since it is an operation of a clearly military nature. The International Commission is asked

In a letter dated 20 September 1989, ')J the President
of the Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"l have the honour to inform you that the members
of the Security Council have taken note of your letter
of 28 August 1989 90 concerning the establishment
within the context of the Central American peace
process of the International Support and V crification
Commission, in accordance with the request made by
the five Central American Presidents for United
Nations assistance in the implementation of the
'Joint Plan for the voluntary demobilization, repatriation or relocation in Nicaragua or third countries of
the members of the Nicaraguan resistance and their
families and for assistance for the demobilization ol
all those involved in armed actions in the countries
of the region when such persons voluntarily request
it', which is annexed to the Tela Declaration of 7
August 1989. 94
"The members of the Council note with approval
the steps which you have taken to set up and form the
International Commission and put it mto operation
and welcome with satisfaction your intention to ask
the Council to adopt in due course the measures
needed to establish the military component of the
International Commission.

90 S/20856.
91 Official Records of rhe Securily Council, Forty-fourth Year, Supplement for July, August and Seprember 1989, document S/20778,
appendix I.
92 Ibid., document S/20791.

3

S/20857.
Official Records of rhe Securiry Council, Forty-fourrh Year, Su1,
plcment for ]11/y, A11gu.H and Sep1C1nbcr 1989, document S/2077H,
annex.
"

"

20

4
