General Assembly-Fifth Session

46

428 (V). Statute of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
In view of its resolution 319 A (IV) of 3 December

1949,
1. Adopts the annex to the present resolution, being
the Statute of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees;

2. Calls upon governments to co-operate with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
the performance of his functions concerning refugees
falling under the competence of his Office, especially by :
(a) Becoming parties to international conventions
providing for the protection of refugees, and taking the
necessary steps of implementation under such conventions;

( b) Entering into special agreements with the High
Commissioner for the execution of measures calculated
to improve the situation of refugees and to reduce the
number requiring protection;
( c) Admitting refugees to their territories, not excluding those in the most destitute categories;

( d) Assisting the Iligh Commissioner in his efforts
to promote the voluntary repatriation of refugees;
( e) Promoting the assimilation of refugees, especially by facilitating their naturalization;

(/) Providing refugees with travel and other documents such as would no~mallv be provided to other
aliens by their national authorities, especially documents
which would facilitate their resettlement;

(g) Permitting refugees to transfer their assets and
especially those necessary for their resettlement;
( h) Providing the High Commissioner with information concerning the number and condition of refugees, and laws and regulations concerning them;
3. Requests the Secretary-(;eneral to transmit the
present resolution, together with the annex attached
thereto, also to States non-members of the United Nations, with a view to obtaining their co-operation in its
implementation.

325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
ANNEX

Statute of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
Chapter I
G1,NERAL PROVISIONS

The United Nat ions II ig-h Commissioner for Refugees, acting under the authority of the General Assembly, shall assume the function of providing international
protection, under the auspices of the United Nations to
refugees who fall within the scope of the present Statute
and of seeking permanent solutions for the prohlcm of
refugees by assisting governments and, subject to the
ap~roval of th_e_ governments concerned, private organizations to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of such
refugees, or their assimilation within new national
communities.
l.

ln the exercise of his functions, more particularly when
difficulties arise, and for instance with regard to any controversy concerning the international status of these persons, the I ligh Commissioner shall request the opinion of
an advisory committee on refugees if it is created.
2. The work of the High Commissioner shall he of an
entirely non-political character; it sl1all he humanitarian
and social and shall relate, as a rule, to groups and categories of refugees.
3. The l [ig-h Commissioner shall follow policy directives given him by the General Assembly or the Economic
and Social Council.
4. The Economic and Social Council may decide, after
hearing the views of the High Commissioner on the subjrct, to establish an advisory committee on refugees,
which shall consist of reprcs('ntatives of States Members
and States non-members of the United Nations, to be selected by the Council on the basis of their demonstrated
interest in and devotion to the solution of tll(' refugee
problem.
5. The General Assembly shall review, not later than
at its eighth regular session, the arrangements fo:· the
Office of the High Commissioner ,vit h a view to determining whether the Office should be continued beyond 31
December 1953.
Chapter JI
Fu NCTIONS OF TJIE l lJ(;n COMM ISS!ONER
(,. The cmnpetenCL' of the I !igh Comrnissionn shall
extend to:
A. ( i) /\ny person who has been considered a rdugee
under the :\rrangcmcnts of 12 May 1926 and 30 June 1928
or under tlw Conventions of :.?8 October l q33 and 10 February \C)J8, the Protocol of 14 September \<!3') or the
Constitution oi the International Refugee Organization;
(ii) Any person who, as a result of events occurring
before l January 1951 and owing to well-founded fear of
being persecuted for rc·asons of race, religion, nationality
or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such frar or for reasons
other than 1w1sunal cm1vcnicnce, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former
habitual rcsickncc, is unable or, owing to such fear or for
reasons other than pcrsonal convenience, is unwilling to
rrturn to it.
I )c·cisions as to eligibility taken hy the International
Rcfug-cc Organization during the period of its activities
shall not prevent the status of refugee being accorded to
µersons who fulfil the conditions of the present paragraph;
Thr competrnce of the High Commissioner shall cease
to apply to any person defined in section A above if;
(a) lie has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the country of his nationality; or
(b) Having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily reacquired it; or
(c) lle has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the
protection of the country of his new nationality; or
( d) He has voluntarily re-established himscl f in the
country which he left or outside which he remained owing
to fear of persecution; 01·
(c) Ile can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion with which he has been recognized as a refugee
have ceased to exist, claim grounds other than those of
personal convenience for continuing to refuse to avail
himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.
Reasons of a purely economic character may not be invoked; or

47
Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee
--------------------------------···--------(f) Being a pers~n who has n? national_ity, he can _no
longer, because the circumstances 111 connexion with whi~h
he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist
and he is able to return to the country of his former
habitual residence, cbim grounds other than those of personal convenience for continuing to refuse to return to
that country;
B Anv other nerson who is outside the country of his
nati~nality or, if he has no nationality, the country of his
former habitual residence, because he has or had wellfounded fear of persecution by reason of his race, religion,
nationality or political opinion and is unahle or, hccatJSe
of such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the_ prot_ection of the government of the country of l1is nat10naht:y,
or, if he has no nationality, to return to the country of !us
former habitual residence.
7. Provided that the competence of the High Commissioner as defined in paragraph 6 above shall not extend to
a person:
(a) Who is a national of more than one country unlc~s

he satisfies the provisions of the precedmg parag-raph m
relation to each of the countries of which hr is a national; or
( b) \Vl10 is recognized by the competent authorities_ of
the country in which he has taken residence as havmg
the rights and obligations which arc :ittachcd to the possession of the nationality of that country; or
( c) Who continues to receive from other organs or
agencies of the United Nat ions protection or assistance; or
( d) In respect of whom there are serious reasons for
considering that he has committed a crime covered by the
provisions of treaties of extradition or a crime mentioned
in article VI of the London Charter of the International
Military Tribunal or by the provisions of article 14, paragraph 2, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.a
8. The High Commissioner shall provide for the protection of refugees falling under the competence of his
Office by:

(a) Promoting the conclusion and ratification of international conventions for the protection of refugees,
supervising their application and proposing amendments
thereto;

(b) Promoting through special agreements with governments the execution of any measures calculated to improve the situation of refugees and to reduce the number
requiring protection;
( c) Assisting governmental and private efforts to promote voluntary repatriation or assimilation within new
national communities;
( d) Promoting the admission of refugees, not excluding those in the most destitute categories, to the territories
of States;

(e) Endeavouring to obtain permission for refugees to
transfer their assets and especially those necessary for
their resettlement;

(f) Obtaining from governments information concerniI?g ~he number and conditions of refugees in their terntones and the laws and regulations concerning them;
(.q) Keeping in close touch with the governments and
inter-governmental organizations concerned;

_(h) Estab_lishin1; contact in such manner as he may
thmk_best with private organizations dealing with refugee
quest10ns;
• See resolution 217 A (III).

( i) Facilitating the co-ordination of the effo'.ts of private oq.;-an1zations concerned with the welfare ot refugees.
<J. The l ligh Commissioner shall _engage in such additional act i vi t ics, incl11ding rcpatna\1011 and i:esettlci:1e1_1t,
as the Gn1l'r;tl 1\sscmhly may determine, witlun the limits
of tl1c rcs"urccs placed at his disposal.

JO. The I I igh Commissioner shall administe_r any
fun,b. in1Llic or pri\'ate,_ which he receives for assist_ance
to rcfug,, ,. ancl shall d1,tnhute them among the private
and, a, :q,propriatc, public agencies which he deems best
qualiii,•,: I<> acln,ini,t,r such assistance.

The l!igh Commissioner may reject any offers which
he cl.cws nut consider a[Jpropnate or which cannot be
utilized.
The Iligh Commissionn shall not appeal t? governments for funds or make a general appeal, without the
prior app,·m·al of the Ccncral Assembly.
The I l igh Commissioner _shall ii_1clmlc in his annual report a statl'ment of his activities 111 this field.
11. The lI igh Commissioner shall he entitled to presei:it
his views he fore the G<'neral .\sscmbly, the Economic
and S,,cial Council arnl Lheir suhsi<liary bodies.

Thr 1 Iigh Commissionrr sh°:ll repo_rt annuaHy to the
General ,\sscmblv through the Economic and Soc1a_l Council; his rqiort sl;all be consi,krccl as a separate item on
the a~cncl;1 of the (~cneral 1\ssl'mbly.
12. Tlic I I igh Commissioner may invite the co-operation of th<" various specialized agencies.
Chaf>lcr I I I
ORGANIZATION AND Fi:--.ANCJ'.o,

13. The High Commissioner shall be elected by the
General 1\sscmbly 011 the nomination of the SecretaryGeneral. The terms of appointment of the High Commissioner shall be proposed by the Secretary-General '.111? approved by the General Assembly. The High Comm1ss1oner
shall he elected for a term of three years, from l January
1951.
14 The High Commissioner shall appoint, for the same
term·, a Deputy lligh Commissioner of a nationality other
than his nwn.

15. (a) Within the limits of the budgetary appropri_ations provided, the staff of the Office of the High_ Commissioner shall be appointed by the High Comrniss10!1cr and
shall be responsible to him in the exercise of their functions.
( b) Such staff shall he chosen from person_s ?evoted
to the purposes of the Office of the High Comm1ss10ner.

( c) Their conditions of employment shall be those provided under the staff regulations adopted by the General
Assembly and the rules promulgated ,hereunder by the
Secretary-General.
( d) Provision may also be made t~ permit the employment of personnel without compensation.

16. The High Commissioner shall consult the governments of the countries of residence of refugees as to the
need for appointing representatives therein. I~ any country recognizing such need, there may be appomted a representative approved by the government of that _country.
Subject to the foregoing, the same representative may
serve in more than one country.
17. The High Commissioner and the Secretary-General shall make appropriate arrangements for liaison and
consultation on matters of mutual interest.

General Assembly-Fifth Session

48

18. The Secretary-General shall provide the High
Commissioner with all necessary facilities within budgetary limitations.
19. The Office of the High Commissioner shall be
located in Geneva, Switzerland.
20. The Office of the High Commissioner shall be
financed under the budget of the United Nations. Unless
the General Assembly subsequently decides otherwise,
no expenditure, other than administrative expenditures
relating to the funci:ioning of the Office of the High Commissioner, shall be borne on the budget of the United
Nations, and all other expenditures relating to the activities of the High Commissioner shall be financed by voluntary contributions.
21. The administration of the Office of the High Commissioner shall be subject to the Financial Regulations of
the United Nations and to the financial rules promulgated
thereunder by the Secretary-General.
22. Transactions relating to the High Commissioner's
funds shall be subject to audit by the United Nations
Board of Auditors, provided that the Board may accept
audited accounts from the agencies to which funds have
been allocated. Administrative arrangements for the custody of such funds and their allocation shall be agreed
between the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General in accordance with the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations and rules promulgated thereunder by the
Secretary-General.

*

* *
In accordance with the terms of the above Statute, the
General Assembly at its 325th plenary meeting on 14
December 1950, on the nomination of the Secretary-General, elected by secret ballot Mr. G. f. van Heuven Goedhart (Netherlands) to the office of United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

429 (V).

Draft Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by its resolution 362 ( IV) of 22
October 1949, it approved the recommendation of the
Special Committee on Methods and Procedures that
the General Assembly might decide to convene a conference ~f plenipotentiaries to study, negotiate, draft,
and possibly sign conventions that had been drawn up
by conferences in which all Members of the United
Nations had not been invited to take part,

Considering the desirability of enabling the governments of States not Members of the United Nations to
participate in the final stages of the drafting of the Convention18 relating to the Status of Refugees, as prepared
by the Ad H oc Committee on Refugees and Stateless
Persons and the Economic and Social Council,
1. Decides to convene in Geneva a conference of
plenipotentiaries to complete the drafting of and to sign
both the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the Protocol1° relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons;

2. Recommends to governments participating in the
conference to take into consideration the draft Conven18 See documents E/1850-E/AC.32/8 and E;l850-E/AC.32/
8/Annex.
19
See document E/1850-E/AC.32/8.

tion submitted by the Economic and Social Council and,
in particular, the text of the definition of the term
"refugee" as set forth in the annex hereto;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the steps
necessary for the convening of such a conference at the
earliest possible opportunity;

4. Instructs the Secretary-General to invite the
governments of all States, both Members and non-members of the United Nations, to attend the said conference
of plenipotentiaries;

5. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with the provisions
of the Statute of his Office, to participate in the work
of the Conference.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
ANNEX

Draft Convention relating to ~
Statu11 of Refugeesa.
Chapter I
ARTICLE 1

A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the
term "refugee" shall apply to any person who:
(1) Since 1 August 1914 has been considered a refugee under the Arrangements of 12 May 1926 and 30
June 1928 or under the Conventions of 28 October 1933
and 10 February 1938, the Protocol of 14 September 1939
or the Constitution of the International Refugee Organization;
Decisions as to eligibility taken by the International
Refugee Organization during the period of its activities
shall not prevent the status of refugee being accorded to
persons who fulfil the conditions of paragraph 2 of the
present article;
( 2) As a result of events occurring before 1 January
1951, and owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted
for reasons of race, religion, nationality or political
opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
unable or, owing to such fear or for reasons other than
personal convenience, is unwilling to avail himself of the
protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
habitual residence, is unable or, owing to such fear or for
reasons other than personal convenience, is unwilling to
return to it;
In the case of a person who has more than one nationality, the above term "the country of his nationality"
shall mean any of the countries of which he is a national,
and a person shall not be deemed to be lacking the protection of the country of his nationality if, without any valid
reason based on well-founded fear, he has not availed
himself of the protection of one of the countries of which
he is a national.
B. The present Convention shall cease to apply to any
person falling under the terms of section A if:
( 1) He has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the country of his nationality; or
(2) Having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily
re-acquired it; or
a Text of chapter I, article 1, as amended by the General Assembly at its 325th plenary meeting.
