56

General A.ssembly-Thirtieth Session

2. Expresses the hope that the United Nations University will, under tbe joint sponsorship of tbe United
Nations and tbe United Nations Educational, Scientilfic
and Cultural Organization, continue to grow as an important and autonomous organ of the General Assembly cbarged witb tbe responsibility for scbolarly inquiry, on a truly global basis, into urgent problems
facing mankind as a wbole;
3. Encourages the United Nations University to pursue its work within the tbree broad areas of priority
identified in paragrapb 19 of the report of tbe Council
of the University so as to take due account, inter alia,
of tbe issues mentioned by the pertinent resolutions of
tbe General Assembly;
4. Urges tbe United Nations Un_iversity to embark
on its full activities as soon as possible and establisb
appropriate links witb interested and qualified institutions all over the world, particularly tbose of developing countries, so as to respond to tbe mounting expectations of the world university, scientific and otber
intellectual communities;
5. Stresses tbe need for full co-operation and coordination, witbin tbe framework establisbyq by tbe
Charter of tbe United Nations for co-ordinat1ng policíes and activities in tbe economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian fields, between the United Nations University and tbe appropriate agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system, in tbe elaboration of tbe programmes of the University witb a view to avoiding
duplication of effort and permitting utilization of the
available expertise in the most effective and economical
manner;
6. Appeals to all Member States to give financia! and
otber support to the United Nations University in tbe
form of grants to its Endowment Fund and, wbere possible, for specific programmes, and to co-operate fully
towards tbe realization of tbe University's global network of institutions;
7. Requests tbe Secretary-General, in co-operation
• with tbe Rector of tbe United Nations University, tbe
Council of tbe University and tbe Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, furtber to intensify his efforts to raise more
funds for the University from Governments and nongovernmental sburces, including foundations, universities and individuals, in accordance witb tbe Cbarter of
tbe University, and to submit a report to tbe General
Assembly at its tbirty-first session on tbe results of bis
efforts, together with tbe annual report of tbe Council
of tbe University.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3440 (XXX). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, 3152 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973
and 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
Recalling also section 11, paragrapb 14, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1972 (LIX) of 30 July 1975,
Recognizing tbat natural disasters constitute a development problem of great magnitude requiring maximum
use of available resources for the prevention and mitigation of such calamities,

Aware that the Office of tbe United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, in addition to being strengthened
as provided for in General Assembly resolution 3243
(XXIX), sbould be given the requisite means to take
more effective and continuing action against disasters,
including emergency relief, pre-disaster planning and
promotion of disaster prevention activities,
Taking note with satisfaction of the reports of the
Secretary-General concerning the activities of the Office
of tbe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator42
and tbe statement made before the Second Committee
by tbe Co-ordinator on tbe activities of bis Office, 43
as well as tbe related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44
I. Decides to expand tbe trust fund established under its resolution 3243 (XXIX) to strengthen the
capability of the Office of tbe United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, so as to fulfil the following additional purposes:
(a) To provide instantly emergency assistance for
countries stricken by natural disasters or otber disaster
situations;
.
( b) To provide, as an 1nterim measure and pending
review at a future date of alternative sources of financing, including the United Nations Development Programme, tecbnical assistance to Governments far tbe
elaboration of national plans for natural disaster prevention and preparedness;
2. Requests tbe Secretary-General to establisb an
honorary committee, composed of distinguished persons particularly interested in and concerned witb disaster relief, to assist tbe Secretary-General in mobilizing financial resources for disaster-related activities and
to advise and counsel bim in tbis regard;
3. lnvites all States to make voluntary contributions
to tbe expanded trust fund in order to permit implementation of effective, significant and continuing action by
tbe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to help
disaster-stricken and disaster-prone countries;
4. Further invites all States to encourage the setting up of national fund-raising committees to promote
voluntary contributions for disaster-related activities,
bearing in mind tbe co-ordinating role of tbe Office of
tbe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator;
5. Requests tbe United Nations organs and other
bodies concerned to co-operate with tbe Office of tbe
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in tbe
formulation of an intemational strategy for disaster prevention and, in due time, to assist the Office in the dissemination of tbe results achieved;
6. Requests the. Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session and
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3441 (XXX),

Assistance to the drought-stricken
areas of Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Noting with deep concern the persistence of drought
in many parts of Ethiopia,
42 A/ 10079 and Corr .1 and Add. l.
43 Of!icial Records of the General Assembly

Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1691st meeting, parns'. 2-6.
44 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 8A (A/10008/
Add.1-28), document A/10008/Add.5.

Reeolutioos adopted on the report8 of the Second Comnúttee

Recognizing the extremely adverse impact of the
drought on the national resources of Ethiopia and on
that country's economic and social development,
T aking note of the measures introduced by the Government of Ethiopia to alleviate the effects of the
drought,
Recalling its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
particularly section X thereof,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1833 (LVI) of 8 May 1974, by which the Council called upon the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to respond to the request of the Government
of Ethiopia with regard to the immediate, medium-term
and long-term needs of the drought-stricken regions,
resolution 1876 (LVII) of 16 July 1974, by which the
Council invited all Member States, international organizations and voluntary agencies to continue to give their
fullest support and assistance to the endeavours in
mobilizing emergency relief assistance, and Council
resolution 1971 (LIX) of 30 July 1975,
Noting with appreciation the assistance given to the
drought-stricken regions of Ethiopia by Governments
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, as well as the efforts made so far by the Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and
other organizations of the United Nations system towards the implementation of the provisions of Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI) and 1876
(LVII),
l. Urges the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to continue to implement vigorously fue provisions of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1833 (LVI), 1876 (LVII) and 1971 (LIX);
2. Appeals to the Governments of all Member States
and to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify their assistance to the droughtstricken regions of Ethiopia;
3. Invites the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixtieth session and
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on
the progress made in the implementation of all relevant
resolutions regarding this matter.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3442 (XXX).

Economic co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3177 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 and 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974
on economic co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New Intemational Economic Order,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Noting the Action Programme for Economic Cooperation among Non-Aligned and Other Developing
Countries, adopted by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Georgetown
from 8 to 12 Augi1st 1972, and reaffirmed at the Fourth
Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-

57

Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973,41>
Taking account of the relevant decisions of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lima from 25 to 30 August 1975,
on the subject of economic co-operation among developing countries, including resolution X dealing with the
establishment of a Solidarity Fund for Economic and
Social Development in the Non-Aligned Countries, 46
Recognizing the increasing importance of programmes of economic co-operation among developing
countries as a strategy of development based on the
principie of·collective self-reliance,
Minaful of the determination of the developing countries to strengthen their unity and capacity far collective action with a view to ensuring their complete
sovereignty,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;47
·
2. Endorses Trade and Development Board resolution 128 (S-VI) of 21 March 1975 on co-operation
among developing countries; 48
3. Urges the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
carrying out his responsibilities under the provisions of
Trade and Development Board resolution 128 (S-VI),
to take account of relevant work being done elsewhere
on economic co-operation among developing countries
and in particular under the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation among Non-Aligned and Other
Developing Countries;
4. Urges also the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to provide,
in accordance with paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 3177 (XXVIII) and the provisions of the
present resolution, continuing support to the promotion
of economic co-operation among developing countries,
including, ínter alia:
(a) Co-operation in the utilization of know-how,
skills, natural resources, technology and funds available within the developing countries for the promotion
of investments in industry, agriculture, transport and
communications;
(b) Trade liberalization measures, including payments and clearing arrangements covering prirnary
commodities, manufactured goods and services such
as banking, shipping, insurance and reinsurance;
(e) Transfer of technology;
5. Urges further that increased emphasis be placed
on programmes of economic co-operation among developing countries, not only at the regional and sui.regional level but also at the interregional level;
·,
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the ef.,.
ficient co-ordination of activities within the United
Nations system designed to promote economic cooperation among developing countries by, inter alía:
{a) Including in the medium-term plan and programme budget of the United Nations an intersectoral
presentation of the totality of actions and activities
planned and programmed for implementing the relevant resolutions pertaining to economic co-operation
among developing countries;
45 See A/9330 and Corr.l.

46SeeA/10217 and Corr.1, annex l.

47 A/ 10094 and Add.1.
48

•
Official Records of the Gene,-al Assembly, Thirtieth Suswn, Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/Rev.1) part one, annex L
