S/PV.8667

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8667th meeting

Monday, 18 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Allen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-37071 (E)
*1937071*

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Libya.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, and Ms. Rida Al Tubuly, Co-Founder
and Director of Together We Build It.
Mr. Salamé is joining this meeting via videoteleconference from Tunis.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.

18/11/2019

evident. To fill gaps in manpower, there is growing
involvement of mercenaries and fighters from
foreign private military companies. The insertion
of these experienced fighters has naturally led to an
intensification in the violence. I am gravely worried
by the expansion of artillery fire northwards into the
city. In recent days, the number of civilians killed and
injured has been rising and many families are leaving
the areas impacted by the shelling. A further escalation
of ground fighting in these densely populated areas
would lead to disastrous humanitarian consequences.
The use of air power and precision technology has
become a dominant feature of an otherwise low-intensity
conflict the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) estimates the total number of drone strikes
in support of Libyan National Army (LNA) forces at
well above 800 since the beginning of the conflict.
The total number of drone strikes in support of the
Government of National Accord is estimated at around
240. It is our judgment that the drone infrastructure
and operations are facilitated by parties external to the
conflict There were also several incidents of precision
airstrikes conducted by unknown aircraft between
September and November. In addition, the increasing
use of unguided bombs in airstrikes conducted by LNA
forces in populated areas of Tripoli caused an increase
in the number of civilian casualties.

Mr. Salamé: Seven and half months into the conflict
in Libya, and given the recent dangerous escalation of
hostilities in and around Tripoli, we find ourselves ever
more in a race against time to reach a peaceful solution
that would spare many lives. I will provide the Council
with an update on the security situation before turning
to political developments.

The violence is facilitated by Libya’s plethora of
Al-Qadhafi-era arms, as well as by continued shipments
of war materiel brought into the country in breach of the
arms embargo. Reports indicate that everything from
spare parts for fighter aircraft to tanks, from bullets
to precision missiles, are being brought into Libya in
support of different groups involved in the fighting.

I am angry and sad to report that today there was
another mass civilian casualty event. A biscuit factory
in the Wadi Rabia neighbourhood of Tripoli was hit by
an air strike, according to early information. The attack
has caused what we currently believe to be 10 fatalities
and over 35 injuries. It appears that the majority of the
dead were migrants, but that at least two were Libyans.
Regardless of whether the attack deliberately targeted
the factory or was an indiscriminate attack, it may
constitute a war crime. We are working to verify the
facts and will update the Council accordingly.

Mitiga airport remains closed. It has been more
than two and a half months now that this key outlet for
the civilian population of Tripoli and western Libya
has been forced shut due to indiscriminate shelling
and airstrikes. Misrata airport, a small mixed civilianmilitary facility located 250 kilometres east of Tripoli,
is now the only exit point for Libyans in the west of the
country — who comprise the majority of the country’s
population — to travel abroad by air. Misrata airport,
too, has been targeted at least 11 times by precision
airstrikes since early September.

Beyond today’s tragedy, the front lines in southern
Tripoli are highly fluid. The dangers and direct
consequences of foreign interference are increasingly

Mitiga airport in Tripoli needs to reopen as soon as
possible. Together with the Ministers of the Interior and
Transportation of the Government of National Accord,

2/16

19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

I am working on a number of practical steps to achieve
that goal, including the clear delineation between the
civilian and military sections of the airport, as well as the
establishment of a dedicated United Nations terminal.
I am determined to see the end of this debilitating
conflict. My colleagues at UNSMIL and I are fully
engaged and have been working tirelessly with Libyans
and international partners to prepare for the second and
third steps of the initiative I announced on 29 July (see
S/PV.8588). I would like to thank the Government of
Germany for its work in preparing for an international
summit. Three senior officials meetings have already
taken place and there will be a crucial fourth meeting
on Wednesday 20 November.
In their most recent discussion on 21 October,
participants worked to agree a draft communiqué that
outlines six baskets of activities necessary to end the
conflict in Libya. Those six baskets include the need
for the return to the Libyan-led political process and
accompanying economic reform; a ceasefire; the
implementation of the arms embargo and security
reform; and the upholding of international human rights
and humanitarian law. Putting the implementation
of the arms embargo at the heart of international
commitments is essential in practical terms and as a
message to the Libyan people.
UNSMIL has worked to substantiate an operational
annex to the draft communiqué. The annex has two
purposes. It serves to outline the commitments that the
members of the Berlin group have made to ending the
conflict and advancing the political process through
tangible actions that are benchmarked by indicators,
which outline the responsibilities for those actions. It
also serves as the bridge to the intra-Libyan political
dialogue, which will be launched under United Nations
auspices immediately following the Berlin summit.
One of the tangible outcomes of the international
summit would be the establishment of a follow-up
committee that would work with UNSMIL to implement
the outcomes agreed in the final communiqué.
Such a committee would play a fundamental role
in terms of ensuring respect for a ceasefire and the
better implementation of the arms embargo. It would
contribute to supporting a return to the political process,
the implementation of agreed economic and financial
reforms and practical ways and means to ensure that
there is no impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law. The committee would also support

S/PV. 8667

the necessary disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process for groups across the country.
I have been actively engaged with Member States
on a bilateral basis. I was, in particular, grateful for
the visit to Libya of Mr. Heiko Maas, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, to brief Prime Minister
Serraj on the Berlin process on 27 October. I also
travelled to Cairo last week for very positive meetings
with Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and other high-level officials.
International unity and agreement are essential to
stopping the violence and pursuing the resolution of the
crisis through political dialogue.
I have high hopes that the Berlin process will end in
success. Let me stress once more that the endorsement
of the Berlin communiqué does not mean the end of
the process, but rather marks the beginning of the
most important part of our journey to put Libya back
on the path to peace and stability. In support of the
Berlin process, I have engaged extensively with Prime
Minister Serraj and the commanders of the Government
of National Accord forces. I have also met with General
Haftar and politicians who support him. There is scope
for agreement on ending the conflict and a basis for
returning to the political process.
UNSMIL has also engaged in extensive outreach to
Libyan constituencies, including in the diaspora. These
meetings have involved commanders of units engaged in
the fighting, their civilian representatives and political
constituencies from across the country. The anger and
frustration at the conflict and the strong desire for it to
end emerged clearly from these discussions.
I am pleased to report that efforts continue to
support the political process. The Egyptian Government
has been working with members of the House of
Representatives to try to unify that body. As a group of
western members continues to meet independently in
Tripoli, we are in permanent contact with the various
factions in the House of Representatives and have been
encouraging them to maintain the integrity of their
assembly. Partner organizations have also held secondtrack consultations, in which participants have again
emphasized their desire for a peaceful resolution to the
conflict and proposed ideas for a way forward. These
are all positive developments that reflect a will and a
commitment to ending the conflict and returning to the
political track to end the crisis in the country.

19-370713/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

In parallel with our efforts at the national level, we
also continue to work directly with Libyan communities.
To address the polarization in the country, we have now
hosted two workshops to stem the incitement of and
the use of hateful rhetoric in the media. The workshops
have brought together journalists, editors and social
media activists, as well as instructors in human rights
and representatives of social media platforms. Our
ultimate goal is to conclude a code of conduct for the
media in Libya.
At the grass-roots level, in mid-October we held the
last of a series of three events to support local mediators.
Over 120 Libyans — including 23 women — attended
those meetings, the aim of which was to establish a
national network of mediators that would include tribal
leaders, elders, representatives of civil society, youth
and women activists, academics and businesspeople,
all of whom enjoy the credibility and respect of their
various constituencies.
Municipal elections remain on hold following
a court ruling in June that cancelled the electoral
regulation administering the elections. It is a positive
reflection of the democratic spirit in Libya that many
mayors are nevertheless requesting to renew the
expired mandate of their councils by way of elections.
I recently met with the chairperson of the Central
Committee for Municipal Council Elections, who
assured me of the readiness of the Committee to resume
municipal elections once the legal basis is restored. On
4 November, the Sabha Court of First Instance validated
the results of the municipal elections in Sabha that
took place on 27 April. While another legal challenge
against the results remains pending and while the
petitioner has announced that the validation ruling will
be appealed to the Supreme Court, this is nevertheless a
welcome and important development for the largest city
in southern Libya. In northern Libya, in Sirte, United
Nations agencies launched a project to support youth
and adolescents in becoming active agents of change
and peace. This is a welcome first effort to implement
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security in
the Libyan context.
Let me take this opportunity to raise once again
the case of Ms. Siham Sergewa, a member of the House
of Representatives who was abducted from her home
on 17 July. For over four months, authorities in the
east have been unable to produce information about
the fate of that woman legislator and outspoken rights
activist. Ms. Sergewa’s fate is part of a larger pattern
4/16

18/11/2019

of violence against women across the country. The
Mission is documenting instances of killing and forced
disappearances, including the case of a 70-year-old
Libyan woman who was abducted from her home in
Benghazi after she was accused of practicing witchcraft.
In addition, both detained and non-detained women
migrants and refugees in Libya are at risk of rape and
other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation and forced prostitution.
On a positive note, I am pleased to report that
Libyan women have been were recognized for their
peacebuilding efforts. On 16 October, the BBC named
Ms. Rida Al Tubuly — a peace campaigner and the
Co-Founder and Director of the Together We Build It
organization, and whom the Council will have a chance
to hear from today — one of the 100 most influential
women of 2019.
In Tripoli, the effects of the conflict continue to
impact the civilian population. More than 200 civilians
have been killed and more than 128,000 people have
fled their homes since the conflict began on 4 April.
More than 135,000 civilians remain in front-line areas,
and an additional 270,000 people live in areas directly
affected by conflict. Since the beginning of 2019,
violence in Libya has had a devastating impact on
health care in the country; 60 attacks against healthcare facilities, medical personnel, and ambulances have
been registered. We have observed a clear pattern of
precision air strikes targeting the medical facilities of
Government of National Accord forces. Intentionally
directing attacks against medical facilities and
personnel, as well as the wilful killing or harming of
sick or wounded people, may constitute war crimes.
Migrants and refugees continue to be at risk of
unlawful killings, torture and other ill-treatment;
arbitrary detention and unlawful deprivation of liberty;
rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based
violence; slavery and forced labour; and extortion
and exploitation. Serious concerns also continue with
regard to the transfer of migrants intercepted at sea
by the Libyan Coast Guard to official and unofficial
detention centres, including to the Zawiya detention
centre and the Tajoura detention centre, which the
authorities reported on 1 August was to be closed.
A health-care sector assessment conducted in
October 2019 revealed a sharp increase in unmet health
needs, particularly for women and girls. More than
24 per cent of health-care facilities are closed owing
19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

to the conflict, electricity cuts or structural damage,
and services are interrupted in many other health-care
facilities. Children are unable to reach schools, dozens
of which have been destroyed. Nearly 30 more schools
are being used as shelters for displaced persons.
The United Nations and its humanitarian
partners have reached more than 310,000 people with
humanitarian assistance this year. Unfortunately, the
humanitarian needs exceed the means at our disposal.
To date, less than half of the appeal for $202 million
under the Libya humanitarian response plan has been
funded. I encourage donors to help us shrink the
funding gap.
In southern Libya, the United Nations country team
continues to support the Ahali population displaced
from Murzuq, very few of whose members have
returned to their homes. UNSMIL has continued to meet
with Ahali and Tebu leaders to resolve the underlying
grievances between the communities and enable the
safe and dignified return of the Ahali population.
I regret to inform the Council that there are no
new developments in my appeal for more information
regarding the 10 August attack, which killed three
United Nations staff members and severely injured
two others. A board of inquiry sent from Headquarters
arrived some days ago, and I call on all Libyan parties
to cooperate positively with that body. Our two injured
staff members continue to recover. We are committed
to remaining in Libya to serve the Libyan people.
It is somewhat of a cliché to say that the weeks
ahead will be critical, but once again it is true for Libya.
External investment in the conflict risks surpassing
the amount of national involvement, taking control of
Libya’s future away from the Libyans and placing it in
the hands of foreign parties. Once invited in, foreign
intervention is the guest that settles in and seizes
control of the house.
It is in the interests of all Libyans to reject outside
interference in their country’s affairs, and I look to
them for their support in calling for external actors to
adhere to the arms embargo and commit tangibly to
ending the conflict on the ground before it is too late.
Ending the conflict and agreeing to the way forward
is a realistic prospect. The parties are known. The
outlines of the agreement are known. Options for a
temporary and longer-term constitutional framework
exist. Electoral legislation has been produced before. It
is all eminently possible.

S/PV. 8667

All that is needed now is for the international
community to come together to provide the necessary
umbrella under which the Libyan parties themselves
can join hands to end the conflict and resume dialogue.
The United Nations is and will remain in Libya to
support the Libyan people on their journey.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al Tubuly.
Ms. Al Tubuly: My name is Rida Ahmed Al Tubuly.
I am honoured and privileged to be speaking before
the Security Council today. I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation and providing me with this opportunity.
I would like to stress that this privilege was
not something that was granted to me by default. I
believe that I earned this opportunity after a lengthy
struggle for my rights as a Libyan woman. My fight
for my rights was first kick-started by my late father,
who courageously resisted the social norms of 1980s
Libya. He encouraged me to continue my education
despite the criticism that he received from his peers at
the time, who were generally doubtful of the value of
women’s education.
He always told me that the important thing is to be
independent. Because of him, I not only continued my
education, but I went on to become a university professor,
holding a master’s degree and doctorate in clinical
pharmacology and a master’s degree in international
human rights law. In fact, the right to education was
given to all Libyans under the Constitution in 1951, and
asserting the right of women to education enabled many
girls, who were even older than primary-school age, to
attend school.
I remember that, when I was eight years old, I shared
a desk with a girl who was double my age — 16 years
old — at that time. The girl was allowed to go to school
by her parents only because the Government at that
time made the effort to encourage girls’ education. This
story is not about personal achievements or a historical
discussion. This story provides the perfect example
to show that Libyans have the potential to progress in
women’s empowerment, gender equality and all other
aspects of life if decision-makers make enough efforts
to facilitate and lead such progress.
We all know that social changes are usually led
by political changes. Unfortunately, at this stage,
Libya is going through an unconventional political
process. However, ordinary Libyans and Libyan

19-370715/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

decision-makers are not the only actors in the political
process. The international community, especially the
United Nations, can be considered as the main mediator
of the current process.
Being Director and Co-Founder of Together We
Build It, which was established in Libya in 2011, has
given me the capacity to take part in advocacy efforts
and campaigns advocating for the role of women in the
formal peace process. We are often told by international
decision-makers that the reason women are excluded
from the formal peace process is because Libyan actors
are against women’s political participation and that, if
we want to ensure that Libyan women have a seat at the
table, then we need to place internal pressure on the
national decision-makers. But that begs the following
question: If there are no means for ordinary Libyans to
take part in the political process, then how will we be
able to change such things on the ground?
Today, the Council might have expected me to
speak only of women in Libya and the amazing work
that they are doing on the ground, and to finish my
statement by delivering recommendations on how to
support Libyan women and their role in peace building.
In fact, I want to talk about the power of the people, of
which Libyan women and youth constitute the majority.
Since 2014, after the last parliamentarian elections in
Libya, ordinary citizens were completely excluded
from the political process. Such exclusion is not only
the fault of Libyan actors, but it is also part of the
responsibility of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) and other international community
actors that are leading and facilitating the current
political process in Libya.
Nevertheless, if elections are not possible, then
UNSMIL and the international community must be
creative and innovative on how to facilitate and lead
a political process that is inclusive of the general
public and both genders. For example, after four
years of exclusion, last year UNSMIL opened up the
political process to ordinary Libyans by conducting
nationwide consultations.
If one has a political conversation with ordinary
Libyans in the street, they will say that their voices do
not matter to the international community. All that is
important is what the international community is saying
and doing to help support and build peace in Libya.
When we interact with members of the international
community, they often say that the conflict in Libya
6/16

18/11/2019

is an internal issue, and therefore that Libyans should
come together to build peace and end this war. We fully
agree, and we have been doing just that. Women and
young people have been doing it, but the international
community has not taken our efforts seriously. In
the name of preventive diplomacy, State-building
and peacebuilding, the international community
supported troublemakers instead of peacebuilders. The
international community gave power and legitimacy to
a violent minority instead of empowering the peaceful
majority. These days, unfortunately, some members of
the international community appear to be turning a blind
eye by allowing a flood of weapons and ammunition to
reach violent groups.
Neville Chamberlain once said, “In war, whichever
side may call itself the victor, there are no winners, but
all are losers”, and that certainly applies in the case of
Libya. The numbers of the dead and injured are rising
every day, not only on the battlefields and in areas
where clashes take place but also on the political and
peaceful activity front. Abductions and assassinations
have been rising since the Libyan civil war began, with
two prominent examples being the assassination of
Salwa Bugaighis and more recently the abduction of
Siham Sergewa, whose fate is still uncertain. The fact is
that the main losers in this conflict are the people who
are excluded from the peace and political negotiations
and have no say in what their dream country should
look like.
In a post made two days ago on Facebook, a friend
of mine says,
“It has been eight months since I left my home.
I miss every detail of my house so much. It hurts
that we did not leave it voluntarily, but were rather
forced to quickly escape an inevitable death. When
the road to your home becomes deadly, you can no
longer visit or see it except via online satellite maps.
The latest satellite photos showed that our car had
also been stolen. We have finally been morally and
materially depleted.”
This is so painful. If UNSMIL and the international
community are serious about bringing peace to Libya,
they must listen ordinary Libyans, and empower and
give legitimacy to people who do not set conditions for
peace based on their personal and political interests.
The international community and UNSMIL, which
are mandated to facilitate the peacebuilding process,
must redesign the negotiating table, first in order to
19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

redistribute power, secondly to redefine power and
thirdly to make power gender-sensitive. But how do we
redesign the table to make it inclusive? That question
has actually been answered by the Security Council
in its resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), and in
subsequent resolutions. That is the Council’s mandate.
When I talked about the 1951 Constitution and girls’
education, earlier in my statement, the Government
acted on it and Libyan parents did not reject girls’
education. On the contrary, many families sent their
daughters to school. The same could apply now. If the
Council implements resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250
(2015), we do not think that the Libyan people will
reject women’s inclusion.
The role of the United Nations and the international
community in Libya is not only important but
life-changing. I call on the Security Council to take
the necessary decisions to stop the flow of arms to
Libya, which in turn will definitely stop the war, and to
support the peace process and build stability in Libya.
Libya has reached a situation where what the Council
does and says, and how it interacts with national and
local actors, really matters. For us Libyans, working
for peacebuilding is not a choice. But for the Council
it is. And today the Council has to make a choice. The
question is, will it make the right choice and support the
peaceful majority in Libya? Will Council members, as
members of the international community, stand strong
together against any actor who supports violence in
Libya? When the Council reaches a decision, I ask
it to remember the people on the ground, the Libyan
families who have left their homes and the activists who
continue to die. We want the international community
to help ensure that Libya can return to its golden age
through support to our country’s progress.
The President: I thank Ms. Al Tubuly for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his briefing, and to assure him of our
full support. We also thank Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for her
briefing and welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Libya.

S/PV. 8667

Today I will focus on two issues — first,
developments on the ground and on the political front,
and secondly, humanitarian developments. With regard
to political developments, we reiterate our support
for the three-step proposal announced by Special
Representative Salamé at the end of July (see S/PV.8588).
The first step was realized through the Libyan warring
parties’ commitment to the humanitarian truce for
Eid Al-Adha, as well as the quite significant progress
represented by the three preparatory meetings held
in Berlin to conclude the second step of holding an
international conference on Libya. We hope that the
next preparatory meeting will ensure that this eagerly
awaited Conference is held as soon as possible. That in
turn could lead to an intra-Libyan national conference
aimed at ending the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of a conflict that has produced numerous
civilian casualties and displaced more than 140,000
people from conflict areas, as well as the constant
strikes targeting civilian infrastructure, the latest being
the shelling of a factory in Wadi Rabia this morning,
which killed and injured dozens of people.
We call for an end to hate speech in order to
consolidate efforts aimed at resuming the political
process based on dialogue, ending the institutional
divide and paving the way for sustainable security and
stability, as part of an inclusive democratic process
through transparent presidential and parliamentary
elections, in accordance with the Paris, Palermo and
Abu Dhabi understandings. We reiterate our call to the
Council to remind all Member States of the importance
of honouring their commitments under the relevant
resolutions on the arms embargo on Libya, which the
Special Representative just emphasized in his briefing,
because any violation of the sanctions regime will
hinder United Nations, regional and international
efforts to prevent the escalation of conflict there. We
also reiterate the importance of helping all the Libyan
parties to launch a sincere dialogue, restore the rule
of law throughout the country and ensure that it has
control over arms, and support Libya in building
unified security institutions in order to address all the
security challenges undermining its stability, security
and territorial integrity.
Secondly, on the humanitarian front, the worsening
armed clashes are increasing the Libyan people’s
suffering every day. That has now reached the most
vulnerable groups, such as illegal migrants in detention
centres. We support the proposal of the Special

19-370717/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

Representative on the importance of releasing them
and providing them with safe shelter, pending either the
processing of their asylum applications or assistance in
repatriating them to their countries of origin. We call on
all the parties in Libya to exercise restraint and respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, while refraining from targeting
civilians or civilian infrastructure and ensuring safe
access for humanitarian groups and personnel to the
areas concerned in order to provide aid to those in need.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to
acknowledge the presence here today of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya, and to welcome him to
the Security Council. We are grateful for the efforts
and commendable work of Mr. Salamé and his team on
the ground. We also thank Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for the
information she presented, especially on the impact of
the conflict on the most vulnerable groups. It is at such
times of great challenges that the admirable work done
by organizations such as Together We Build It, which
Ms. Al Tubuly leads, is so crucial.
We note with concern the rapid shrinking of the
public space available for Libyan women and young
people to express their opinions and participate actively
in political processes, as well as the continuing threats,
intimidation and violence, including sexual and genderbased violations, that they are subjected to. We call on
the Libyan authorities to protect and promote the rights
of women, including those of human rights defenders,
so that they can do their work without fear of reprisals,
and to support their full and active participation in the
public arena and in political processes. In that regard,
we think it is essential to hold systematic consultations
with women, youth and indigenous peoples in support
of the work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.
The Dominican Republic firmly condemns the
acts of violence committed against civilians and
civilian infrastructure in violation of international
humanitarian law, and which disproportionately affect
the most vulnerable groups, especially children.
The humanitarian situation resulting from those
factors remains a matter of concern. According to the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), the
numbers of internally displaced persons have increased
considerably in recent months, following the military
campaign that began in April. We regret the fact that
this situation has created a scenario that has led to an
8/16

18/11/2019

increase in the number of victims of human trafficking
and enormous challenges for the protection of the
civilian population in general. Although the numbers
of migrants attempting to reach European coasts have
fallen, the mortality rate among those attempting
the journey across the Mediterranean has increased
significantly compared to last year. In that regard, I
would like to take a moment to refer to a study recently
published by the IOM and the World Food Programme,
which concludes that the main factors driving those
migrants to attempt the crossing include economic
issues, insecurity, conflict, hunger, environmental
degradation and climate-related shocks. We have seen
once again how those factors not only have a disastrous
impact on people but also wider regional effects on an
alarming scale.
We are also concerned about the growing number
of reports of the participation of foreign fighters in
the internal conflict in Libya, which we believe is
exacerbating the already critical situation. Added to
that are flagrant violations of the arms embargo, as
identified in the report of the Panel of Experts. The
current trend of using increasingly sophisticated and
lethal military equipment, such as armed drones,
guided missiles and more, is disturbing. The strict
implementation of the arms embargo is crucial to the
protection of civilians and the restoration of security
and stability to Libya and the rest of the region.
Finally, we call on the parties to resume
negotiations, without preconditions. There can be no
military solution to the situation in Libya. The key is
and always will be dialogue. We urge all stakeholders in
the conflict and the international community as a whole
to work towards a successful conference in Berlin with
a view to bringing back the peace and stability that the
Libyan people desire and deserve so much.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I am speaking on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council, Côte d’Ivoire, South
Africa and my own country, Equatorial Guinea.
At the outset, we would like to express our thanks
to Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his detailed
and informative report. We also thank Ms. Rida Al
Tubuly for her briefing.
Eight years have already passed since the beginning
of the Libyan conflict. The three African members of
19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

the Council remain concerned about the deadlock in the
current crisis, which owing to its particular nature is
far from being resolved. We therefore urge the parties
to establish a definitive ceasefire, and we reiterate that
there can be no military solution in Libya. The only way
forward is through negotiation and inclusive dialogue,
leading to a political solution that will enable the
achievement of a stable and lasting peace throughout the
country. We echo the calls for a ceasefire, negotiations,
reconciliation and the unification of the Libyan people,
with a view to ensuring a prosperous future in which the
Libyans themselves take ownership of their decisions.
Today we would like to focus on three issues.
First, we are concerned about the serious
consequences of this protracted conflict, especially on
the humanitarian and security fronts, which themselves
are likely to have grave consequences for sub-Saharan
Africa generally. We deplore the impact of the prolonged
conflict on the civilian population, which has left more
than 128,000 people displaced. We remain concerned
about the situation of migrants and refugees being
held in detention centres, and we hope that they are
being treated with humanity and dignity. Due attention
should be given to the large numbers of those who have
lost their lives off the coast of Libya. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of Mr. Ghassan Salamé in seeking
an agreement to close the detention centres.
Secondly, we strongly condemn the attacks on
civilian areas and civilian infrastructure and on healthcare centres and their personnel. We want to remind
all parties to the conflict that such actions, as well as
the inhumane treatment of migrants and refugees, are
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, the continuing violations of the arms
embargo represent a blatant disregard for the
Council’s authority. We therefore call on all parties, as
well as the international community, to comply with
and rigorously implement resolution 2491 (2019) and
the other relevant resolutions adopted by the Council.
With regard to this issue, it is worth highlighting
the repeated concerns expressed before the Council by
our respective delegations regarding ongoing foreign
interference, as has also been expressed by the African
Union High-Level Committee on Libya. We therefore
call on countries with influence over the parties and
the entire international community to act as brokers
and refocus the process in the pursuit for a genuine and
effective peaceful solution to the conflict. Furthermore,

S/PV. 8667

we reiterate the African Union’s call for the appointment
of a joint United Nations-African Union special envoy
for Libya in order to assist and strengthen the work of
Mr. Ghassan Salamé.
We welcome Germany’s initiative to support
Mr. Salamé in the implementation of his three-step plan
by convening an international conference of influential
parties external to the conflict. We hope that the Berlin
conference will produce positive results that provide
urgent solutions to this serious crisis.
In turn, we take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Salamé and UNSMIL for their tireless work and
firm commitment in seeking a political solution in
Libya. The three African countries reiterate their
unwavering support.
In that regard, we would like to urge the
international community to join forces in pursuit of
effective and peaceful solutions to the conflict, which
should be dealt with through a more objective and
constructive approach, while taking into account the
cultural, ideological and political aspects of the Libyan
people. We believe that the work of the Council should
not only consist of words but be implemented in specific
and effective actions.
In conclusion, in our national capacity, we would
like to point out that, as Mr. Salamé has just mentioned,
the migrant and Libyan civilian communities have just
suffered another series of attacks that have claimed
many innocent lives. How long can we, as members of
the Security Council, allow such atrocities to continue?
In 2011, the assault by NATO forces was justified to
protect the Libyan people. Is there no civilian population
in Libya today?
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Special Representative Salamé and his team
at the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. I
also thank Ms. Al Tubuly for her comprehensive and
enlightening presentation. I particularly welcome the
Foreign Minister of Libya to the Council.
Let me first fully agree with what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has said. It
is somewhat of a cliché when we say that he said that
the next days and weeks will be crucial for Libya.
Unfortunately, that is very true given the situation today.
He kindly referred to the Berlin process. I do not have
a great deal to add. He spoke very comprehensively in
that regard. But let me reiterate that in two days, another

19-370719/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

18/11/2019

meeting of the so-called senior officials meetings of the
Berlin process will take place. From our point of view,
that will be an important meeting.

Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations and
close all legal proceedings or request authorization to
continue them in line with the Convention.

Let me just reiterate that the sole objective of the
Berlin process is to provide support to the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé and the United Nations to facilitate a political
solution for Libya. That requires a more coherent
approach by the international community to issues such
as the arms embargo, the ceasefire, the return to the
political process, respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights and several reforms that are
urgently needed.

Regrettably, the problem has been even further
perpetuated. The Chair of the Committee will not be
able to provide the periodic report of its activities to
the Security Council because a purely factual rendition
of the Committee’s activities in the Kartas case was
blocked. We expect Council members and Members
of the Organization to honour their commitments
under the Charter of the United Nations and all the
conventions that they have signed. The signal that
we send as the Council by not being able to agree on
merely factual statements runs counter to what all
our leaders reaffirmed in September, namely, that the
United Nations and the Security Council are crucial.

We think that, despite all open issues, we can
move forward in our negotiations and support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
help the return to an intra-Libyan political dialogue.
That is exactly what Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salamé suggested on 29 July, when
he presented his three-point plan to the Council (see
S/PV.8588).
I do not want to go into all the issues that are on the
agenda but wish to focus on two matters today: first, the
arms embargo and, secondly, respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.
Let me start with the implementation of the arms
embargo. We all know that the decisive and swift
action of the international community and the Security
Council is becoming increasingly pressing in the light
of the increasing number of civilian casualties. We
therefore call on all United Nations Member States to
immediately halt any arms deliveries. The illicit flow of
arms needs to stop now. We all know that there cannot
be any military solution to the conflict in Libya.
In that context, I will say a few words in my
national capacity about the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I think that it is fair to say that the work of the Libya
Sanctions Committee is unfortunately probably now
more important than ever. In that context, I would
mention the case of Mr. Moncef Kartas, a member
and arms expert of the Committee’s Panel of Experts.
Council members are aware of the case. Let me say that
we understand and respect that this is a judicial matter
in Tunisia but, at the same time, it is a matter of the
Libya Sanctions Committee and of the Council. For that
reason, I would like to reiterate that Tunisia must abide
by its obligations under the 1946 Convention on the
10/16

Secondly, I would like to refer to the issue of respect
for international humanitarian law, human rights and
women’s rights. Unfortunately, as the presentation
by Ms. Al Tubuly once again made abundantly clear,
women, children, migrants and refugees are exposed
to indiscriminate shelling, exploitation and sexual and
gender-based violence. I would like to thank Ms. Al
Tubuly for giving the Council first-hand insights into
the situation within Libya. We commend her courage
and dedication and that of Libyan civil society for their
challenging work in a dangerous environment. We
know that women activists and human rights defenders
in particular are frequently targeted, often to silence
them and to create a climate of fear. We cannot allow
that to happen. Women must be represented in political
and social life and their voices must be heard. We will
certainly continue to support Ms. Al Tubuly’s work
wherever we can.
Before concluding, let me also take this opportunity
to again encourage the Libyan authorities to continue
their search for the House of Representatives lawmaker
Siham Sergewa, whose whereabouts remain unknown.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We express
our appreciation for the convening of this meeting and
for the comprehensive interventions by the briefers,
who have described to us an urgent situation requiring
the attention of the Council. We also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.
Peru notes with deep concern the escalating violence
and suffering in various areas of the Libyan territory,
which have resulted in new internally displaced persons,
deaths among the civilian population, primarily of
19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8667

women and children, and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals and schools.

Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for their
useful briefings on recent developments in Libya.

Those indiscriminate attacks represent flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights which, due to their nature, could constitute
war crimes. In such circumstances, we deem it vital
that those countries with influence on the parties
act firmly to bring about the end of such regrettable
incidents. This must in addition be guided by efforts to
ensure accountability and to identify and duly punish
the perpetrators of atrocities. Impunity, just as in other
bloody conflicts on the Council’s agenda, cannot be
tolerated here. We thus welcome the intention of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to
assess such situations in its efforts to cooperate with
the Libyan authorities.

First and foremost, the prolonged clashes in and
around Tripoli have proved that the conflict in Libya
cannot be resolved by military measures. We therefore
call on all parties to refrain from the use of force and
return to the political dialogue under the auspices of the
United Nations. We fully support Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salamé’s three-step peace
plan, and we look forward to the positive outcome of
the Berlin conference on Libya, scheduled to be held
before the end of the year.

In this regard, Peru underscores the need for the
parties to return to the negotiating table in pursuit of
a political solution in the context of a Libyan-owned
process and supported by the United Nations, with a
constructive and complementary role being played
by regional organizations such as the African Union
and other concerned international actors. The Berlin
process represents an important step in that direction,
in line with the three-step proposal put forward by the
Special Representative. This will require an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire and the establishment of
confidence-building measures and processes aimed
at ensuring the unification and strengthening of
institutions, particularly in the case of the security
forces. This will also require an end to the blatant and
persistent violations of the arms embargo imposed by
the Council, which only heightens the human cost and
creates space for extremist groups to carry out their
activities. Such a process must be people-centred and
focused on achieving the common good as opposed
to strategic or economic interests such as those that
characterized the development of this conflict.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Peru’s deep
concern at the inhumane conditions and abuse suffered
by thousands of migrants and refugees in detention
centres in Libya. We await the urgent action of the
Council and of the international community to speed
up the process of definitively shuttering such centres,
which overtly violate international human rights law.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

Likewise, we deplore the influx of weapons and
the presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries
in Libya. In that regard, the full implementation of
the arms embargo, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, is absolutely essential
and indispensable to protecting civilians and restoring
stability and security in Libya and the region as a whole.
Moreover, we cannot forget the fact that the immunity
of United Nations experts is crucial for the proper
functioning of the sanctions regime and therefore must
be respected by every Member State.
The humanitarian situation in Libya continues
to be of deep concern to us, especially with regard
to the destruction of vital infrastructure and the loss
of capacity to deliver basic services. Similarly, we
are disturbed by the situation of migrants in Libya,
in particular those being held in detention centres.
Therefore, echoing the recent statement made by
the International Criminal Court Prosecutor, Fatou
Bensouda, we call on all parties to immediately cease
all indiscriminate attacks and to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Poland’s full
support for all efforts made by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya aimed at
finding a lasting political solution to the current crisis,
so as to bring security, political and economic stability,
and national unity to Libya.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé for his briefing. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya, Mr. Mohamed Siala.

19-3707111/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

18/11/2019

China listened carefully to the statement made
by civil-society representative Ms. Al Tubuly. The
conflict in Libya has been going on for more than
eight years, leading to great suffering for the people of
Libya and its neighbours in the region and threatening
international peace and security. The parties in Libya
should prioritize the overall interests of the country and
its people and seek a peaceful solution to the issue of
Libya through political dialogue.

Libya has expressed its concern over the continual
depreciation of its frozen assets and related losses. The
sanctions Committee should accelerate its efforts to
find appropriate ways to respond to Libya’s legitimate
concerns. The Committee, together with the Secretariat
and the Panel of Experts, should strictly abide by
the mandate entrusted to it by the relevant Security
Council resolutions and discharge it in an impartial and
objective manner.

China would like to make the following points.

China has always been impartial in supporting the
people of Libya in their pursuit of peace and tranquillity,
and it has played a constructive role in the promotion
of a political solution to the issue of Libya. China is
prepared to continue to make positive contributions
to ensuring the restoration of peace and stability in
the country.

First, it is important to continue to engage in
dialogue in order to promote the political process.
It has always been China’s belief that the issue of
Libya must be resolved politically. The international
community must respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Libya and adhere to principle
of the political process being Libyan-led and Libyanowned. China calls on all parties to the conflict in
Libya to establish a ceasefire as soon as possible, ease
tensions and return to the track of peaceful dialogue
and consultations, with a view to realizing lasting
peace and stability in the country.
Secondly, there is a need for increased coordination
to create synergies. China supports the good offices
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé, whose three-step action plan provides a viable
plan to resolve the conflict in Libya. Countries with
influence should play an active role and exert such
influence to help all parties in Libya address their
differences and increase mutual trust. They should also
provide constructive help so as to establish a ceasefire
and resume the political dialogue.
The African Union and the League of Arab States
have particular advantages in terms of mediation among
the parties to the conflict. We must support them in
their efforts and thereby create synergies with the work
of the United Nations.
Thirdly, there is a need to ensure that the issue
of sanctions is handled properly. Sanctions are not an
end in themselves but only a means that should always
be aimed at promoting a political solution to relevant
issues. Given current circumstances, the arms embargo
in Libya must be strictly implemented. At the same time,
there is a need to avert the negative impact of sanctions
in other areas on civilians in Libya and other third
countries. They should not harm the overall interests of
the country, hamper the daily lives of people or prevent
their humanitarian needs from being met.
12/16

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé and Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for
their very comprehensive and clear briefings. I would
also like to welcome to the Council His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Libya.
Indonesia would like to join others in expressing
our deep concern at the current situation in Libya. To
that end, allow me to focus on the following points.
First, we reiterate our call for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in Libya. We call for all parties
to cease military actions, de-escalate tensions on the
ground and return to political negotiations. They must
adhere to international law, including international
humanitarian law and the Council’s resolutions on the
arms embargo. Foreign intervention should stop further
exacerbating the conflict.
We welcome the efforts made by the United
Nations and other partners to find peace and to bring
all parties in Libya to return to political negotiations.
We reiterate our full support to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We continue
to reiterate our support for the Special Representative’s
three-step proposal that he presented in July (see
S/PV.8588). We also welcome and appreciate the plan
to hold the Berlin summit, including the preparatory
meetings that are under way. We hope that the summit
will facilitate a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process and the attainment of lasting peace in Libya.
19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

Secondly, Indonesia reiterates the need to protect
civilians and calls for humanitarian assistance to be
provided to Libyans. It is concerning that the latest
report shows that, since the outbreak of fighting in
April, more than 100,000 people, half of whom are
children, have fled their homes,\; that more than
800,000 people are in need of humanitarian assistance;
that the situation has aggravated humanitarian needs
and forced displacement, thereby hindering access
to food, health care, and other basic services; and
that the fighting has resulted in at least 395 civilian
causalities. Despite all those dreadful figures, the 2019
humanitarian response plan for Libya received less
than 47 per cent of requested funding.
Furthermore, attacks on civilians, including
migrants, and on health-care and civilian facilities
persist, not to mention today’s attack mentioned by the
Special Representative. There have been 58 attacks on
health-care facilities in 2019, resulting in the deaths of
13 health-care workers, and the shelling of residential
areas and vital civilian infrastructure, including the
Mitiga airport, continues. This must stop and must
stop now.
Finally, the Security Council must be united in our
efforts with regard to Libya. The statement delivered
by Ms. Al Tubuly is a true wake-up call for us sitting
here at United Nations Headquarters. We need to spare
no effort in assisting the people and the Government of
Libya to achieve peace. The unity of the Council would
send a strong message that the world wants peace in
Libya. What we do here will have repercussions for
those are on the ground. We are here to do one particular
job and that is to save lives.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Ghassan Salamé for his briefing, which
once again demonstrates his ongoing commitment to
peace in Libya. I would also like to thank Ms. Rida Al
Tubuly for her briefing and to welcome the presence
among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.
We meet again today to discuss the situation in
Libya, even though the situation on the ground has not
really changed since our last exchange. Low-intensity
fighting continues on the ground, air attacks are on
the rise, civilians and migrants are suffering and
international humanitarian law is blatantly violated.
Moreover, the sanctions regime is being infringed, not
only by the belligerents but also — and I deeply regret

S/PV. 8667

this — by several States Member of the United Nations.
In that regard, I encourage everyone to cooperate
with the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1973 (2011) for the purpose of reporting to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) and to the Council. In that connection, I would
like to point out that, in order to effectively carry out the
mandate entrusted to them by the Council, the experts
enjoy immunity and cannot be prosecuted.
The military spiral must stop. No one can deny
that it leads to nothing. We must bear in mind that the
conflict continues to claim casualties among the civilian
population, including vulnerable segments of it, as a
result of indiscriminate attacks on populated areas. No
supremacy in the air can lead to lasting peace in Libya.
Therefore, the arms embargo must be respected by all,
the delivery of arms must stop and the recruitment
of combatants, including foreign mercenaries and
elements engaging in terrorist and criminal activities
that are listed by the Council, must stop.
At the same time, a political dialogue must resume
without conditions in order to bring Libya out of the
crisis. My country therefore supports Germany’s efforts
to bring the Berlin process to a successful conclusion,
in close cooperation with the Special Representative.
I also welcome the efforts made to support an
inclusive political dialogue among the various Libyan
stakeholders. I call on all those parties to engage in
these efforts in a spirit of compromise and goodwill for
the benefit of peace and stability in Libya.
In the long term, it will also be necessary for the
distribution of Libya’s wealth to benefit all citizens.
I would also like to reiterate my country’s
commitment to ensuring that crimes committed in
Libya do not go unpunished, be it before national
courts or before the International Criminal Court. I
recall that it is the responsibility of the belligerents to
protect civilians, including the most vulnerable, such as
migrants and children.
In conclusion, allow me to commend once again all
staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and Special Representative Salamé for their courage
and determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya.
Mr. Siala (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the presidency and members

19-3707113/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

of the Council and wish them all every success. I
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé for his briefing on the latest
developments in my country, Libya. We wish him
every success in his endeavours to end the crisis in
my country. I also thank His Excellency Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for his briefing on
the work of the sanctions Committee.
The aggression waged against Tripoli by the
Haftar militias started eight months ago and continues
to this day. The city has seen the most abhorrent
crimes, including the shelling of civilian sites,
inhabited neighbourhoods, civilian airports, hospitals,
schools, books warehouses and headquarters of State
institutions. The latest of such acts was the drone attack
on a food factory, which killed a number of citizens
of Libya, Egypt and other African countries. It is a
war crime by any definition. These are criminal acts
of killing and punishment carried out against civilians
by terrorist groups affiliated with the militias and
illustrate the criminal intent of the militia leaders and
their blatant violations of all national and international
human rights instruments.
Regrettably, all of this is happening in the face of
silence from the international community, which is
the result of differences among the Council members
regarding the situation in Libya. All members of the
Council should reach some form of agreement with a
view to ending atrocities and crimes in my country and
follow a unified strategy to stand up to those trying
to prevent Libyans from reaching an agreement and
from coming together to start the process of building
a modern State.
Foreign intervention is one of the most important
key drivers of the ongoing crisis in my country, Libya.
We have repeatedly warned against the exacerbation
of the crisis due to the irresponsible interference of
certain States and their indifference in the face of its
consequences. They insist on courses of action that
seem to have no aim but to leave my country in a state
of deadlocked fratricide among Libyans and halted
development. We do not see these States proposing any
initiatives that could contribute to a solution to stop the
bloodshed. They are explicitly breaching the relevant
Security Council resolutions, which always call for a
peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis and for refraining
from resort to the military option to settle the crisis,
which leads to implementing a policy of “might
14/16

18/11/2019

makes right” that may result in violating international
humanitarian law. This is totally incompatible with
the Libyan people’s desire to establish a State ruled by
institutions in which the rule of law prevails and where
we all have equal rights and duties.
Someone could say that all parties, and I mean
here Libyan parties, are dealing with certain States. I
would like to remind the Security Council that State
institutions are under attack here; these institutions
are run by the Government of National Accord, which
has been recognized by the Council. The Council also
called on all States Members of the United Nations to
refrain from interacting with any parallel institutions
other than those of the Government of National Accord.
My Government would like to highlight further serious
acts carried out by the aggressor force against Tripoli,
using foreign elements as mercenaries fighting in its
ranks. This has been confirmed by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) in its
various reports. We call on the Security Council to
urge the States involved to take the measures necessary
to prevent such actions, which are fuelling the conflict
and damaging Libya’s relationship with those States.
My reference to foreign interference leads me to
raise an important issue here in the Council — that of
the arms embargo that has been imposed on Libya since
2011, which the Council has been urging Member States
to adhere to in accordance with resolution 1970 (2011).
My delegation wishes to reiterate that many States
have violated this resolution and supplied the aggressor
forces attacking the city of Tripoli with sophisticated
weapons, such as fighter drones and offensive weapons
that even some States do not possess.
In that connection, we cannot help but wonder
what how the international community expects the
Government of National Accord and the Libyan
National Army to confront this aggression. Do we
stand idly by and leave the country’s capital vulnerable
to damage and destruction by gangs and irresponsible
individuals whose sole purpose is to gain power?
The actions that the Libyan National Army of the
Government of National Accord is taking to confront
this aggression are an obligation in line with the
natural right of every Government to defend its people.
Logically, the aggressor forces — namely, the militias
of Haftar — should be questioned and held accountable
here, not the Government of National Accord, which
emerged from the Libyan Political Agreement that has
been recognized by the Council. We must ask ourselves
19-37071

18/11/2019

The situation in Libya

how those militias have obtained such an arsenal
of weapons to carry out their continued aggression
against the city of Tripoli, right under the noses of the
United Nations.
We wish also to stress that the Council could have
done a great deal in the face of the aggression against
the city of Tripoli had it stood united and adopted a
clear approach, based on its various resolutions on
Libya, and held everyone, including States Members of
the United Nations, to comply. However, some Member
States are currently tampering with the fate and unity of
Libya, the evidence for which is clearly and consistently
documented in the reports of the Security Council and
its various committees and panels, particularly those of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011). Those reports provide ongoing evidence
of the grave violations that have fuelled the war and
aggression against Tripoli under pretexts and for
reasons that could have been resolved through serious
negotiations, with the participation of all Libyans.
My country welcomes all international efforts
to end the crisis and bring peace to our country.
The Government of National Accord stresses the
importance of activating the Libya Quartet, composed
of the European Union and the United Nations, among
others. We reaffirm the fundamental importance of
the African Union’s role in working with the United
Nations to find a formula for cooperation among them
in order to coordinate efforts aimed at ensuring the
success of international efforts to achieve peace in my
country. My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the efforts currently under
way, in cooperation with the United Nations through
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, aimed at making a success of
the international conference on Libya, to be held in
Berlin. We are confident in Germany’s ability to host a
successful conference and reach a unified international
position that will put an end to all polarization or
disputes among a number of States whose differences
have greatly contributed to fuelling the situation in
Libya and exposing it to risks and levels of tragedy that
the country has not witnessed since its independence.
My Government would also like to emphasize that
the success of any such effort should not overlook the
following points.

S/PV. 8667

First, the aggressor forces must withdraw
to their former positions before 4 April 2019,
without preconditions.
Secondly, we reiterate the importance of the
ceasefire following that withdrawal through the
implementation of an international monitoring
mechanism, under the auspices of the United Nations,
and the adoption of a Security Council resolution on
the matter.
Thirdly, the States involved in the situation in
Libya must be compelled to refrain from any act that
would undermine national and international efforts to
bring peace to Libya.
Fourthly, the Government of National Accord
reaffirms that it continues to address the concerns
of States vis-à-vis Libya, particularly with regard to
terrorism, and calls on them to provide any information
concerning individuals or entities that they consider
to be engaged in terrorist acts that pose a threat their
security and stability. We also call for a strategy
based on cooperation with the relevant authorities
of the Libyan State and stress the need to adhere to
the implementation of bilateral and international
agreements in this field.
Fifthly, we must emphasize the necessity of
concluding this stage and finalizing the steps to be
negotiated among Libyans at an inclusive national
conference, as stipulated in the United Nations action
plan and the initiative to resolve the Libyan crisis
proposed by the Chairman of the Presidential Council
on 16 June, in order to reach an agreement on the rules to
form a constitutional basis for organizing parliamentary
and presidential elections as soon as possible.
Sixthly, all countries concerned with the Libyan
file should be involved in the Berlin conference,
especially our neighbouring States. This will allow
us to reach an agreement whereby those States can
commit to refraining from any action that would
undermine domestic and international efforts to resolve
the Libyan crisis.
The Government of National Accord also reiterates
its previous requests submitted to the International
Criminal Court and to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Haftar to
hold him accountable for the violations and crimes he
has committed against civilians and the infrastructure
of the city of Tripoli and surrounding areas. My

19-3707115/16

S/PV.8667

The situation in Libya

Government also calls for the expedited deployment of
a fact-finding mission to document such violations and
identify those responsible.
With regard to illegal migrants, my Government
has taken swift measures to protect them,by moving
them out of the area where clashes are taking place.
We conducted this process in cooperation with the
International Organization for Migration. Furthermore,
my Government intends to complement efforts to
provide them with the necessary protection. We
reiterate the need for concerted international efforts to
address this crisis in view of the repeated aggressions,
such as when Haftar warplanes carried out an air strike
on a migrant detention centre in the vicinity of Tajoura,
in Tripoli.
On the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), we recall the situation of
the frozen assets of the Libyan Investment Authority.
These assets have diminished owing to the actions of
the sanctions system in place since 2011 and because
of the negative interest on the frozen accounts and
the management fees that are withdrawn from them.
Those charges are withdrawn from the frozen accounts
without being duly managed through the banks into
which they are deposited. There is no option to reinvest
these assets, and their value diminishes because they
are not invested in a timely manner. In addition, we
cannot even maintain the investments of the Libyan
real estate and hotels owned by the Authority that are
all over the world because of the sanctions imposed on
its assets. The Authority is facing many challenges in
managing these investments and because of the failure
to consider their profitability. In some cases, the Libyan
Investment Authority has not been able to carry out the
maintenance of the hotels it owns to ensure their proper
functioning. The pretext advanced by the authorities of
some States was that the Authority has been affected
by the freeze.
In order to find effective solutions for the
difficulties facing the Authority as a result of the
sanctions regime, on 12 September a delegation of the
Libyan Investment Authority met with the sanctions
Committee and clarified for its members the challenges,
difficulties and negative consequences of the existing
sanctions regime. The Authority has also presented a
notification to the Committee regarding the negative
consequences of the sanctions and the strategy of the
Libyan Investment Authority to enhance transparency,
good governance and accountability with regard to its

16/16

18/11/2019

management and assets. In this respect, we hope that
the Council will take the measures necessary to address
the negative consequences of the sanctions regime as
soon as possible in order to improve the management
of assets without lifting the freeze. That would enable
us to stop the unnecessary losses that we have warned
against since March 2016.
The sanctions regime was presumably established
in the first place to protect against the diminishing
of frozen assets. The purpose is to serve interests of
the Libyan people and its sovereign wealth fund for
future generations. The sanctions regime in the case
of Libya is a measure to protect assets and preserve
them; it is not intended to be punitive. We therefore
call once again on the Security Council and the Libya
sanctions Committee — given their ethical and legal
responsibilities — to urgently amend the measures
taken by the sanctions Committee with regard to
frozen assets in effect since 2011, in order to stop the
losses on these assets and preserve the wealth of the
Libyan people, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
In closing, we reiterate the position of the
Government of National Accord. We are fully
convinced that dialogue among the Libyan people, with
the assistance of the United Nations, is the only way to
achieve safety and peace and meet the aspirations of
our people. We have high hopes that the Council will
duly assume its role, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, to maintain international peace
and security. I also emphasize what was said by Ms. Al
Tubuly regarding the importance of the participation
of women and their role in the future of Libya, that
Libya is going through an unconventional political
stage and that Libyans are not the only ones who have
put the country in such a situation. Indeed, the foreign
interference of many States, which are well known to
the Council, is also to blame.
I conclude my statement by reiterating the
reference made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to the effect
that the international community should be united on
the situation in Libya. We hope that the Berlin summit
will play a crucial role in that direction and foster
support for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. That action may lead to the resolution of the
Libyan crisis.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

19-37071
