S2

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

Expressing its concern that, according to the survey,

70 per cent of the population of the world lack
adequate information facilities and are thus denied
effective enjoyment of the right to information,
Considering that the information media have an important part to play in education and in economic and
social progress generally and that new techniques of
communication offer special opportunities for acceleration of the education process,
1. Invites the Governments concerned to include adequate provision in their economic plans for the development of national information media ;
2. Invites the Technical Assistance Board, the Special
Fund, the specialized agencies concerned, the regional
economic commissions and other public and private
agencies and institutions to assist, as appropriate, the
less developed countries in developing and strengthening
their national information media ;
3. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue to further
the programme for the development of information media
including the application of new techniques of communication for achievement of rapid progress in education,
to keep up to date as far as possible its survey on this
subject and to report as appropriate to the Commission
on Human Rights and to the Economic and Social
Council;
4. Recommends that the Governments of Member
States should take this programme into account in connexion with the United Nations Development Decade;
5. Invites the Governments of the more developed
countries to co-operate with less develoi,ed count rie.s
with a view to meeting the urgent needs of the less
developed countries in connexiclll with this pror;ramme
for the development of independent national information
media, with due regard for the culture of C'ach cm1111n.
1187th plcnar:v 111crtinr1.
7 Drcrmhcr 1067.
1779 (XVII). Manifestations of racial prejudice
and national and religious intolerance
The General Assembly,
H a'vinq consider Pd the report of the seventeenth SC'~
sion of the Commission on Human Rights 6 and the
report of the thirteenth session of the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities,'
Deefl[y disturbed by the continued existence an<l manifestations of racial prejudice and of national and religio11s
intolerance in different parts of the world,
Reiteratinq its condemnation of all manifestations of
racial prejudice and of national an<l religious intolerance
as violations of the Charter of the Unite(1 Nations and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Right~;,
Recalling its resolution 1510 (XV) of 12 December
1960,
Considering it essential to recommend further specific
effective measures to eliminate these manifestations of
prejudice and intolerance,
1. Im,ites the Governments of all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental and private organizations to continue to make sustained efforts to educate
6 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement l•./o. 8 (E/3456);
see in particular paras. 99-139 and draft resolutions V an<l Vl.
7 E/CN.4/815 and Corr.I; see in particular paras. 149-189.

public opinion with a view to the eradication of racial
prejudice and national and religious intolerance and the
elimination of all un?esirable influences promoting these,
and to take appropriate measures so that education may
be directed with due regard to article 26 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and to principle 10 of the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 November 1959 ;3
2. Calls upon the Governments of all States to take
all necessary steps to rescind discriminatory laws which
have the effect of creating and perpetuating racial
prejudice and national and religious intolerance wherever
they still exist, to adopt legislation if necessary for prohibiting such discrimination, and to take such legislative
or other appropriate measures to combat such prejudice
and intolerance ;
3. Recommends the Governments of all States to discourage actively, through education and all media of
information, the creation, propagation and dissemination
of such prejudice and intolerance in any form whatever:
4. Invites the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to co-operate fully with the Governments of States in their efforts to prevent and eradicate
racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance;
5. Invites the Governments of Member States the
specialized agencies and the non-governmental orga;1izations concerned to inform the Secretary-General of action
taken by them in compliance with the present resolution :
6. Requests the Secretarv-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session a report on
compliance with the present resolution.
1187th plenary mcrtino.
7 December 1967.
1780 (XVII). Preparation of a draft declaration
and a draft convention on the elimination
of all forms of racial discrimination
The General Assembly,
Desirin.17 to put into effect the principle of the ecptality
of all men and all peoples without distinction as to race.
colour or religion, as stated in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of discrimination based on differences of race, colour and relirrion
still in evidence throughout the world,
,.,
Con~idering the necessity of taking all possible steps
conducive to the final and total elimination of all s11ch
manifestations, which violate the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Emphasizing that each State ought to take all the
necessary action to put an end to these violations, which
infringe human dignity,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask
t~e Commission on Human Rights, bearing- i11 mind the
views of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Di~crimination and Protection of Minorities, the dC'bate,at the seventeenth session of the General Assemhlv, any
proposals on this matter that may be submitted by Go.:ernments and any international instruments already
adopted in this field by the specialized agencies, to
prepare:
(a) A draft declaration on the elimination of all forms
of racial discrimination, to be submitted to the Assemhh·
for consideration at its eighteenth session ;
·
( b) A draft international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination, to be submitted
