10

General Aseembly-Twe•tieth Session

Noting the report of the United Nations Mediator
on Cyprus, submitted to the Secretary-General on 26
March 1965, 14
Noting further that the Government of Cyprus is
committed, through its Declaration of Intention and
the accompanying Memorandum, 16 to:
(a) The full application of human rights to all
citizens of Cyprus, irrespective of race or religion,
( b) The ensuring of minority rights,
( c) The safeguarding of the above rights as contained in the said Declaration and Memorandum,
l. Takes cognizance of the fact that tl1e Republic of
Cyprus, as an equal Member of the United Nations,
is, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
entitled to enjoy, and should enjoy, full sovereignty
and complete independence without any foreign intervention or interference ,
2. Calls upon all States, i11 conformity with their
obligations under the Charter, ancl in particular Article
2, paragraphs 1 and 4, to respect the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus and to refrain from any intervention directed
against it;
3. Recommends to the Security Council the con-tinuation of the United ;\lations mediation work in
conformity with Council rf'solution 186 ( 1964).
1402nd plenary meeting,
18 December 1965.

2129 (XX). Actions ou the regional level with a
view to improving good neighbourly relations among European States having different social and political systems
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations in which Member States have affirmed
their resolve to live together in peace with one another
as good neighbours and to develop friendly relations
among nations in order to strengthen pean
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December
1957 and 1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958 callitJg
upon States to make every efforl to strengthen international peace and to develop friendly and co-operative
relations, and to take effect i \ c steps towards the implementation of principles r,f J>e.1ceful anti neighbourly
relations,
Aware of the responsibility w111ch today devolves
upon all countries, great and s111:dl, tu e:,tablish an
atmosphere of co-operation and security throughout the
world, and of the role that the existence and development of bilateral good neighbourly relations and unde1 standing among States can play in achieving that goal,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing concern for
the development of reciprocal co-operative relations in
many fields among European States having different
social and political systems, based on the principles of
equal rights, respect and mutnal interests,
Convinced that any improvement in relations among
European countri~s, being in the interest of the States
in that part of the world, has at the same time a positive
effect on international relations as a whole and thus
contributes to the creation of an atmosphere conducive
1 4 Official Records

of the Security Council. Twentieth Year.

Supplement for Jammry, February ·and March 1965, document
S/6253.
111 Official Records of

the General Assi'mbly, Twentieth Ses-sion, Annexes, agenda item 93, document A/6039.

to peace and international security and to the settlement
of the major problems which have not yet been solved,
1. Welcomes the growing interest in the development
uf good neighbourly 1 elations and co-operation among
European States having different social and political
systems, in the political, economic, technical, scientific,
,.:ultural and other fields;
2. Emphasizes the impo1 tance of maintaining and
mcreasing contacts between those States for the purpose
of developing peaceful co-operation among the peoples
of the European continent, with a view to strengthening peace and security in Europe by all possible means;
3. Requests the Governments of the European States
to intensify their efforts to improve reciprocal relations,
with a view to creating an atmosphere of confidence
which will be conducive to an effective consideration
of the problems which are still hampering the relaxation
of tension in Europe and throughout the world;
4. Decides to continue to give its attention to
measures and actions for promoting good neighbourly
, t'lations and co-oprration in Europe.
1408th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2130 (XX). lnternationHI co-operation
peaceful uses of outer space

in the

The General Assembly,
Rew/ling its resolution 1962 (XVIII) entitled "Declaration of Legal Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space"
and resolution 1963 (XVIJ I) entitled "International
co operation in the peaceful uses of outer space", both
;1clopted unanimously u11 13 December 1963,
Having considered the reports of the Committee on
the Praceful Uses of Outer Space, 16
Conscious that tlie benefits of space exploration can
be must widely enjuyed if Member States support the
widest possible exchange of information and promote
international ro-operation in this field.
T
Urges the Cornmittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer

:--,pace, in developing law for outer space, to continue
with (ktern1ination the preparation of draft international
agreements on assistance to ;111d return of astronauts
and space vehicles and on liability for damage caused
li_y objects launched into outer space, and to give consider at~on to incorporating in international agreement
form. 111 the futnre as appropriate, legal principles
governing the activities of States in the exploration
and use of outer space ;

II
Endorses the recommendations contained in the
reports of the Committef' on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Spare concerning exchange of information, education
and training. international sounding rocket launching
facilities, potentially harmful effects of space experi1,1ents, and encouragement of international programmes;
2. Welcomes the intention of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to continue its activities
in the exchange of information on outer space matters
hy encouraging such means as the preparation of
1.

16 Ibid, Nineteenth Session, ,·lnnexe.1 a.nuex No. 10 document
A/5785: ibid., Twentieth Session, A~nexes. agend~ item 31.

document A/6042
