United Nations

S/PV.6687

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6687th meeting
Wednesday, 14 December 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Eick
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Mashabane
Ms. Hendrie
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in that country (S/2011/739)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-63696 (E)

*1163696*

S/PV.6687

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/739, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that
country.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic

I give the floor to Ms. Vogt.

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
and on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that
country (S/2011/739)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, Prime
Minister and Head of Government of the Central
African Republic, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, Prime Minister
and Head of Government of the Central African
Republic, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Council, I welcome His Excellency Prime Minister
Touadera.
I wish to acknowledge the presence in the
Council Chamber of His Excellency Mr. Antoine
Gambi, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional
Integration and Francophonie of the Central African
Republic.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Margaret Vogt, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls,
Chairman of the country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on the Central African
Republic and Permanent Representative of Belgium, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

its

Ms. Vogt: It is an honour for me to present the
sixth report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/739) on
the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). The report before the Council builds on the
Secretary-General’s previous report (S/2011/311) of
16 May 2011, and provides an update on political,
security, socio-economic, humanitarian and human
rights developments in the Central African Republic. It
also describes the salient activities of BINUCA in
support of the Government’s peace consolidation
efforts, in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it
by the Security Council.
In the first half of the year, BINUCA focused on
elections, as well as on the aftermath of a contested
electoral process that began on 23 January with the
presidential and legislative elections. In my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6575), I highlighted
four priority areas on which BINUCA will accord
particular focus in the following months. These include
working with the Government and the political class to
manage the tension and dissension that followed the
January elections; seeking ways of creating a
rapprochement between the Government and the
opposition; and getting all parties around the table to
discuss the future political dispensation and national
reconciliation.
I also highlighted the importance of the
commencement of the disarmament and demobilization
process after several months of blockage, starting in
the north-east, as well as the signature of ceasefire
agreements between the Government and the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix
(CPJP), as well as between the Chadian Government
and the Front populaire pour le redressement (FPR),
led by the Chadian dissident Baba Laddé. At that time,
I signaled that the commencement of the disarmament
process and the conclusion of these peace agreements
constituted major steps towards the stabilization of the
security environment in the Central African Republic.

11-63696

S/PV.6687

The difficult social, humanitarian and human
rights context in which the people of the Central
African Republic exist was also highlighted, and I
undertook to pay particular attention to issues relating
to the protection of civilians, especially women and
children.
The last briefing also highlighted the complex
regional security environment in which the Central
African Republic is situated and the potential
destabilizing impact on the Central African Republic of
development in the region, and how a degeneration of
security in the Central African Republic would equally
impact on the region. I put a particular accent on the
activities of foreign elements, such as the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and the FPR, operating in that
country.
The report before the Council provides an
analysis of developments on these various fronts and
the efforts undertaken by BINUCA and the rest of the
United Nations family to address these challenges.
On the political front, I am pleased to report that,
in spite of the divisions within the political, the
situation today has greatly improved. Following
extensive consultations that I had with the
Government, the political parties, representatives of
civil society and other partners, we identified the
importance of discussion of the reform of the electoral
code and the establishment of a permanent electoral
body as possible entry points to bring all stakeholders
around the table and to gradually help build confidence
that could lead to broader discussion of other difficult
issues.
The commencement of the first workshop of the
consultation committee on the revision of the electoral
code, held in Bangui from 28 to 30 November —
which brought together the Government, the political
parties, civil society, religious leaders, and
representatives of the international community as
observers — signified a major political breakthrough
that could lead to the creation of a framework for
continuing discussion between the Government and the
political class. The Government undertook to adopt a
consensual approach to electoral reforms.
Following a study tour of a number of countries,
undertaken
by
the
Minister
for
Territorial
Administration and Decentralization to learn from their
experiences in managing electoral processes, the
Ministry presented a proposal of a framework of a

11-63696

permanent body to manage elections and referendums.
The proposal calls for the establishment of an
independent body — the national agency for
elections — that would supervise and control electoral
activities to be carried out by the Ministry. A
consultative committee composed of political and civil
society actors would monitor the electoral process as
an observer. The Constitutional Court would retain its
adjudication role in all electoral disputes. The High
Council for Communication would continue to monitor
candidates’ access to national and private media.
During the discussion that took place at the first
consultation, representatives of the political parties and
of civil society expressed a preference for the
establishment of an authority for elections that would
be independent of the Ministry and would administer
the entire electoral process.
The Government’s agreement to engage in this
consultation was an unexpected and major
breakthrough. The Government and opposition parties
have re-established contacts that had been halted since
late 2010. A second round of discussion is scheduled
for January 2012 to discuss, among other issues, the
opposition’s counter-proposal to the Government’s plan
on the electoral management body. It is crucial to the
political stability of the Central African Republic that
this discussion continue and that the parties arrive at
consensus on these matters.
The report suggests that despite its near
unicameral nature, the legislature has exercised an
impressive independence and has taken the
Government to task on major issues.
In my last briefing, I informed the Council of the
determination of President Bozizé and leaders of the
politico-military groups to pursue the nationwide
disarmament process that they began last June. As of
today, 4,800 ex-combatants of the Armée populaire
pour la restauration de la démocratie (APRD) have
been disarmed and demobilized. Nevertheless, the
majority of ex-combatants are in their villages awaiting
plans for their reintegration. It is evident that the
disarmament in the north-east has had a positive
impact on the overall security environment in that part
of the country. The movement of people and goods has
been facilitated and, based on an evaluation mission to
the region from 22 to 30 November, security remains
stable, if tense, as the ex-combatants are now in high
expectation of the reinsertion and reintegration

3

S/PV.6687

exercise. Unfortunately, provision has not been made
to fund the reintegration strategy, and adequate funding
is inadequate to complete disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) in the rest of the country.
We are now at a highly precarious juncture in the
Central African Republic. Failure to find the resources
to conclude disarmament in the north and north-east,
where all the politico-military parties are anxiously
awaiting the disarmament of their forces, may lead to a
major resurgence of violence and further undermine
security in a region where, even in normal
circumstances, movement is highly impacted by
insecurity. At the same time, the temporary gain made
in securing the north-west could be lost.
The Government requires about $3 million to
complete the disarmament process through the country,
and about $19 million for the reintegration exercise.
The completion of the DDR process is strongly linked
to an effective security sector reform (SSR) if the
Government is to regain control of its territory.
Strongly encouraged by BINUCA to define a national
strategy, and by our partners — especially the
indomitable advocate Ambassador Grauls — we have
been pressing the Government to work on the SSR
strategy. Just before I left, we received a request from
the Ministry of Defence for support to undertake that
exercise. The success of the DDR and SSR processes
will depend heavily on the ability of the international
community to provide necessary resources for their
timely completion.
As a next step to the signing of the ceasefire
agreement between the CPJP and the UFDR, following
the outbreak of conflict in the north-east a peace and
reconciliation caravan visited the conflict-affected
cities in the north-east to promote reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence among local communities. During
that important gathering, both CPJP and UFDR leaders,
as well as local communities, pleaded for a speedy
DDR process to enable them to live in peace.
We need to move beyond the peace and
reconciliation caravan to ensure that the results that
have been achieved thus far are not reversed by the
outbreak of violence in the future. The establishment of
processes through which local communities would be
involved in conflict prevention and resolution in the
affected areas is critical. The Government has
expressed its willingness to work in that direction, and
there, again, additional resources will be required.

4

The signing of action plans for the release and
reintegration of children associated with the APRD and
the CPJP, in October and November, constitutes
another major step forward. We were delighted that the
signing of the latest action plan was witnessed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, who was visiting the
Central African Republic at the time.
Two foreign armed groups continue to pose a
serious threat to the peace process and to overall
security in the Central African Republic. Those are the
Front populaire pour le redressement (FPR), led by the
self-proclaimed Chadian “General” Baba Laddé, and
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), led by Joseph
Kony. Baba Laddé has become a nuisance and a threat
to the Central African Republic and the region.
Rather than leaving the country as expected in
June, he is recruiting and re-arming. During my last
visit to Bambari and Kaga Bandoro, people complained
about his multiple exactions on the population. His
elements have been accused of rape and forced
collection of cattle from herders as protection fees,
including from the Fulani population, whom he claims
to protect. Just a week ago, his elements carried out
attacks just 60 kilometres outside of Bangui and forced
a restriction of international movement along many
axes.
It is important that the Council send an
unequivocal message condemning the FPR’s illegal
activities and that it urge Baba Laddé to stop harassing
the population, lay down his arms and return to Chad.
He should be held accountable for the violations
perpetrated against the civilian population in those
regions. The Council may also wish to encourage Chad
and the Central African Republic to collaborate with
other affected countries in the region to find a peaceful
solution to the Baba Laddé issue.
Concerning the LRA, BINUCA has initiated steps
to support national and international efforts aimed at
curbing the impact of the LRA on the security of the
Central African Republic and to work closely with the
African Union. In that regard, a local coordination cell
chaired by BINUCA has been established — with the
participation of the United States of America, France,
the African Union, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Government of the
Central African Republic — to share information on
the ground. The deployment of United States military

11-63696

S/PV.6687

advisers in the subregion to strengthen the capacity of
affected countries has also been deeply welcomed in
the Central African Republic.
Since my last briefing to the Council, simmering
tensions and a climate of growing anger have
characterized the social environment in the Central
African Republic from August to October, threatening
social cohesion. However, the Government has since
taken bold measures to negotiate with labour unions
and has so far ensured the regular payment of salaries.
The Government, with contributions from the
National Assembly, community leaders across the
country, including civil society, and international
partners, has finalized its second poverty reduction
strategy paper. It will now be important for the Central
African Republic to follow up with its bilateral and
multilateral partners on the required assistance and
support.
The cooperation between the European Union
(EU) and the Central African Republic deserves to be
highlighted. The EU has now started to implement its
€50 million development hubs programme, whose goal
is to alleviate poverty, restore social and economic
stability and enhance peace. Although not especially
aimed at ex-combatants, they may qualify, along with
community members, for the high-intensity labour
works, as part of their reintegration process. We intend
to ensure that we try to couple that initiative by the
European Union with the reintegration process.
The humanitarian situation remains highly
precarious and is seriously impacted by the security
situation on the ground, which has rendered access
difficult. Reports have it that the HIV/AIDS pandemic
in the Central African Republic is on the increase,
especially in Bangui and in conflict-affected areas.
Women are more affected than men, and boys more
than girls. A report just published by Médecins Sans
Frontières entitled “A Silent Crisis” concludes that the
Central African Republic faces a chronic medical
emergency, with mortality rates above the level of
medical emergencies in other countries and with life
expectancy that stands at 48 years. At the same time,
the consolidated appeals process remains grossly
underfunded, with the latest figure being 45 per cent.
Apart from the issue of security, the problem on the
humanitarian front, as in many other areas, is both a
structural and developmental one.

11-63696

The report before the Council points to
continuing human rights challenges in the Central
African Republic, including irregular or arbitrary
detention by armed forces and non-State actors,
witchcraft accusations, gender-based violence, et
cetera. BINUCA has focused its activities on
monitoring, technical cooperation and advisory
services in the administration of justice, including the
penitentiary and child protection activities. I intend to
undertake a review of those activities in the next few
months to see how best we can improve our delivery
and effectiveness.
In the area of child protection, the country task
force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations
committed against children affected by the armed
conflict in the Central African Republic was
established on 27 July, in accordance with resolution
1612 (2005). Since its establishment, the task force has
played a major advocacy role with the Government and
armed groups to end and prevent grave violations
committed against children.
In conclusion, I am pleased to report that the
dynamic of peace initiated between the Government
and politico-military groups has become a reality and
offers a real chance for peace in the country. However,
several obstacles risk blocking that process, and could
ultimately undermine those efforts. The Government is
listening and responding to advice from national
stakeholders and the international community.
However, the lack of funding to complete the DDR
process and to initiate the second phase of SSR could
put the Central African Republic on the brink of
disaster. We need to act quickly to prevent a situation
that may lead the country to disintegrate into another
cycle of generalized conflict; that would have serious
repercussions throughout the subregion. Failure to
consolidate security in the Central African Republic
would increase its attractiveness as a safe haven for
regional brigands and rebel groups operating in the
region. That factor explains the Secretary-General’s
urgent appeal to the international community to
mobilize the appropriate funds to complete the DDR
process, without which there will be no peace in the
country. The total budget to complete disarmament and
demobilization operations is $2,617,475. The total
budget required for reinsertion and reintegration is
$19,363,328. The success of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process will depend

5

S/PV.6687

on the will of the international community to support
it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Vogt for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grauls.
Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for permitting me to address the
Security Council once again in my capacity as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic. I fully
endorse the statement made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Vogt, and
I welcome here the presence of the Prime Minister of
the Central African Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Touadera. I believe that his presence here attests to
the importance that his Government attaches to
cooperation with the United Nations and with the
international community as a whole. I should like to
take this opportunity to convey to both of them my
appreciation for their vision and their commitment and
for the spirit of partnership in which they carry out
their work with the Peacebuilding Commission.
I should like, through this briefing, to outline the
situation in terms of peacebuilding and the resulting
prospects for the future, on the basis in particular of a
visit to the field that I undertook in October, when I
headed a delegation from the country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic.
In that context, I should like to touch on three
issues that involve both opportunities and risks: the
security situation and its subregional dimension; the
political climate; and the emerging new strategic vision
of the Government.
First, with respect to the security situation, as
Ms. Vogt pointed out, the Government has made
considerable progress in terms of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of armed
groups in the north-west part of the country, and
brought the Convention des patriotes pour la justice et
la paix (CPJP) to the negotiating table so as to enable it
to become a party to the Libreville Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. Full attention is now being devoted
to the reintegration of ex-combatants. However,
financing such reintegration remains a major and
pressing challenge. It was the promise of support for
reintegration that enabled the Government to disarm
and demobilize rebel combatants in the north-west of

6

the country and to sign a ceasefire agreement with the
CPJP, and it is the implementation of that pledge that
will enable the reintegration process to be successful.
It is now urgent to secure the funding necessary
to complete the DDR process and avert a resumption of
hostilities. The Peacebuilding Fund and the World
Bank, inter alia, are currently considering ways of
contributing to this financing. However, this appeal is
addressed also to other potential donors.
Security in the Central African Republic is
closely linked to that in the subregion, and vice versa.
The current subregional context could undo the fragile
progress that has been achieved. The presence of
foreign armed groups, in particular the Lord’s
Resistance Army, led by Joseph Kony, and the Front
populaire pour le redressement, led by Baba Laddé,
continue to destabilize Central Africa considerably. In
addition, new mercenaries from Libya are often joining
foreign armed groups. Those militias not only pose an
immediate threat to the security of the people but also
hinder the completion of the DDR process.
Furthermore, those groups represent a threat to peace
and security throughout the region.
The
summits
convened
by
subregional
organizations provide the heads of State of
neighbouring countries with an important opportunity
to address the problem of subregional insecurity and its
impact on Central Africa. The maintenance of the
subregional force — the Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic — beyond its
current mandate would appear to be one of the
appropriate measures.
My second point concerns the political climate
and good governance. As was recalled by Ms. Vogt, the
holding of the 2011 elections led to a major political
reshuffling that resulted in the principal opposition
parties leaving the National Assembly and gave the
presidential party a broad parliamentary majority. In
late November, the Government’s holding of an
inclusive workshop on electoral reform made clear its
awareness of the importance of policies that are based
on seeking a broad-based consensus.
Beyond electoral reform, the Peacebuilding
Commission encourages the Government to extend this
inclusive approach to all of the primary areas of public
policy. The opposition should also be constructive in
terms of its approach to dialogue with the Government,

11-63696

S/PV.6687

despite its having boycotted the elections, which
proved to be counterproductive.

relations between her Office and the Government of
the Central African Republic.

Good governance and the fight against corruption
are important priorities that the Government has
highlighted in its general policy statement to the
National Assembly. In the area of good governance,
there needs to be an improvement in public finance
management in order to restore relations with the
International Monetary Fund.

It would be remiss for us not to extend such
words of gratitude to the Chairman of the countryspecific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission on the Central African Republic,
Ambassador Jan Grauls, whose commitment to the
Central African cause we wish to recognize.

The PBC encourages the initiative of the Prime
Minister to hold a national workshop on fighting
corruption in order to raise the awareness of all
components of the nation with respect to this major
problem. The National Assembly has major oversight
responsibilities in this area.
The final point I would like to raise concerns the
transition from the previous national poverty reduction
strategy to the new one. Peacebuilding is one of the
key pillars of this new strategy, which will involve
efforts on the part of the Government as well as of its
international partners in the years ahead. It is important
that this strategy also win a broad national consensus.
As Chair of the country-specific configuration on
the Central African Republic, I would like to reiterate
here to the Government of that country that we are
ready and willing to continue to support it in the period
ahead in terms of mobilizing funds for the areas of the
strategy that would contribute to peacebuilding. In that
context, the Government will need to identify its
priorities and present realistic numbers.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Grauls for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touadera.
Mr. Touadera (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. I wish also to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his reappointment to the helm of
the Organization. Allow me to assure him of the
support of the Central African Republic during his
second term in his noble mission in the service of
peace and security in our world, which is today beset
by so many challenges. I wish also to congratulate
Ms. Margaret Vogt for her work at the helm of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic, as well as for the good

11-63696

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/739)
that has just been presented generally sets out, with
clarity, precision and concise analysis, a mostly fair
picture of the Central African Republic since last July’s
update. We have paid careful attention to the report.
The Government of the Central African Republic,
which I have the honour of leading under the authority
of the President of the Republic, has already noted the
observations contained in the report. It is committed, in
line with its capacities, means and limitations, to
continue the reforms that underpin the recovery of our
country, which aspires to peace, stability and
development but remains very fragile. Allow me,
however, to say that we face numerous challenges that
could severely jeopardize the opportunity for a lasting
peace in my country and the entire subregion.
Since 15 March, the beginning of the mandate of
the second five-year term of the President of the
Republic, while we recognize that much remains to be
done, at the same time we can point to significant
developments on the political level,. An inclusive
Government, whose members are of different and
varied affiliations, with quite a significant number of
women, is doing its utmost to address the pressing
issues of the Central African people. Parliament
operates freely and plays its role in the service of the
nation. On the political level, it is also worth recalling
that a space for dialogue has been established between
the Government and the various national political
families. The same applies to certain bilateral and
multilateral partners.
The recent consultation with the political parties
of the democratic opposition aimed at establishing a
standing body responsible for organizing future
elections, the revision of the electoral code, and
continuing the dialogue with the European Union under
article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement on issues of mutual
interest are, in our view, the paths to follow to ensure a
sustained dialogue as the basis for mutual
understanding, so that, together, we can overcome the

7

S/PV.6687

obstacles impeding the recovery of the Central African
Republic.

hampering the implementation of
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

On the security front, on 12 June the Government
signed a ceasefire and peace agreement with the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix
(CPJP) armed group, which calls for that group to
accede to the Libreville Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2008. In June, the President of the
Republic launched disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) operations that, in their first
phase, enabled the demobilization of more than 4,000
former combatants in the north-west of the country,
comprising largely former rebels of the Armée
populaire pour la restauration de la démocratie
(APRD).

With regard to the Lord’s Resistance Army, the
Government will continue to fight that terrorist
movement on its own and with the assistance of the
subregion, the international community and those
countries that have understood that that barbarous
situations cannot remain the concern of just the few
States that are victim to the crimes of those bandits and
criminals.

DDR operations are ongoing in the centre-north
and the north-east of the country, where the
strongholds of the CPJP and Union des forces
démocratiques pour le rassemblement (UFDR) armed
groups were situated. The second disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
phase,
like
reintegration, is hampered by a lack of funding, which
could jeopardize all efforts to date.
With regard to security sector reform, while
short-term actions have been successfully launched by
the Central African Government, we must nevertheless
say that medium- and long-term actions requiring the
assistance of our partners will be decisive; they merit
the international community’s special attention so as to
expedite the process. The Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), which is helping to shape peace and
security in the Central African Republic, should
gradually withdraw in stages by 2013. It will be
replaced by the Central African Armed Forces.
The situation of greatest concern involves the
foreign armed groups and road bandits, the Zaraguinas
or roadblockers, who continue to operate in the north,
carrying out attacks, kidnappings and the extortion of
goods and money and causing the displacement of
people, who have abandoned their villages, homes and
fields with humanitarian consequences that can be
imagined. The most appalling cases to date have been
as a result of the incursions of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA), led by Joseph Kony, and the presence on
our territory of the Chadian rebel Baba Laddé. They
pose a significant challenge for the Central African
Republic at a time when internal armed groups are

8

the Libreville

This is an opportunity to welcome the initiatives
of the Economic Community of Central African States,
the African Union, the United Nations and the United
States of America, who have been present and
committed alongside us on the ground. Our gratitude
also goes to the organizers of the thirty-third
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, held in Bangui from 5 to 9 December. That
meeting not only commended the joint actions of the
States of the subregion aimed at rooting out the LRA
rebellion, but also demanded the departure of the
Chadian armed group of Mr. Baba Laddé, who has
installed himself in the centre of the country and seeks
now to extend his influence to other parts of the
national territory. He must leave the Central African
Republic without conditions, and all legal means will
be used to facilitate his departure from the Central
African territory, starting with dialogue.
Concerning governance and the rule of law, the
Government will continue its efforts in its unwavering
struggle against corruption. The same goes for
improving the business climate by providing some
legal certainty for investment through laws and good
practices drawn up and implemented to promote that
end. Respect for human rights is an integral part of a
democratic State. The State will ensure that respect and
will spare no effort in ensuring access to justice for
those who seek it.
Finally, in this international context of crisis,
where austerity seems to be the order of the day, the
State will do its utmost to maintain and, I would say,
engage in dialogue with our traditional financial
partners, without whom the Central African Republic, a
post-conflict and fragile State, will not be able to curb
the endemic poverty affecting its population.
To conclude my statement, my presence at the
head of a significant delegation from my country in

11-63696

S/PV.6687

New York, is testimony to the unequivocal will of the
Central African Government and people to pursue by
every possible means the paths of peace and stability,
prerequisites of any sustainable development. For that
reason, all goodwill, old or new, that can help us along
that path is welcome in order to reach that shared goal.

11-63696

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

9
