A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
AIRESl47ll02
26 April 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 95
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (Al47l710)]
471102.

International action to combat drug abuse and illicit
trafficking

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned that the illicit demand for, production of and traffic
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances continue to threaten seriously
the socio-economic and political systems and the stability, national security
and sovereignty of an increasing number of States,
Reaffirming the principle of shared responsibility of the international
community in combating drug abuse and illicit trafficking,
Reaffirming also that the Declaration 11 and the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, II
adopted by the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking,
the Political Declaration and the Global Programme of Action adopted by the
General Assembly at its seventeenth special session JI and the Declaration
adopted by the World Ministerial Summit to Reduce the Demand for Drugs and to

11
See Report of the International Conference on Drua Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. B.
II

Ibid., sect. A.

JI

Resolution S-1712, annex.

I . •.
93-24560

A/RES/47/102
Page 2

Combat the Cocaine Threat, held in London from 9 to 11 April 1990, !/ together
with the international drug control treaties, provide a comprehensive
framework for international cooperation in drug control,
Re~ognizing the efforts of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme to implement its mandates within this comprehensive framework,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
to improve the effectiveness of the regional meetings of heads of national
drug law enforcement agencies and of the Subcommission on Illicit Traffic and
Related Matters in the Near and Middle East in addressing specific drug law
enforcement problems of the various regions,
Emphasizing the need for an analysis of transit routes used by drug
traffickers, which are constantly changing and expanding to include a growing
number of countries and regions in all parts or the world, particularly those
that are vulnerable to illicit transit traf£ic on account, inter alia, of
their geographical location,
Alarmed by the growing connection between drug trafficking and terrorism
in various parts of the world,
Recognizing the €fforts of countries that produce narcotic drugs for
scientific, medicinal and therapeutic uses to prevent the channelling of such
substances to illicit markets and to maintain production at a level consistent
with licit demand,
Reiterating its condemnation of criminal activities that involve
children in the use, production and illicit distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, and emphasizing the need for the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme and other competent agencies to give high
priority to measures designed to address this problem,
Noting the increasing number of States acceding to or ratifying the
international drug control treaties, including those that have become States
parties to the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, ~/
Reaffirming that all efforts to combat problems related to the
consumption, production and manufacture of and traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and the flow of money related to these activities
should be accompanied by effective measures to promote the economic and social
development of affected States,

!/

A/45/262, annex.

~/

E/CONF.82/15 and Corr.2

I ...

A/RES/47/102
Page 3

Recalling its resolution 46/103 of 16 December 1991, in which it
reiterated its invitation to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to consider, at
its thirty-fifth session, the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Expert
Group to Study the Economic and Socia.l Consequences of Illicit Traffic in
Drugs,~/ together with the comments of the Executive Director of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, with a view to recommending
appropriate follow-up activity,
Noting the action taken by the Commi.ssion on Narcotic Drugs on this
issue, including its decision to study the issue again at its thirty-seventh
session,
I

International action to combat drug abuse and illicit
trafficking
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General; 21

2.
Reiterates its condemnation of the crime of drug trafficking in
all its forms, and urges continued and effective international action to
combat it, in keeping with the principle of shared responsibility and with
full respect for national sovereignty, territorial integrity and the cultural
identity of States;
3;
Welcomes the initiatives of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to implement its mandates within the framework of the
international drug control treaties, the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary
Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, l/ the Global Programme of
Action 1/ and relevant consensus documents;
4.
Supports the focus on national and regional strategies for drug
abuse control, particularly the master-plan approach, and urges the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme to keep in mind that these should
be complemented with effective interregional strategies;
5.
Notes with appreciation the activities of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to promote and monitor the United Nations
Decade against Drug Abuse, 1991-2000, under the theme, "A global response to a
global challenge", including the successful launching by the Programme of the
goodwill ambassadors initiative, and invites Governments to cooperate with the
Programme in further developing this initiative;
G.
Takes note of the recommendation that Governments should establish
national focal points or coordinating mechanisms for the Decade;~/

£!

A/C.3/45/8, annex.

2/

A/47/378 and A/47/471.

~/

See A/47/471, para. 13.

/ ...

A/RES/47/102
Page 4

7.
Recommends that Governments cooperate fully with the Coordinator
for the Decade to enhance and facilitate the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs on progress made in attaining the objectives of the Decade, to
be submitted to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council;
8.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme,
in cooperation with relevant agencies, including the United Nations Children's
Fund, to study the involvement of children in drug-related criminal activities
and the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances by children, with
a view to recommending measures that may be taken to address this problem;
9.
Welcomes the trend towards ratification and implementation of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, ~/ that Convention as amended by
the 1972 Protocol, 10/ the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 11/
and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988; ~/
10.
Requests the United Nations International Drug ·control Programme
to include in its report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on the
implementation of the United Nations convention against Drug Abuse and Illicit
Trafficking of 1988 a section on experience gained to date in implementing the
Convention, which should contain recommendations and strategies for its
further implementation;
11.
Recommends that the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme invite the cooperation of the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Branch of the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat in its activities to counter drug-related criminality, including
money-laundering, to ensure complementarity of their efforts and to avoid
duplication;
12.
Encourages all countries to take action to prevent the illicit
arms trade by which weapons are provided to drug traffickers;
13.
Expresses its satisfaction with the efforts of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs to improve the functioning and impact of the meetings of heads
of national drug law enforcement agencies and with its decision, that the
heads of national drug law enforcement agencies of Africa, Asia, Latin America
and the Caribbean and the Subcommission on Illicit Traffic and Related Matters
in the Near and Middle East should continue to meet annually;
14.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
in its report on illicit traffic in drugs to analyse world-wide trends in
illicit traffic and transit in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
including methods and routes used, and to recommend ways and means for
improving the capacity of States along those routes to deal with all aspects
of the drug problem;

~/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.

10/

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.

11/

Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

A/RES/47/102
Page S

15.
Emphasizes the connection between the illicit production and
supply of, demand for, sale of and traffic and transit in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and the economic, social and cultural conditions of
the countries affected and that solutions to these problems must take into
account the differences and diversity of the problem in each country;
16.
Calls upon the international community to provide increased
international economic and technical cooperation to Governments, at their
request, in support of programmes for the substitution of illicit crops by
means of integrated rural development and alternative development programmes
that respect fully the jurisdiction and sovereignty of countries and the
cultural traditions of peoples;
17.
Takes note of the initiative of the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme to study the concept of swapping debt for alternative
development in the area of international drug abuse control and the decision
of the commission on Narcotic Drugs to consider this matter at its
thirty-sixth session on the basis of a report of the Executive Director of the
Programme; 12/
18.
Encourages Governments to nominate experts for the roster to be
maintained by the United Nations International Drug Control Programme, to
ensure that the Programme may draw from the widest pool of expertise and
experience in implementing its policies and programmes;
19.
Stresses the need for effective action to prevent the diversion
for illicit purposes of precursors and other chemicals, materials and
equipment frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
20.
Commends the International Narcotics Control Board for its
valuable work in monitoring production and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances so as to limit their use to medical and scientific
purposes, and for the effective manner in which it has implemented its
additional responsibilities, under article 12 of the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances,
concerning the control of precursors and essential chemicals;
21.
Takes note of the conclusions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
at its thirty-fifth session on the economic and social consequences of illicit
trafficking; 13/
22.
Expresses its satisfaction with efforts being made by the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme and other United Nations bodies
to obtain reliable data on drug abuse and illicit trafficking, including the
development of the International Drug Abuse Assessment System, the project to
determine possible improvements to the international system for the collection
of data on illicit traffic and money-laundering, as well as the programme of
technical cooperation with developing countries in collaboration with the
Financial Action Task Force, and requests the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme to report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
thirty-sixth session on the progress being made in these areas;

12/

See E/1992/25-E/CN.7/1992/14, chap. XI, resolution 2 (XXXV).

13/

Ibid.,

chap. VI.

I . ••

A/RES/47/102
Page 6

23.
Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations Social Defence
Research Institute will complete its world-wide research study on the economic
and social consequences of drug abuse and illicit trafficking in 1993;
24.
Recommends to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, when it studies
the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme on the economic and social consequences of drug abuse and
illicit trafficking at its thirty-seventh session, to consider including this
issue as an item on its agenda;
25.
Aooeals to States and the international donor community to
increase voluntary contributions to the Fund of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to enable it to expand its programmes
further;
II

Imolementation of the Global Programme of Action against illicit
production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 14/ concerning
the implementation of the Global Programme of Action; 1/
2.
Reaffirms its commitment to implementing the mandates contained in
the Global Programme of Action and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline
of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control; l/
3.
Notes with satisfaction the framework established by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs to monitor implementation of the Global Programme
of Action;
4.
Calls upon States to take all possible steps to promote and
implement individually and in cooperation with other States the mandates and
recommendations contained in the Global Programme of Action, with a view to
translating the Programme into practical action to the widest possible extent
at the national, regional and international levels;
5.
Calls upon the United Nations and its relevant bodies, the
specialized agencies, other relevant intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations to extend their cooperation and assistance to
States in the promotion and implementation of the Global Programme of Action;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution
under the item entitled "International drug control".
89th plenary meeting
16 December 1992

14/

A/47/471.
