A/63/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

69

th plenary meeting
Monday, 15 December 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Specific meeting focused on development
Agenda item 107 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will resume its consideration of agenda item
107, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit”, to hold, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006, a specific
meeting focused on development, including an
assessment of progress over the previous year.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Asha-Rose
Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General.
The Deputy Secretary-General: We gather at a
time when the world’s peoples face multiple crises
involving food, fuel and finance. These crises threaten
to upset poverty reduction efforts and our development
objectives. Therefore, this year’s meeting of the
General Assembly on development takes on special
significance.
The expected recessions in most developed
economies are likely to slow the robust growth
experienced by developing countries during the past
five years. There is already evidence that the financial
crisis is proving contagious, as exports from and
remittance flows into many developing countries are
diminishing.

Moreover, the slowdown in developing countries
is coming before many of them have had a chance to
recover from the shocks of the food and fuel price
hikes of 2007 and 2008. The prospects for the least
developed countries are deteriorating rapidly.
Even as we grapple with the causes and
consequences of these crises, the threat of climate
change is also upon us. Our immediate efforts to
manage the impacts of recent crises must not deflect
our attention from tackling this challenging problem.
The international community must work together
simultaneously on poverty, hunger, disease and finding
an acceptable path of sustainable development.
Poverty eradication is a top priority. Lack of
progress in achieving this goal could undermine efforts
to realize other Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). We have made some progress, but the latest
data show that much more needs to be done.
Creating jobs and accomplishing the goal of
creating decent work for all are crucial targets.
According to the International Labour Organization,
more than 20 million people are likely to lose their jobs
because of the current crisis.
In the area of health, significant but slow
progress has been made in reducing child mortality.
However, major differences remain between the
regions. Gains that have been made in the treatment
and prevention of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria need
to be sustained. There has been little movement on
maternal and newborn mortality. The strengthening of
health systems remains a challenge.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-64483 (E)

*0864483*

A/63/PV.69

We have also made some gains in establishing
sustainable development as a primary objective of
development strategies. The challenges posed by
climate change are being acknowledged widely. There
is now a growing recognition that development is not
attainable if it is not sustainable. Thus, we face
heightened challenges as progress slows. We must act
decisively to stop any further reversals.
We know that people and countries plagued by
poverty will be hit hardest by the crisis. That is why
aid flows have to be sheltered from its impact. Some
important steps have been undertaken to strengthen
international development cooperation, but there is a
growing fear of setbacks if the recessions in developed
countries deepen.
The commitments to increase the volume of
official development assistance and improve its quality
and impact, reiterated at the Doha Conference just a
couple of weeks ago, must be honoured. The Doha
Review Conference has resulted in a firm
recommitment to the global partnership for
development.
A successful conclusion to the Doha Round of
trade negotiations is essential. Doha should give new
impetus to efforts to realize the MDGs, but it must not
erode the developing countries’ policy space. A new
trade agreement must ensure that poor countries have
access to cheaper drugs to fight deadly diseases such as
AIDS. They must also have access to cleaner
technologies that will enable them to develop without
aggravating climate change.
In times of crisis, global solidarity is vital. I was
heartened by the display of political will and pledges
of support at last September’s high-level event on the
MDGs. The United Nations must continue to mobilize
all its mechanisms to maintain and enhance progress
towards development. I would like to stress the
important role played by the Economic and Social
Council in this regard.
The United Nations Development Cooperation
Forum, convened by the Economic and Social Council
for the first time last July, demonstrated its potential
role in promoting mutual accountability on aid issues.
In the current crisis, the Forum can also work towards
more effective approaches to development cooperation.
Moreover, it is well placed to forge greater coherence
between aid policies and other development-related

2

policies, such as trade policies and those that aim to
promote investment and other resource flows.
The Economic and Social Council’s annual
ministerial reviews are also important for their ability
to facilitate exchanges of information and lessons
learned. They have paved the way towards mutual
accountability in the fulfilment of international
commitments in development cooperation and aid
assistance. These new functions can enhance
collaboration, cooperation and coherence within and
beyond the United Nations system in the area of
development.
The financial crisis has made it clear that our
destinies are deeply interconnected. We have to work
together to ensure that our gains are not lost. The
global
mobilization
behind
the
Millennium
Development Goals has been inspiring. Let us not go
back on the promises made. This is a time to come
together. We should use every opportunity in 2009 to
ensure that these trying times do not distract us from
our commonly shared goals, particularly the goal of
pursuing peace and prosperity for all.
Mr. Delacroix (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of taking the floor on behalf of the
European Union.
The efforts of the international community to
ensure the follow-up of the texts arising from the
Millennium Summit, particularly in the area of
sustainable development, are of particular importance
at this time when, as Ms. Migiro pointed out, the
financial crisis, the impact of climate change and
attacks on the environment, and the increase in food
prices and energy costs could jeopardize the progress
made in the area of economic growth and the
improvement of living conditions in a number of
countries, particularly affecting the poorest and the
most vulnerable.
The work of this sixty-third session of the
General Assembly, marked by the seriousness of the
situation, has benefited from the positive results of the
international meetings that have been held throughout
the year, including the first meeting of the
Development Cooperation Forum; the twelfth session
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, held in Accra; the Third High-Level
Forum on Aid Effectiveness, also held in Accra; the
high-level meeting on Africa’s development needs; and

08-64483

A/63/PV.69

the High-Level Event on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs).
These major meetings have shown us how much
work remains to be done by all participants in order to
achieve the goals set by the international community at
the Millennium Summit. The dynamism from which
these events benefited was useful for the very
important meeting in Doha early this month: the
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for
Development.
The European Union participated very actively in
the drafting of the Outcome Document of the Doha
Conference and is happy to see its success. The
Conference was the opportunity for the European
Union, the leader in official development assistance, to
strongly reaffirm its solidarity with its partners in the
South and its commitments in the area of official
development assistance. The European Union will
continue to spare no effort to help the international
community to meet its commitments, in particular with
regard to sub-Saharan Africa, where there are serious
delays.
Strengthened cooperation at all levels is also
indispensable if we are to pool our energies for
sustainable development and the protection of the
environment.
Climate change is a reality today, and everyone is
feeling its effects. We must intensify our efforts to
fight against this phenomenon, which affects in turn
our ability to achieve our environmental, economic and
social goals, and which has an impact on peace and
security. The European Union has placed climate
change at the heart of its action. The European Union
intends to maintain its level of ambition and
commitment. The United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Poznan last week has placed us on the
right track for the Copenhagen Conference next year.
Climate change is inseparable from other threats
to the environment and sustainable development. Thus,
the loss of biodiversity, which we undertook in
Johannesburg to reduce significantly by 2010, must be
seen together with problems such as desertification,
deforestation and climate change.
We must also remain very attentive to the social
aspects of development and create conditions that
allow for the full development of every individual:
respect for the rule of law, the promotion of human

08-64483

rights, gender equality, the protection of children,
education, health care and the fight against the major
pandemics, economic and social rights and decent
work, particularly in the face of the growing migration
flows, as well as a number of other challenges.
In seeking to meet these numerous challenges, we
should look to the future work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
entire United Nations system with a will to rationalize
agendas, to make our work effective and
complementary with the decisions of other institutions
and intergovernmental bodies, and to ensure the
coherence of the system at Headquarters and in the
field.
In this respect, we welcome the adoption at the
end of the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly and during the current session of consensual
resolutions on the operational development activities of
the United Nations system that will allow us to make
significant progress in the rationalization of the
operational activities of the system for the benefit of
our partners.
More generally, we welcomed the adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 62/277 on system-wide
coherence within the United Nations system, and we
are happy to see that the current session, as well as the
Doha Conference, has already enabled us to consolidate
some of the achievements of that resolution.
We also welcome the initiatives taken over the
past two years in the organization of the work of the
Economic and Social Council. We feel that the annual
ministerial review and the Development Cooperation
Forum are very promising mechanisms. We must also
benefit as far as possible from the Council’s spring
session, which is an occasion to strengthen our
partnership with the Bretton Woods institutions — a
partnership that is particularly needed, given
international reflections currently taking place on the
financial crisis and its impact on development.
However, we would like to express a degree of
concern at the accumulation of numerous proposals for
new summits and high-level meetings in future years.
It seems to us very important for the very credibility of
our Organization and for its budgetary stability that we
think more strategically with regard to the areas in
which the United Nations can really add value as
compared to other international forums, and with
regard to the deadlines that it seems truly important for

3

A/63/PV.69

our leaders to meet, using existing structures insofar as
possible, so that, within the framework of the United
Nations, we can provide genuine dynamism and real
added value to our common action for the
implementation of the texts adopted at the Millennium
Summit.
Mr. Reina Idiaquez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to commend your efforts and to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having organized
this meeting to discuss the Millennium Development
Goals and the world economic crisis, which also
enables us to consider in depth the need for genuine
democratization of the United Nations and the
international economic system.
We have entered a period of history from which
we will not emerge the same. Something will change,
and we will emerge well or not well, according to how
we act. Much will depend on what we do, how we do it
and when we do it.
I am duty-bound to appeal to the international
conscience regarding the negative impact of the current
crisis, which is hindering the access of millions of
people in our region to the most basic services and
products for human consumption. They are victims of
the inequities of the international market and of this
global crisis, which is aggravating the situation of the
most vulnerable populations in our countries and
forcing them to survive by fighting fierce daily battles
to find food.
This crisis requires immediate responses, and we
cannot, through neglect and indifference, overlook the
neediest in our societies. That is why it is important
that the General Assembly play a more dynamic and
active role in preparing short- and medium-term
strategies that offer viable and lasting solutions.
The financial and economic crises of the past sent
us a very clear message, although we did not know
how to interpret it. The crises began in the United
States, a symbol of wealth and development, and
spread suddenly, like a tsunami.
At the dawn of United Nations history in the
mid-twentieth century, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund were created at Bretton
Woods, as we all know. Ever since then, it has been
assumed that the main goals of the United Nations
would be shared by all States and organizations and by
the entities created at Bretton Woods. They were not

4

two separate organizations; it was a single international
community which needed to harmonize its criteria for
assisting countries. As a consequence, the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund fall within the
worldwide structure that is the United Nations.
Mr. Jeenbaev (Kyrgyzstan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Our historical experience holds many lessons for
us, among which is the need to evaluate, with an eye to
the future, the viability of the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank as they work at the moment
in order to determine whether they require major
changes. It is clear that their viability will depend on
their being brought up to date and made more
democratic. Democratization has taken hold in almost
all of the countries of the world, but not in all of the
organizations in which those democratic countries
participate. The economic and financial objectives of
these institutions must maintain a relevant relationship
with democratic structures across the globe. This is an
aspiration shared by all countries, all peoples and all
human beings.
Experience also teaches us that, while the United
Nations drafts plans for attaining the Millennium Goals
and reducing poverty, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have adopted policies that
diverge from and contradict those goals. This
divergence results in a shock when such policies
conflict with the policies of human and democratic
development designed by the United Nations.
Experience also tells us that, if we seek to resolve
economic problems, we cannot choose solutions that
promote greed. Privatizing profit and socializing loss,
as stated by President Lula of Brazil at the general
debate of the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly, is a path at odds with ethics and is,
furthermore, unsustainable.
The weakness of the existing institutions highlights
the need for change to update and democratize the entire
architecture of the United Nations and the Bretton
Woods agreements. The recent meeting of the Group of
Twenty, held in Washington, D.C., on 15 November,
underlined the importance and necessity of revising the
structure and sustainability of these institutions and,
above all, the need for their reform. Honduras adds its
voice to the call for the necessary consultations to be
held at the very highest level in order to achieve, as soon

08-64483

A/63/PV.69

as possible, the appropriate strengthening of the
aforementioned institutions.
Following consultations with Member States,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon laid out at those
meetings some steps to be followed. He has our full
support in his initiatives. Other initiatives have been
suggested by the President of the General Assembly on
more than one occasion.
The Presidents of Central America, organized in
the Central American Integration System, which I have
the honour of chairing until the end of December,
raised the issue of the need for the General Assembly
to assess the consequences of the economic crisis on
the Millennium Development Goals in terms of food,
climate, energy and health needs. Following up on this
decision, the countries of the Bolivarian Alternative for
the Americas, with our co-sponsorship, agreed on the
preparation of a draft resolution that has been
submitted for the consideration of the General
Assembly with a view to organizing a world summit in
order to reach consensus on common solutions between
countries, rich and poor, large and small, in the pursuit
of common benefits in the interests of all humanity.
This same idea, with some variations, was raised by the
Group of 77 and at the recently concluded Doha
Summit. There can therefore be no doubt that a global
consensus has been formed on this historic matter.
The strength of this meeting convened by our
illustrious friend, the President of the General
Assembly, lies in its timeliness and its potential
historic impact if we are able to update and adapt the
United Nations and to recast the Bretton Woods
institutions, which are in urgent need of
democratization and rejuvenation, with a democratic
vision.
We must construct a world of peace and
development with the support of all. That has been and
continues to be not only the founding but the lasting
dream of the United Nations and of all the peoples of
the world. When we say that we need the support of
all, we are referring to specific situations in which, in
the ideal vision of a just and fair world, such goals
could be achieved with relative ease. By way of
example, I note that, if trade barriers no longer existed,
our exports would reach the market in more
competitive circumstances, allowing our productive
sector to be much more profitable. If the increasing
distortion of agricultural trade caused by production

08-64483

subsidies were brought to an end, our economies,
which rely strongly on the primary sector, would likely
be strengthened, opening up greater opportunities for
employment generation. If migration were no longer
considered a crime and migrants no longer treated as
international criminals but as human beings, then
development, progress and harmony among nations
would very likely make it possible to bridge the gaps
between developed and developing countries.
Perhaps these proposals may seem unattainable,
but Honduras, its President and its people will never
renounce our dream of a just world where there are
opportunities for everyone and where solidarity and
democracy are the norms governing relations among
human beings and the members of the international
community.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): We thank the President of
the General Assembly for convening this specific
meeting of the General Assembly focused on
development, as decided in resolution 60/265. As we
deliberate this important issue today, the world is in the
throes of a development emergency triggered by
multiple crises of finance, food and energy and a
looming global recession. Clearly, these crises
seriously threaten the efforts of developing countries
like Pakistan to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. It is particularly alarming when
we also know that poverty is more widespread than
previously estimated and that it is rapidly increasing.
Earlier this month in Doha, our review of the
implementation of the development commitments made
in Monterrey also confirmed the existence of a serious
deficit in their implementation. More notably, as
reflected in the continuing decline in official
development assistance flows, there are also distortions
in the global trade regime and a continued exclusion of
low-income
countries
from
global
economic
governance and decision-making. All signs indicate
that the present crises will only make the
implementation shortfalls more pronounced and real.
Happily, in Doha, we were able to rekindle the
Monterrey spirit and recommit to a genuine global
partnership for development — a partnership that is
rooted in the belief that, as members of humanity, our
destiny is interwoven and that peace and development
are inseparable. That partnership is premised on mutual
trust and the common pursuit of agreed goals.

5

A/63/PV.69

We particularly welcome the Doha decision to
convene a United Nations conference on the world
financial and economic crisis. The conference, we
believe, will provide a good opportunity, at the highest
political level, to fully assess the impact of the
financial crisis on the efforts of the developing
countries to achieve sustained economic growth and
sustainable development. It should also offer specific
recommendations on how best to address the
challenges and underlying factors that triggered the
crisis. We look forward to an early convening of the
conference and to working closely and cooperatively
with the President of the General Assembly in defining
the modalities for the conference.
Pakistan is also delighted at the agreement
reached in Doha to have a strengthened and more
effective intergovernmental process to follow up on the
implementation of the Doha Declaration. Pakistan has
long pushed for effective implementation mechanisms
to monitor development commitments under United
Nations auspices. We see this decision as an important
step in the right direction and will be working closely
with Member States for its early realization.
We would have liked to have used this specific
development-focused meeting to carry out a serious,
comprehensive and in-depth review of the global
economic
situation
and
to
make
concrete
recommendations on how best to tackle the multiple
crises, including the global economic meltdown. As
pointed out this past year as well, this meeting would
have better served its original purpose if it had been
scheduled at the beginning of the General Assembly
session rather than towards the end of the main part of
its work. Convening this meeting earlier, during the
general debate of the Assembly, we believe, would
have allowed our leaders to collectively reflect on the
global economic trends and prospects and to assess
progress in the implementation of the development
goals and commitments on an annual basis. We realize
that this important role, on account of the extraordinary
circumstances that we face this year, will be played by
the United Nations conference that we have all agreed
to convene soon.
The dwindling interest in this meeting, which is
marked by limited participation, as reflected in the
short speakers’ list this morning, particularly with
regard to speakers from the developed countries,
speaks volumes about why the timing and scheduling

6

of this meeting are not appropriate and need to be
revisited.
Before I conclude, Pakistan, for its part, will
continue to work closely with our partners in a
constructive and creative manner to address some of
the key challenges that we face globally and in the
context of our work in the United Nations in advancing
the implementation of the global development agenda.
Ms. Alzhanova (Kazakhstan): This sixty-third
session of the General Assembly, from day one of the
general debate, has been marked by deliberations on
the world economic and financial crisis, volatility in
food and fuel prices and the adverse impacts of climate
change and the costs of its mitigation, all of which
represent challenges to efforts to create environments
conducive to development in any State in the world.
We strongly believe that the United Nations is the
one truly global venue where the world can unite and
hear deliberations by representatives of all Member
States and by the world’s leading experts. Therefore,
Kazakhstan highly welcomes the decisions to hold a
United Nations summit and a high-level meeting of the
Economic and Social Council in 2009 to examine the
underlying causes of the financial crisis, present
recommendations, undertake a comprehensive review
of the financial institutions and articulate a policy
framework for making the international financial
system more inclusive, democratic and developmentoriented.
We are concerned by the far-reaching impact and
multidimensional effects of the crises on the global
economy and financial system, yet we fully recognize
that the core and primary responsibility of any State is
to be engaged in development processes through the
exercise of ownership and the effective implementation
of national policies and development strategies, thus
realizing its respective commitments towards its own
people.
Without waiting for the results of the
international deliberations on global economic and
financial governance, which could ensure a more
effective and coordinated management of the
aforementioned global issues, Kazakhstan is already
participating in the process by mitigating setbacks to
our own development objectives and finding solutions
to strengthen our economy, maintain our growth and
sustainable development and protect our citizens,
especially by empowering marginalized groups in

08-64483

A/63/PV.69

society in order to shield them from the severe impacts
of the crises. We are doing so on the basis of our strong
belief that each country’s individual development at the
national level contributes to the foundation of
international financial and economic well-being.
This is why Kazakhstan has undertaken a series
of measures to stabilize its internal market through
sound economic and financial policies and structural
reforms. To sustain our current level of socio-economic
development, my Government has chosen to mitigate
the negative consequences of the crises through
measures of unprecedented scale, including the
adoption of an economic and financial system
stabilization plan and the use of a national fund to
ensure that there are effective mechanisms to respond
to economic instability, modernize our economy and
manage risks in both the public and the private sectors.
To support the economic and financial sectors,
$15 billion was allocated towards stabilizing the
housing market, supporting local small and mediumsized enterprises, and enhancing the incomes of
socially marginalized groups through increases to
social benefits and pension payments. $5 billion will be
channelled to the Samruk-Kazyna National Welfare
Fund and other funds allocated to recapitalizing the
major banks and injecting money into the national
financial securities market. The rest will be provided as
liquid assets to private companies financing the real
sectors of economy, especially our “leap forward”
innovation and infrastructure projects.
We are all aware that the “three f” crises and the
subsequent cuts in foreign direct investments and
official development aid have had a particular impact
on the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing
States. Kazakhstan was the venue for the first
ministerial conference that raised the issue of the
economic vulnerability of landlocked countries and
called for worldwide attention to them. As such, my
country highly values the broad recognition of the
needs of landlocked developing countries and stronger
engagement by donor countries to the midterm review
of the Almaty Programme of Action through the
adoption of new modalities and concrete measures of
assistance to landlocked developing countries and the
redressing of trade imbalances for this group of
countries, thus ensuring their stable economic growth.

08-64483

In his 2008 annual address to the nation, the
President of Kazakhstan called on the business
community to fully commit to the realization of the
State’s social policy through the integration of
environmental and social partnerships and the
inclusion of community relations issues in corporate
strategic business plans and everyday operations.
Furthermore, we will follow the United Nations
recommendation that governmental solutions be
aligned with the Millennium Development Goals. The
Government of Kazakhstan strongly adheres to efforts
to mainstream environmental sustainability into all
socially oriented development policies in all national,
sectoral and local strategic programmes and action
plans.
For example, implementing the national
sustainable development concept at the local level
provides for the establishment of transboundary
sustainable development zones on the basin principle,
which contributes to the resolution of environmental
and socio-economic problems.
Furthermore, in keeping with the renewed
priority placed by the Government of Kazakhstan on
strengthening its social development policy and with
the
United
Nations
Development Assistance
Framework for Kazakhstan 2009-2014, our country
will rely on best foreign practices and on the technical
assistance of United Nations programmes and
specialized agencies in formulating a people-oriented
economic policy, developing a socially responsible
private sector and improving our public administration
system.
In conclusion, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral and his staff for all the work done by the
United Nations to promote the implementation of the
outcomes of the Millennium Summit. We express the
hope that these multilateral deliberations will maintain
the momentum and will increase opportunities to
enhance global development processes and resolve
today’s acute problems in a concerted manner.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The efforts of the nations of the South to
achieve their sustainable development are being
seriously threatened today. The high-level dignitaries
attending
the
recent
Follow-up
International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in
Doha, acknowledged that fact in the outcome document
of that event, the Doha Declaration. While it contains

7

A/63/PV.69

important statements on the current economic and
financial context, the document does not provide a
comprehensive and accurate diagnosis as to the
seriousness of the situation that the world is
experiencing or its implications for the poorest
countries. It merely reiterates old commitments, which
still require the political will of the most powerful in
order to be met.
Every day, we continue to receive all manner of
analyses and forecasts concerning the repercussions of
the current financial and economic crisis on the
weakest economies. At the same time, there is
sufficient evidence of the negative impact of climate
change and environmental degradation, whose main
victims continue to be the poor and most vulnerable
countries. In the particular case of small island States,
the devastating paths of hurricanes and other climaterelated phenomena in recent months have caused
extensive economic losses, including resource losses of
every kind, that have set us back years in terms of
development. Foreign indebtedness continues to
deepen the structural crisis of our economies, and the
stalemate in the Doha Round of trade negotiations —
which were supposed to have been focused on
development — completes the discouraging scenario
that we have described.
Regrettably, urgent solutions to address those
issues are still not being provided. Rich countries and
the international institutions representing their interests
do nothing more than offer us palliatives and
temporary remedies, often marred by onerous
conditionalities, instead of seriously committing
themselves to finding and implementing effective
measures that will finally provide the radical changes
we so sorely need.
Today, it is more urgent than ever to establish an
international order based on solidarity, social justice,
equity and respect for the rights of peoples and of
every human being. We do not need more rhetoric or
empty promises. The question is whether those
responsible for the chaotic and unequal world in which
we live today are willing to give up at least some of
their privileges and their wastefulness.
Such change will occur only through a profound
transformation of the current economic, commercial
and financial system, resulting in more just regulations
that truly facilitate the sustainable development of our
peoples. The need to continue to strive for a new

8

international economic order was acknowledged a few
days ago by the 115 nations that voted in favour of a
draft resolution under this item presented by the Group
of 77 and China in the Second Committee of the
General Assembly. Other important ongoing initiatives
will give pre-eminence to the role of the Assembly in
discussing these issues and, in particular, in
establishing new international institutions that meet the
true needs and priorities of our peoples.
At the current international juncture, we hope that
the Organization can play its historic role and that it
can become, as has been said, the most legitimate
defender of the rights of the world’s dispossessed and
marginalized, in particular their most urgent right: the
right to development.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): We
have heard the last speaker for this specific meeting
focused on development. The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 107.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/63/L.39/Rev.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Russian):
Members will recall that the Assembly held the debate
on agenda item 114 and its sub-items (a) to (u) at its
36th and 37th plenary meetings, on 3 November 2008.
Before we proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.39/Rev.1, I should like to announce that, since
the introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Cambodia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.39/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/63/L.39/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 63/144).
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda
item 114?
It was so decided.

08-64483

A/63/PV.69

The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I
would like to appeal to those Member States intending
to submit draft resolutions on the remaining sub-items
to do so as soon as possible.
The President in the Chair.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
draw the attention of members to the date of recess of
the current session. Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, held on 19 September 2008, the
General Assembly decided that the sixty-third session
would recess on Tuesday, 16 December 2008.
However, in view of the work that remains to be done
in this part of the session, I would like to propose that
the Assembly postpone the date of recess of the current
session to Monday, 22 December 2008.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to that proposal?

08-64483

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In addition, I
should like to consult members regarding an extension
for the work of the Fifth Committee. Members will
recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting, held on
19 September 2008, the General Assembly approved
the recommendation of the General Committee that the
Fifth Committee complete its work by Friday,
12 December 2008. However, I have been informed by
the Chairperson of the Fifth Committee that the
Committee was not able to finish its work on Friday,
12 December, and would need additional meetings
until Monday, 22 December 2008. May I therefore take
it that the General Assembly agrees to extend the work
of the Fifth Committee until Monday, 22 December
2008?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at noon.

9
