220

_________ ___G_'e_n_era_l_A_sse_m_b_l"--y-_F_o_m_·e_tb_Sess
__io_n______________ ________________ _

13. Also calls upon Member States to make all efforts
to promote the accelerated and complete elimination of
such fundamental elements hindering economic and social
progress and development as colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism and all forms of racial discrimination, apartheid, terrorism in all its forms, aggression, foreign occupation, alien domination and all forms of inequality and
exploitation of peoples, and also to undertake effective
measures to lessen international tensions and to halt the
arms race and redistribute released resources in order to
promote social and economic development;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue monitoring the world social situation in depth on a regular basis
and to submit the next full report on the world social situation to the General Assembly in 1989, for consideration at
its forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social
Council;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the next report on the world social situation, to take into
account the observations made by Member States on the
1985 report as well as the conclusions of the Commission
for Social Development contained in the report on its
twenty-ninth session;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for wide dissemination of the
reports on the world social situation;
17. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the preparation of future reports by
making available all relevant information pertaining to
their respective areas of competence;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "World social situation".
116th plenary meeting
/3 December /985

40/101. The role of women in society91
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, as
well as the importance of the Declaration of Mexico on the
Equality of Women and their Contribution to Development and Peace, I 97 5, 92 the World Plan of Action for the
Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Women's Year93 and the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 94
Welcoming the results of the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, held at Nairobi from I 5 to 26 July 1985, in particular the adoption of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies
for the Advancement ofWomen, 51
Noting that just and lasting peace and social progress, as
well as the establishment of a new international economic
order, require the active participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation and in the
process of development,
Bearing in mind that economic inequality, colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, foreign intervention, occupation, alien domination and terrorism in all its
forms, acts of aggression and interference in the internal
9l See also sect I, footnote 17, and sect. V, resolution 40/204.
92 Report of the World Conference of the International Women ·s Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 Jul_v 1975 (llmtcd Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV. I), chap. L
93 Ibid., chap. 11, sect A.

affairs of others and violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms constitute an impediment to the achievement of real and genuine equality and to the integration of
women in society,
Convinced of the necessity to secure for all women full
realization of the rights embodied in the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,H in the International Covenants on Human
Rights 24 and in other relevant instruments in this field,
Recognizing that the achievement of equal and full participation of women in all spheres of activities constitutes
an inseparable part of the political, economic, social and
cultural development of all countries,
Aware that efforts to promote the status of women in all
its aspects and their complete integration in society go
beyond the problem oflegal equality and that deeper structural transformations of society and changes in presentday economic relations, as well as elimination of traditional prejudices through education and dissemination of
information, are required so as to create conditions for
women to develop fully their intellectual and physical
capacities and to participate actively in the decisionmaking process in political, economic, social and cultural
development,
Mindful of the necessity to enlarge the possibilities for
both men and women to combine parental duties and
household work with paid employment and social activities,
Aware that the role of women in childbearing should not
be the cause of inequality and discrimination, and that
child rearing demands shared responsibilities among
women, men and society as a whole,
Deeply appreciating the increasing participation of
women in political, economic, social and cultural life and
their contribution thereto,
I. Appeals to all Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to recognize in
their activities the importance of all interrelated aspects of
the role of women in society - as mothers, as participants
in economic development and as participants in public
life - without underestimating any one of them;
2. Calls upon all Governments to encourage such
social and economic development that would secure the
participation of women in all spheres of work, equal pay
for work of equal value and equal opportunities for education and for professional and vocational training, taking
into consideration the necessity of combining all aspects of
the role of women in society;
3. Appeals to Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to promote
conditions that would enable women to participate as
equal partners with men in public and political life, in the
decision-making process at all levels and in the management of different spheres of life in society;
4. Calls upon Governments to recognize the special
status and social importance of motherhood and to take.
in the context of their specific abilities and conditions, all
necessary measures to promote its protection, including
maternity leave with pay, and to provide security for their
jobs as long as necessary, so as to allow women, if they so
wish, to fulfil their role as mothers without prejudice to
their professional and public activities;
5. Appeals to Governments to promote the establishment of appropriate facilities for child-care and education
94 Report of the World Conference on the United Natwns Decad.- fi11
Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Copenhagen. /4-30 July 1980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and comgendurn), chap. I.

sect A

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of children as a means of combining parenthood with economic, political, social, cultural and other activities and
thus to provide assistance to women in integrating fully
into their societies;
6. Decides to consider the question of the role of
women in society at its forty-first session under an item
entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advanc.ement
of women to the year 2000".
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/102. Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation
The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain peac.e and security in the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recalling that the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peac.e, held at
Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, in adopting the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women, 51 underlined the importanc.e of the participation
of women in promoting international peac.e and co-operation,
Convinced that the International Year of Peace, proclaimed for the year 1986 by the General Assembly in its
resolution 40/3 of 24 October 1985, could give new
impulses for safeguarding international peac.e and security,
Reaffirming its resolution 37/63 of 3 Dec.ember 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 124 of 14 Dec.ember 1984, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of
Women to consider what measures might be necessary in
order to implement the Declaration,
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace and security and cooperation,
Convinced that increased efforts are required to eliminate still existing forms of discrimination against women
in every field of human endeavour,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of
the Declaration,
I. Pledges its determination to encourage the full participation of women in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote international peac.e and co-operation;
2. Appeals to all Governments to take the necessary
measures for putting into practice the principles and provisions of the Declaration on the Participation of Women in
Promoting International Peace and Co-operation;
3. Invites all Governments to give wide publicity to the
Declaration and its implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the Declaration;
5. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization
and other appropriate bodies within the United Nations
9S PJl983/7 and Corr. I and 2.
96 Report of the World Conference to Rev,ew and Appraise the Achievements o(the United Nations Decadefor Women: Equa/ir_v. Development and

221

system to consider adequate measures to implement the
Declaration;
6. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to consider measures which may be necessary to implement the Declaration in the context of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women
for the period up to the year 2000;
7. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its forty-first session, as a sub-item of an
item entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women to the year 2000".
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/103. Prevention of prostitution
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the subject of the suppression of the traffic in persons
and of the exploitation of the prostitution of others, prepared in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/20 of 4 May 1982, 95
Recalling its resolution 38/ 107 of 16 December 1983
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/30 of
26 May 1983, as well as the report of the World Conferenc.e to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peac.e, 96
Considering that the suppression of the traffic in persons
and of the exploitation of the prostitution of others require
a three-fold concerted effort, involving prevention, punishment of all forms of procuring and solidarity in order to
facilitate the social rehabilitation of the victims,
l. Congratulates the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World
Tourism Organization for the action they have begun to
take in implementation of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1983/30;
2. Invites once again the Economic and Social Council
to consider the whole question of the suppression of the
traffic in persons and of the exploitation of the prostitution
of others at its first regular session of 1986 in connection
with the agenda item on human rights, together with the
reports requested by the Council in its resolution 1983/30;
3. Invites the Working Group on Slavery of the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to transmit its report to the Commission
on the Status of Women at its next session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the issuanc.e as a United Nations document of the report on the
suppression of the traffic in persons and of the exploitation
of the prostitution of others prepared in pursuanc.e of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/20.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/104.

United Nations Development Fund for
Women

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 25 of 14 December 1984, in
which it decided, inter alia, that the activities of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
Peac1•, Nairobi. 15-26 Julv 19/i.< (IJnited Nations publication, Sales No.
E.85.IY 10)
