S/2021/240

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 March 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
during the period from 21 October 2020 to 19 February 2021
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous report, dated
12 November 2020 (S/2020/1110), including on the provisions of resolution 2539
(2020). Against a backdrop of increasing hardship in Lebanon, the area of operations
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally stable.
Outstanding obligations remain for both parties under resolution 1701 (2006). There
was no progress towards a permanent ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
On 14 November, UNIFIL observed 12 illumination rounds fired from south of the
Blue Line close to Abbasiyah (Sector East). All 12 rounds landed south of the Blue Line.
In this connection, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that they had
apprehended an individual who had crossed south of the Blue Line close to Ghajar
(Sector East). UNIFIL has launched an investigation into the incident. On 17 November,
UNIFIL observed 17 illumination rounds fired from south of the Blue Line close to
Abbasiyah; 11 of the rounds landed north of the Blue Line. On this occasion, the Israel
Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that they had apprehended two Israeli citizens in the
area, who allegedly were involved in drug smuggling. On 19 November, UNIFIL
observed eight illumination rounds fired from south of the Blue Line near Sarda (Sector
East); seven landed north of the Blue Line. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL
that they had fired the rounds after observing suspicious activity in the area. On
28 November and 1 January, respectively, UNIFIL observed 14 and 2 illumination
rounds fired from an Israel Defense Forces position close to Mays al-Jabal (Sector East),
all of which landed south of the Blue Line. On both occasions, the Israel Defense Forces
informed UNIFIL that they had prevented a number of individuals from crossing south
of the Blue Line. On 16 February, UNIFIL observed an illumination round fired from
south of the Blue Line near Arab al-Wazzani (Sector East), which landed south of the
Blue Line. Subsequently, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that they had fired
the round in response to suspicious activity in the area.

21-03229 (E)

170321

*2103229*

S/2021/240

3.
On 16 November, UNIFIL observed Israel Defense Forces soldiers firing eight
small arms rounds in the air after a sewage truck approached the Blue Line from the
north, close to Markaba (Sector East). Shortly thereafter, an Israel Defense Forces
tank pointed its barrel north of the Blue Line. On 13 December, UNIFIL observed a
group of Israel Defense Forces soldiers close to Hula (Sector East), one of whom fired
three shots in the air after four individuals in civilian clothes approa ched the Blue
Line from the north. UNIFIL launched an investigation into the incident. On
9 January, UNIFIL observed eight Israel Defense Forces soldiers close to Kfar Shuba
(Sector East), with one of the soldiers firing two shots in the air. On 15 Februar y,
UNIFIL observed three Israel Defense Forces soldiers firing two shots in the air after
two men in civilian clothes approached the Blue Line from the north near Hula, one
of whom threw stones towards the area south of the Blue Line. UNIFIL is following
up on all of these incidents with the parties. On 15 November, the Israel Defense
Forces informed UNIFIL that they had fired shots in the air close to Blida (Sector
East) after two individuals were spotted approaching the technical fence. UNIFIL also
launched an investigation into an incident on 15 December, when the Israel Defense
Forces allegedly fired warning shots in the air after a boy crossed south of the Blue
Line close to Mays al-Jabal. On 7 February, the Israel Defense Forces informed
UNIFIL that they had fired shots in the air close to Mays al-Jabal to deter individuals
from crossing south of the Blue Line.
4.
UNIFIL continued to observe incidents of weapons being pointed by the Israel
Defense Forces and the Lebanese Armed Forces across the Blue Line, often requiring
efforts by UNIFIL to reduce tensions, including by interpositioning between the parties
on the ground. On 10 November, UNIFIL interpositioned between the parties close to
Udaysah (Sector East), after an Israel Defense Forces tank pointed its barrel towards a
group of approximately 20 Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers, 3 of whom were armed
with rocket-propelled grenade launchers, and three individuals in civilian clothes. Some
of the Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers pointed their weapons toward s the tank. On
23 December, an Israel Defense Forces tank near Mays al-Jabal pointed its barrel north
of the Blue Line towards an area where Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL personnel
were standing, whereupon one Lebanese Armed Forces soldier pointed a rocketpropelled grenade launcher towards the tank. The tank laid a smokescreen, following
which the Lebanese Armed Forces and then UNIFIL left the area. On 30 December,
UNIFIL personnel took position between the parties in Markaba after an Israel Defense
Forces tank pointed its barrel towards an area where several Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL personnel, as well as five individuals in civilian clothes, were standing,
following which Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers pointed a rocket-propelled grenade
launcher and an automatic rifle towards the Israel Defense Forces. On 26 January,
UNIFIL observed Israel Defense Forces soldiers with two tanks and Lebanese Armed
Forces soldiers in defensive positions pointing weapons at each other across the Blue
Line in the vicinity of Mays al-Jabal. UNIFIL also observed individuals in civilian
clothes, some with professional cameras, north of the Blue Line. The Israel Defense
Forces withdrew from the area 90 minutes later. On 5 February, UNIFIL interpositioned
between the parties close to Mays al-Jabal when Israel Defense Forces soldiers and
Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers pointed weapons across the Blue Line.
5.
During the reporting period, UNIFIL assessed that a dirt road in the vicinity of
Udaysah had crossed south of the Blue Line, at two locations in an area where
Lebanon has reservations. At the urging of UNIFIL to address these violations of the
Blue Line, the Lebanese Armed Forces intervened with Udaysah municipality, which
commenced realignment of the road on 28 January. UNIFIL is maintaining a
monitoring and liaison presence in coordination with the parties to ensure calm during
the corrective roadworks.

2/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

6.
Following the facilitation of access by the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel
Defense Forces to relevant locations in connection with the breaches of the cessation
of hostilities that took place on 27 July and 25 August 2020 (see S/2020/1110,
paras. 2–4), UNIFIL finalized its investigations into the two incidents and shared its
findings with the parties. UNIFIL has been unable to substantiate the claim by the
Israel Defense Forces of an attempted infiltration from north to south across the Blue
Line that preceded its shelling in Kfar Shuba on 27 July. Regarding the 25 August
incident, UNIFIL confirmed that the exchange of fire was initiated from north of the
Blue Line, with sniper/small arms fire from the Hula area into the Manarah area south
of the Blue Line, followed by retaliatory fire by the Israel Defense Forces ta rgeting
several Green without Borders locations north of the Blue Line. In identical letters
dated 16 November addressed to the President of the Security Council and myself
(S/2020/1120), the Permanent Representative of Israel stated “[these are] the two
most significant attacks conducted by Hezbollah against Israeli soldiers and positions
in recent months”. In identical letters dated 29 January addressed to the President of
the Security Council and myself (A/75/732-S/2021/104), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon stated that there was “no truth to the Israeli claims that
Hizbullah attacked from north of the Blue Line on 27 July and 25 August 2020.”
7.
The Israel Defense Forces continued to enter Lebanese airspace in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. From 21 October to 19 February,
UNIFIL recorded 333 airspace violations, totalling 758 hours and 11 minutes in
overflight time. Unmanned aerial vehicles accounted for approximately 77 per cent
of the violations. The remaining airspace violations involved fighter aircra ft or
unidentified aircraft. In identical letters dated 12 January addressed to the President
of the Security Council and myself (A/75/714-S/2021/51), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon stated that “Israeli enemy aircraft, whether reconnaissance
aircraft or warplanes, have violated Lebanese airspace in a manner that is disturbing
and provocative and aimed at terrorizing the inhabitants of Lebanon in all popul ated
areas of the country.”
8.
On 10 November, the Israel Defense Forces stated that it had downed “a drone
belonging to Hezbollah that crossed from Lebanon into Israel.” On 24 November,
UNIFIL detected an unmanned aerial vehicle flying in a north-eastern direction,
falling north of the Blue Line near Qulay‘at (Sector East). UNIFIL did not find any
debris. On 22 January, the Israel Defense Forces stated that it had “downed a drone
that crossed from Lebanon into Israeli airspace,” close to the Kibbutz Hanita, south
of Alma al-Sha‘b (Sector West). UNIFIL did not observe the incident. On 1 February,
Hizbullah said that it had “downed a drone belonging to the Israeli enemy that had
entered Lebanese airspace outside Blida”. UNIFIL did not observe the incident.
9.
UNIFIL continued to liaise and coordinate with the parties to defuse tensions
along the Blue Line and to underscore the importance of respecting resolution 1701
(2006). From 21 October to 19 February, UNIFIL recorded 328 ground violations by
Lebanese civilians crossing south of the Blue Line, including 229 violations by
shepherds and farmers, mainly in the Shab‘a Farms area, as well as 71 violations by
civilians on their way to the Shu‘ayb well near Blida. On 13 January, UNIFIL
observed eight Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers, some of whom were armed, crossing
south of the Blue Line near Kfar Shuba on three different occasions while taking
photographs of the area south of the Blue Line. Following a warning by UNIFIL, they
returned north of the Blue Line. On 12 January, the Israel Defense Forces
apprehended a shepherd who had crossed south of the Blue Line close to Bastrah
(Sector East). In identical letters dated 13 January addressed to the President of the
Security Council and myself (A/75/717-S/2021/78), the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon informed about this incident and stated that it was “being pursued in
coordination with UNIFIL”. On 15 January, UNIFIL, in coordination with the
21-03229

3/19

S/2021/240

International Committee of the Red Cross, facilitated the return of the shepherd to
Lebanon. A UNIFIL investigation is ongoing.
10. In addition to Blue Line violations observed by UNIFIL, the Lebanese Armed
Forces informed UNIFIL on 15 November that it had apprehended a Palestinian who
had crossed north of the Blue Line near Duhayrah (Sector West). On 18 and
28 November, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that it had thwarted
attempted crossings south of the Blue Line by Sudanese citizens in the vicinity of
Ayta al-Sha‘b (Sector West) and an unspecified location. On 28 November, the
Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL that it had arrested two Sudanese citizens
for attempting to cross south of the Blue Line close to Mays al-Jabal. UNIFIL, in
coordination with the parties, facilitated the return of seven cows that had crossed
south of the Blue Line on 24 January in the Wazzani area (Sector East). UNIFIL has
launched an investigation into the incident.
11. The occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line
by the Israel Defense Forces continued. While the Government of Lebanon has
welcomed the UNIFIL proposal of 2011 for the facilitation of the withdrawal of the
Israel Defense Forces from the occupied area, the Government of Israel has yet to
respond.
12. To help to keep the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River free of
unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons, UNIFIL, in close coordinat ion
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, maintained 16 permanent and an average of 129
temporary checkpoints and conducted 357 counter-rocket-launching operations on
average each month.
13. UNIFIL observed unauthorized weapons in the area of operations on 317
occasions. All but the following four incidents involved hunting weapons. On
13 November, an Observer Group Lebanon patrol observed an individual pointing a
rifle without a magazine at a driver of another vehicle in Ayn Ibil (Sector West). On
1 December, UNIFIL observed seven individuals, one carrying an M16 rifle, close to
the Blue Line near Ghajar. On 1 December, UNIFIL observed two individuals, one
carrying an AK-47 rifle, near Aytarun (Sector West). On 27 January, UNIFIL observed
two individuals, one carrying an AK-47 rifle, in the vicinity of Ramiyah (Sector
West). UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forced of all four incidents.
14. Pursuant to resolution 2539 (2020), UNIFIL maintained its operational tempo
and visible presence throughout the area of operations, conducting on average 13,497
monthly military operational activities, including 6,281 patrols. Some 4 per cent of
the mission’s military operational activities included at least one woman peacekeeper.
UNIFIL vehicular, foot and air patrols maintained an operational footprint in
municipalities and villages in the area of operations. Air reconnaissance patrols
continued over areas to which ground patrols have limited access, including private
property and land contaminated by explosive remnants of war or anti-personnel
mines. While observing precautionary measures owing to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the proportion of UNIFIL operations conducted in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces remained at 15 per cent. Owing to
COVID-19-related restrictive measures, in November, UNIFIL decreased operational
activities by about 6 per cent. Since 14 January, the Lebanese Armed Forces
suspended training activities, while community engagement walks remain suspended.
15. Despite repeated requests, UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several
locations of interest, including some Green without Borders sites. While the freedom
of movement of UNIFIL was respected in most cases, the mission did encounter some
restrictions to its movements, as detailed in annex I.

4/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

16. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued to carry out maritime interdiction
operations throughout the maritime area of operations, hailing 2,192 vessels. The
Lebanese Armed Forces inspected and cleared all 373 vessels referred by UNIFIL for
inspection.
17. UNIFIL continued to support the capacity-building of the Lebanese Armed
Forces Navy by conducting 216 training sessions and exercises, jointly practising
common operational standards for commanding, monitoring and hailing activities.
This included the conduct of the first advanced maritime interdiction operation
integration training on 25 November. Training sessions requiring in-person
attendance remain suspended owing to COVID-19-related restrictions.
18. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL continued their engagement within the
framework of the strategic dialogue, although at a reduced pace owing to COVID -19
restrictions. UNIFIL assisted the Lebanese Armed Forces in developing plans for the
model regiment training concept and enhancement of the training site identified in
Shawakir (Sector West). Preparatory steps for the refurbishment of the model
regiment headquarters in Sribbin (Sector West) were finalized.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
19. UNIFIL convened tripartite meetings on 27 October, 7 December and
2 February, in a curtailed format and with fewer participants, owing to COVID -19
restrictions. UNIFIL continued its regular liaison and coordination activities with
both parties, in person and virtually. The mission also continued its ongoing bilateral
engagement with the parties and utilized the tripartite mechanism to resolve
contentious issues, including by revitalizing the discussions on the marking of the
Blue Line.
20. After being on hold since May 2017, the Blue Line marking process resumed on
16 November, with the Lebanese Armed Forces concluding the verification of
21 pending Blue Line markers on 21 December. UNIFIL has urged the Israel Defense
Forces to complete the verification of its eight pending markers. In line with the
recommendations of the Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System, UNIFIL continued the refurbishment of existing Blue Line markers.
21. Despite the agreement of Israel to the proposal in 2008 for a UNIFIL liaison
office in Tel Aviv, the establishment of the office remains pending.
22. In accordance with the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, UNIFIL, through
quick-impact projects and civil-military cooperation initiatives funded by troopcontributing countries, continued to provide capacity-building support to national
authorities, including the Internal Security Forces, and supported local authority
efforts to prevent COVID-19 transmission. Such support included the donation of
personal protection equipment and the training of medical personnel in virus
detection, screening and quarantining.
23. UNIFIL continues to support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, including through the training of 5,015 UNIFIL
military and civilian personnel, including 351 women, during the reporting period.
UNIFIL sector commanders and battalion commanders continue to meet specific
performance benchmarks related to women and peace and security. In line with
resolution 2539 (2020), UNIFIL supports implementation of the first national action
plan of Lebanon for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as a member of
the plan’s five coordinating committees.

21-03229

5/19

S/2021/240

C.

Disarming armed groups
24. No progress was achieved with respect to the disarmament of armed groups.
Hizbullah continued to acknowledge publicly that it maintains military capabilities.
The maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and other
groups in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) continues to restrict the State’s ability
to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory.
25. On 27 December, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, stated,
“The resistance now has double the number of precision missiles it had last year. …
We can hit precisely all important targets inside the Israeli entity.”
26. In identical letters dated 16 November addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (S/2020/1120), the Permanent Representative of Israel stated that
Hizbullah had continued its “military entrenchment and presence in southern
Lebanon” and that “this dangerous situation poses a threat not only to Israel and its
citizens, but also to the people of Lebanon, which Hezbollah uses as human shields
to protect its arsenal of over 130,000 rockets and military infrastructure”. On
26 January, the Israel Defense Forces Chief of Staff, Aviv Kochavi, said, “every fifth
house in Lebanon is either a missile warehouse or rocket warehouse”, adding that,
“we are going to attack military targets, but if a rocket is linked to a house, it’s
categorized as a military target.”
27. The Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces made 24 terrorismrelated arrests between 21 October 2020 and 19 February 2021, including of
suspected affiliates of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
28. In eastern and northern Lebanon, several personal disputes escalated into
shootings, resulting in 33 fatalities (including two children) and injuries to
78 persons. At least 16 personal disputes in Baalbek-Hirmil, eastern Lebanon,
involved the use of rocket-propelled grenades.
29. On 3 December, the Higher Defence Council ordered tighter security measures
to counter the proliferation of weapons and their use for celebratory purposes.
Nevertheless, on 1 January, in Baalbek, eastern Lebanon, a Syrian woman re fugee
was killed following celebratory shooting. In a separate incident, also on 1 January, a
civilian aircraft parked at Rafic Hariri International Airport in Beirut was damaged
following celebratory shootings.
30. The security situation in the Palestine refugee camps across Lebanon remained
stable, despite isolated incidents reported in the Ein el Hilweh and Mieh Mieh camps.
There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
31. Allegations of arms transfers to non-State armed actors continued and remain
of serious concern. If confirmed, such transfers would constitute a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) (see annex II). While taking allegations of arms transfers
seriously, the United Nations is not in a position to substantiate them independently.
32. With reference to paragraph 36 of my report dated 12 November 2020
(S/2020/1110), on 29 September, at the annual debate of the General Assembly, under
the right of reply, the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran characterized as
baseless and unfounded the allegations made by Israel against his country. He pointed
to the Israeli regime’s violation of the dignity of Palestinians and other Arabs living
under occupation, in flagrant violation of international law and disregard for United

6/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

Nations resolutions, as well as its continued occupation of territories in the Syrian
Golan and part of Lebanon (see A/75/PV.15).
33. On 27 December, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, stated
that Hizbullah “took the Kornet [missile] from the Syrians to defend our country and
we used it in the July war”. On 3 January, Mr. Nasrallah stated that “when Iran gave
missiles … to Lebanon, it was for the … Lebanese people to defend Lebanon”.
34. Reports of Hizbullah engagement in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued.
35. The border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic remained closed
owing to COVID-19 restrictions, with limited exceptions. Cross-border smuggling
continued to be reported, however, including of fuel, flour and medicine. On
13 December in Uwaynat, Akkar, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested four Lebanese
individuals attempting to smuggle 27 Syrian nationals into Lebanon. As part of
anti-trafficking operations, on 2 January, in Hirmil, the Lebanese Armed Forces
arrested three Lebanese individuals who had shot towards a military vehicle, killing
one soldier and injuring another.
36. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
is aware of one movement by sea from Lebanon to Cyprus, in January, involving
seven Syrian nationals.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
37. UNIFIL cleared 4,906 m 2 of land in the UNIFIL area of operations, finding and
disposing of 985 anti-personnel mines. The Mine Action Service conducted 30 quality
assurance and quality control monitoring visits, one quality assurance handover and
four risk awareness briefings to 21 UNIFIL military personnel.

F.

Delineation of borders
38. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, nor in relation to the issue of the
Shabʻa Farms area. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel have yet to respond to the
provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed in my report of 30 October
2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (see S/2007/641, annex).
39. On 28 and 29 October and 11 November, representatives from the Governments
of Israel and Lebanon held the second, third and fourth rounds of talks to discuss the
delineation of their maritime boundary. The United States of America mediated the
discussions, which were hosted by the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon at UNIFIL premises in Naqurah, South Lebanon. A further
round of talks scheduled for 2 December was postponed until further notice.

G.

Political and institutional stability
40. On 22 October, the President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, held binding
parliamentary consultations resulting in the designation of the former Prime Minister,
Saad Hariri, as Prime Minister, with 65 votes out of 120 members of Parliament
(8 having resigned). Mr. Hariri vowed to quickly form a Government of non-partisan
specialists, whose mission would be to implement the economic, financial and
administrative reforms featured in the road map of the French initiative. As at
19 February, despite ongoing discussions between the President and Prime Minister-

21-03229

7/19

S/2021/240

designate, as well as exhortations by key domestic actors and international partners,
no agreement had yet been reached with respect to a future Cabinet.
41. The worsening economic and financial crisis in Lebanon has resulted in over
half of the population sliding into poverty. Gross domestic product in 2020 contracted
by about 20 per cent. Depositors’ access to their accounts remains tightly limited. The
Lebanese pound has lost nearly 85 per cent of its official value since October 2019,
trading at around 9,000 pounds for the dollar on the black market. On 8 January 2021,
the Governor of the Central Bank, Riad Salameh, indicated that, the exchange rate
“will be floating”, while noting that this should be accompanied by a confidenceenhancing programme and cooperation with the International Monetary Fund.
Mr. Salameh also indicated that the Central Bank had around $500 million above the
minimum mandatory reserve level of $17.5 billion. The consumer price index rose by
145 per cent from November 2019 to November 2020, while food and beverage prices
increased by around 402 per cent for the same period. Talks between the Government
of Lebanon and the Fund remain stalled.
42. On 1 December 2020, the World Bank stated that a “deliberate lack of effective
policy action by authorities has subjected the economy to an arduous and prolonged
depression”. In a report dated 1 December 2020, the World Bank urged Lebanon to
adopt “a credible, comprehensive and coordinated macro-financial stability strategy,
within a medium term macro-fiscal framework”, comprising debt and financial sector
restructuring, a new monetary policy framework, fiscal adjustments, pro-growth
reforms and enhanced social protections.
43. On 29 December 2020, the caretaker Prime Minister, Hassan Diab, indicated
that critical import subsidies could continue for another “six months if we apply
rationing ”. On 12 January, the World Bank approved a $246 million loan for a threeyear Emergency Social Safety Net Project to provide emergency cash transfers and
access to social services to approximately 786,000 poor and vulnerable Lebanese.
44. On 26 November, the firm contracted to audit the Central Bank withdrew, citing
“insufficient provision of information”. The Central Bank had cited the banking
secrecy law as grounds not to share certain information. On 21 December, Parliament
approved a law suspending banking secrecy for one year. On 19 January 2021, the
office of the Attorney-General of Switzerland requested legal assistance from the
Lebanese authorities related to an investigation into alleged money laundering and
embezzlement tied to the Central Bank of Lebanon. The request has been transferred
to the public prosecutor of Lebanon.
45. Public frustration at the worsening socioeconomic situation as well as
COVID-19 restrictive measures escalated into violence on several occasions. On
26 and 27 January in Tripoli, 2 protestors died, and 246 protesters and 81 securi ty
personnel were injured, when protesters stormed local government buildings and
clashed with security forces. On 29 October in Beirut, a Syrian refugee set himself on
fire and died. On 6 January, also in Beirut, a Lebanese man self-immolated. On
7 January, another Syrian refugee self-immolated, in Ta‘labaya, Biqaʻ.
46. Fears of insecurity and lawlessness prompted peaceful protests in Hirmil, Biqaʻ,
on 5 January, and in Tripoli, North Lebanon, on 8 January. On 21 November, in
B‘abda, Mount Lebanon, 69 prisoners escaped from the Justice Palace. The Internal
Security Forces apprehended 37 fugitives and another 5 fugitives died when their
getaway vehicle crashed, while 27 remain at large. On 2 December, in Qartaba,
Jubayl, a retired customs colonel was found inside his house with a deadly head
injury; a criminal investigation was launched. On 21 December, in Kahhalah, Alayh,
Mount Lebanon, unidentified individuals shot dead a Lebanese national in his car. On
4 February, a political activist and publicist known for stances critical of Hizbullah,
Lokman Slim, was found shot dead in his car near Nabatiyah, South Lebanon.
8/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

Mr. Slim’s death was condemned across the political spectrum, and a criminal
investigation was ordered.
47. The death toll of the explosion that occurred at the port of Beirut on 4 August
stands at 205, including 23 Syrian and 2 Palestine refugees. Over 6,500 people were
injured, with 543 refugee households reporting family members injured and
26 Palestine refugees reported injured. The investigation into the explosion’s causes
and circumstances continues. On 26 November, Parliament rejected the request of the
investigative judge, Fadi Sawan, to expand the investigation to former and current
caretaker ministers. On 10 December, Judge Sawan announced his intention to
question as suspects the caretaker Prime Minister, the former Minister for Finance,
Ali Hassan Khalil, and the former Ministers of Public Works, Ghazi Zeiter and
Youssef Fenianos. On 17 December, Mr. Khalil and Mr. Zeiter requested the Court of
Cassation to transfer the case to another judge. On 18 February, the Court of Cassation
dismissed Judge Sawan from the investigation. A new judge, Tareq Bitar, was
appointed the next day. As at 19 February, 37 individuals had been charged; of these,
25 were detained. Victims and their families have staged protests against what they
perceived as a lack of accountability and political interference in the investigation.
48. Since 4 August, humanitarian assistance coordinated by the United Nations has
reached approximately 300,000 people through protection, food security, shelter and
rehabilitation, water, sanitation and hygiene interventions. Coordination continued
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, which leads government efforts. The humanitarian
flash appeal that was announced on 14 August and closed on 31 December received
$165.1 million (84 per cent) of the $196.6 million requested. Together with non -flash
appeal funding, donors have contributed $310.9 million to the port explosion response.
49. Following the rapid damage and needs assessment of the explosion at the port
of Beirut, the United Nations, the World Bank and the European Union launched their
strategic framework for reform, recovery and reconstruction on 4 December. The
framework includes a calculation for a people-centred recovery of $584 million, over
18 months. Longer-term reform and reconstruction costs are estimated at $2 billion.
50. The strategic framework and the Lebanon Financing Facility (a multi-donor trust
fund) were presented to the international conference in support of the Lebanese
population, which was hosted virtually by France and the United Nations on
2 December. Taking stock of the humanitarian response to the crisis and efforts towards
early recovery, participants expressed concern regarding the socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation, reiterated the urgent need for Lebanese political leaders to agree
as soon as possible on the formation of a credible Government, called for respect for
human rights and reaffirmed solidarity with the people of Lebanon. Participants
emphasized the importance of the continuity of funding beyond emergency humanitarian
aid, notably for good governance, health, education, social protection, housing, culture
and heritage, with special attention to the immediate needs of small and medium -sized
enterprises. The participants supported the reconstruction of the port facilities and
adjacent neighbourhoods to build back better and in an inclusive and transparent manner,
and strongly recalled the importance of the effective implementation of the reforms
expected by the men and women of Lebanon and the international community.
51. In December, judicial authorities convicted three senior officers of the Internal
Security Forces and others of serious corruption crimes and initiated prosecutions,
using the recently adopted illicit enrichment law, against more than 25 senior public
officials, including the former commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces. Other
anti-corruption initiatives included the introduction of a new asset declaration system
and the establishment of a special office for whistle-blower protection.
52. The National Anti-Corruption Institution remains inoperative pending the
appointment of its commissioners. The National Commission for the Missing and
21-03229

9/19

S/2021/240

Forcibly Disappeared in Lebanon and the National Human Rights Commission,
including the Committee for the Prevention of Torture, are also not yet functional,
with no budgets allocated. On 6 January, the Human Rights Committee of the
Parliament issued a declaration on hate speech, recognizing with grave concern its
increased intensity in Lebanon and committing to confront it. Investigations into prior
allegations of the excessive use of force by security forces against protestors (see
S/2020/195, para. 60) remain outstanding.
53. On 25 November, parliamentary committees reviewed electoral reform
proposals ahead of the 2022 parliamentary elections.
54. On 21 December, Parliament amended the domestic violence law to include
economic and psychological violence, introduced specialized prosecutors and judges,
and adopted a law criminalizing sexual harassment in the workplace and in public
spaces. In support of the country’s efforts to implement the national action plan on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, the United
Nations has advised on mainstreaming gender equality in the Lebanese Armed Forces,
improving the prevention of and response to gender-based violence and trafficking in
persons, increasing the active participation of women in peacebuilding and intensifying
support for their political representation and participation in the 2022 elections.
55. As at 31 December, overall international assistance to Lebanon reported by
donors stood at $2.01 billion, including $1.7 billion disbursed in 2020 and
$304 million carried over from 2019. Donors reported $372 million in outstanding
commitments for 2021 and beyond. Within the overall amount, the Lebanon Crisis
Response Plan for 2020 is 63 per cent funded at $1.68 billion, with United Nations
entities and non-governmental organizations reporting $1.4 billion in funds received
in 2020 and $245 million carried over from 2019.
56. Also as at 31 December, 882,162 refugees and asylum seekers were registered
with UNHCR in Lebanon, including 865,531 Syrian refugees and 16,631 refugees
and asylum seekers of other nationalities. The number of registered Syrian refugees
continued to decrease owing to returns to the Syrian Arab Republic, resettlement to
third countries, deaths and onward movements. With new registrations of Syrian
refugees by UNHCR suspended since 2015, the actual number of Syrians in need of
international protection in Lebanon is unknown. The estimate of the Government of
Lebanon remains at 1.5 million.
57. At the International Conference on Facilitating Repatriation of Refugees to
Syria, convened in Damascus on 11 and 12 November, the caretaker Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and Emigrants and Social Affairs of Lebanon stressed country’s desire
for an increase in refugees returning to the Syrian Arab Republic, referring to the
policy on returns adopted by the Council of Ministers on 14 July 2020, which set out
measures to accelerate the safe return of displaced people to the Syrian Arab Republic.
Meanwhile, deportations of Syrians who entered or re-entered Lebanon irregularly
after 24 April 2019 continued, without the application of legal procedural safeguards.
58. On 23 November, in Bisharri, North Lebanon, after a Syrian man shot and killed
a Lebanese man, local Lebanese attacked Syrians and their homes, injuring 13 and
forcing some 338 Syrian families to move. On 26 December, following a personal
dispute between Lebanese and Syrian nationals in Minniyah, North Lebanon, a local
informal refugee settlement was torched, injuring four and forcing around 90 Syrian
refugee families to relocate.
59. Inside the Palestine refugee camps, protests calling attention to socioeconomic
distress, as well as humanitarian and protection needs, led to temporary closures of
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) facilities and service disruptions.
10/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

60. On 11 December, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon sentenced Salim Ayyash,
who had previously been convicted, to life imprisonment in the Ayyash et al. case in
connection with the bombing on 14 February 2005 that killed 22 people, including
the former Prime Minister, Rafic Hariri, and injured 226 others. The Tribunal issued
a renewed arrest warrant for Mr. Ayyash, who remains at large. On 13 January, the
Prosecution, the Defence and the legal representative of participating victims filed
appeals.
61. COVID-19 infections surged, reaching the stage 4 level of community
transmission by late January. The Government imposed a nationwide lockdown from
14 January to 8 February. The Lebanese Armed Forces distributed financial assistance
to around 280,000 of the most vulnerable families to alleviate the economic and social
impact of the lockdown. With the intensive care unit occupancy rate near 95 per cent
and the ongoing emigration of health professionals further straining the country’s
capacity to manage the pandemic, the World Health Organization, UNHCR and the
United Nations Children’s Fund helped to secure additional hospital beds, equipmen t
and human resources, notably nurses. As at 8 February, Lebanon had recorded
339,122 cumulative cases and 3,993 cumulative fatalities. By the same date, 2,781
Syrian refugees, 5,215 Palestine refuges and 28 refugees of other nationalities had
tested positive for COVID-19, of whom 127 Syrians and 184 Palestinians have died.
UNHCR and UNRWA are working to contain transmission of the virus among the
refugee population and ensure their equal access to testing, treatment and vaccines
under the national COVID-19 response plan. The Lebanon COVID-19 Emergency
Appeal had received $91 million by 31 December. With emergency funding support
from the World Bank, Lebanon received its first shipment of vaccines on 13 February.
With additional supplies from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility, the Government aims to vaccinate at least one third of the population,
including refugees and migrant workers, by December 2021.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
62. The COVID-19 Countrywide Business Contingency Plan of Lebanon continued
to inform United Nations preparedness measures, in line with World Health
Organization guidelines, including quarantine and remote working arrangements, as
appropriate.
63. UNIFIL continuously reviewed its security plans and risk prevention and
mitigation measures in close coordination with the Lebanese authorities. Strict security
measures remained in place in the Arqub area (Sector East), including the use of armed
escorts for official movements by all United Nations personnel. UNIFIL facilitated
24 missions to the Arqub area by members of the United Nations country team.
64. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings in Lebanese military courts against
individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against the mission.
The Permanent Military Court held hearings on 15 December regarding the attack
against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with the Spanish contingent in 2007 and the
case of terror intent opened in January 2014. In the case of the serious attack against
UNIFIL on 27 May 2011, a hearing was held on 26 October, with the next hearing
scheduled for 21 September 2021. In the 1980 case, in which two UNIFIL
peacekeepers from Ireland were shot dead and one was injured, and i n which the
United Nations shared with the Court, at its request, the report of the Board of Inquiry
convened by UNIFIL on the incident, the Permanent Military Court issued a verdict
on 21 December, sentencing the perpetrator to 15 years of hard labour. Th e case has
been appealed before the Military Court of Cassation. The United Nations has not
21-03229

11/19

S/2021/240

been informed of any criminal proceedings to bring to justice the perpetrators of the
incident of 4 August 2018 in the village of Majdal Zun (Sector West), in which armed
individuals attacked a UNIFIL patrol, as described in my report dated 15 November
2018 (S/2018/1029).

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
65. As at 19 February, UNIFIL comprised 10,636 military personnel, including 637
women (6.0 per cent), from 45 troop-contributing countries; 244 international civilian
staff, including 94 women (38.5 per cent); and 565 national civilian staff, including
151 women (26.7 per cent). Since the departure of the Brazilian flagship on
2 December, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force has comprised five vessels, one
helicopter and 697 of the Force’s military personnel, including 32 women (4.6 per
cent). Germany assumed command of the Maritime Task Force on 15 January. In
addition, 52 military observers, including 9 women (17.3 per cent), from the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization serve with Observer Group Lebanon, under
the operational control of UNIFIL. The most senior military woman serves at the rank
of Colonel; the most senior civilian woman serves at the D-2 level.
66. Pursuant to the Action for Peacekeeping commitment to strengthen performance
and accountability, UNIFIL undertook its first performance assessment utilizing the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment System (CPAS) framework in
November. The framework also informed the 2021–2022 budget planning process.
67. In implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping commitments and Security
Council resolution 2436 (2018), UNIFIL finalized the assessment of 14 subordinate
military units and two ships for logistics, training and operational preparedness on
30 October. The shortfalls identified within two military units, related to logistics and
documentation, have been addressed. On 31 January, the Mission concluded the
assessment of 15 additional military units and one ship, with 12 shortfalls relating to
logistics, training, documentation, area familiarization and gender identified among
eight units, to be addressed by 20 February.
68. In my letter to the President of the Security Council dated 29 October
(S/2020/1059), I presented the first elements of the implementation plan on the
assessment of the continued relevance of UNIFIL resources (see S/2020/473),
pursuant to resolution 2539 (2020). In November, UNIFIL completed the civilian
staffing review, ensuring closer alignment of the workforce with UNIFIL
requirements. Following the finalization of a comprehensive plan for enhanced video
surveillance at 19 positions along the Blue Line, which will enhance force protection,
situational awareness and the detection and reporting of violations of resolution 1701
(2006), UNIFIL has commenced the procurement of related equipment.

V. Conduct and discipline
69. Neither UNIFIL nor the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon received any allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse during the
reporting period. Both missions continued to improve their related preventative
mechanisms, taking into account the increased risks of gender-based violence,
including sexual harassment and domestic violence, since the implementation of
COVID-19 work modalities and to raise public awareness. Military commanders
continued to receive briefings on their accountability in respect of conduct and
discipline matters.

12/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

70. The United Nations country team, with international and national
non-governmental organizations, supported the prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse network of Lebanon through the development of inter-agency standard
operating procedures, an information-sharing protocol on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, awareness-raising materials and technical guidance
documents to strengthen prevention and response efforts, in addition to awar enessraising with front-line aid workers and the promotion of the integration of a
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse approach to the COVID-19 response and
the response to the explosion at the port of Beirut.

VI. Observations
71. I reiterate my call, and echo that of the international community, to all political
forces to facilitate the timely formation of a Government able to undertake the
reforms necessary to put Lebanon on the path to recovery. Meanwhile, I also call on
the caretaker Government of Lebanon and its Parliament to exercise their
responsibilities in taking policy and legislative steps to alleviate the impact of the
country’s multiple crises on the population. I urge the authorities of Lebanon to act
to halt the deepening financial and economic crisis, strengthen accountability and
ensure good governance, in line with the needs of the people.
72. At the 2 December conference of support to the Lebanese population, the
international community sent a strong message that genuine reforms are critical to
restore the trust of the Lebanese population and the international community, and for
the engagement of the international community in support of Lebanon. The United
Nations will, together with the World Bank and the European Union, work to
implement the strategic framework for reform, recovery and reconstruction, with
continued gratitude for the generous support of the international community for the
recovery effort in Beirut. The active, unified and committed cooperation of an
empowered Government will be indispensable for the successful implementation of
this framework and to bring tangible relief to the population.
73. I reiterate the need for an impartial, thorough and transparent investigation into
the explosion at the port of Beirut.
74. Noting that transformative, people-centred reform remains a key demand of the
Lebanese people, I encourage the Parliament, electoral authorities and other
stakeholders to put in place the required electoral frameworks, in keeping with the
constitutionally stipulated electoral calendar for 2022.
75. I call for the respect of obligations and commitments under international human
rights law. I condemn the killing of Lokman Slim and urge a swift and transparent
investigation to bring the perpetrators to justice. Perpetrators of serious violations and
abuses of human rights must be held accountable. The space for civic engagement
and freedom of expression must be preserved.
76. As public protests continue, I remind the authorities to protect the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. The security forces of Lebanon should
abide by international norms and standards on the use of force, in particular the
principles of legality, necessity and proportionality. Protestors should exercise thei r
rights in accordance with the rule of law and without resorting to violence.
77. I am concerned by the incidents along the Blue Line, including the occasions on
which weapons were pointed by the parties across the Blue Line. Such incidents have
the potential to lead to escalation, with serious consequences. I commend the timely
intervention by UNIFIL to contain such situations and the effective liaison and
coordination mechanism by which UNIFIL has kept the parties positively engaged. I
wish to recall that the identification of the Blue Line in 2000 was solely the
21-03229

13/19

S/2021/240

responsibility of the United Nations for the practical purpose of confirming the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanon in compliance with Security
Council resolution 425 (1978) and without prejudice to future border agreements.
Both sides, despite their respective reservations, undertook to respect the Blue Line
as identified by the United Nations. I urge both parties to do their utmost to prevent
violations of the Blue Line, which must be respected in its entirety. It is essential that
the parties avoid provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric, exercise utmost
restraint and refrain from hostile activity that could put at risk the cessation of
hostilities. The parties should use the liaison and coordination arrangements with
UNIFIL to the maximum extent, refrain from unilateral action and allow UNIFIL, in
the first instance, to resolve tensions.
78. I commend the parties for continuing to attend the tripartite meetings, despite
COVID-19 restrictions. I urge the parties to engage with UNIFIL in the Blue Line
subcommittee and find agreed solutions to the outstanding contentious areas. The United
Nations will continue to support efforts to defuse tensions through dialogue, pursue
opportunities for confidence-building and create an environment conducive to resolving
underlying differences, including through the continued good offices of my Special
Coordinator for Lebanon and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander.
79. The continued violations of Lebanese airspace by Israeli aircraft, including
allegedly to carry out strikes inside the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as of low-flying
aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles, remain of deep concern. The overflights
constitute a violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty and
cause distress to the Lebanese population. I reiterate my condemnation of all
violations of Lebanese sovereignty and call again for the Government of Israel to
cease all overflights of Lebanese territory. The continued occupation by the Israel
Defense Forces of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line equally
represents a continuing violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
80. I call upon the Lebanese authorities to grant UNIFIL full access to all locations
north of the Blue Line requested in connection with the mission’s investigations,
including with respect to the tunnels crossing the Blue Line, confirmed by UNIFIL in
December 2018 and early 2019, and to the Green without Borders site in Aytarun in
connection with the incident on 1 September 2019, as well as the daily monitoring of
the Blue Line, as mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) and recalled in resolution
2539 (2020). The Lebanese authorities have the primary responsibility for ensuring
that there are no unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons in the area and, to
that end, must facilitate the mission’s access to such locations for preventive
inspections and investigative purposes.
81. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations, including
along the full length of the Blue Line, remains critical. The mission’s ability to conduct
patrols and activities independently must be upheld in accordance with its mandate. It
is incumbent upon the Lebanese authorities to investigate any such restrictions of
movement, including with respect to the incidents in Bar‘ashit on 10 February and
Blida on 25 May 2020. The United Nations has still not been informed of any criminal
proceedings against the attackers from the Majdal Zun incident of 2018. The Lebanese
authorities must fulfil their obligations to ensure the safety of UNIFIL personnel and
full accountability for those who attack peacekeepers. I note the verdict of
21 December by the Permanent Military Court of Lebanon sentencing the perpetrator
to 15 years of hard labour for the kidnapping and killing of two UNIFIL peacekeepers
and causing serious injury to a third peacekeeper in April 1980. I welcome this
development and urge the timely conduct and completion of judicial processes into all
outstanding cases of attacks against United Nations personnel.

14/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

82. The 100 per cent inspection rate by the Lebanese Armed Forces of vessels
referred by UNIFIL through the reporting period is welcome. I am encouraged by the
commencement of the advanced maritime interdiction operation integration training
for Lebanese naval personnel and crews, an important step towards a partial transfer
of UNIFIL Maritime Task Force responsibilities to the Lebanese Navy. International
partners are strongly encouraged to further support the Lebanese Armed Forces in
bringing the model regiment project and naval transfer plan forward. I reiterate my
call for donors and partners to reinforce support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, as the
only legitimate armed forces of Lebanon.
83. I look forward to the cooperation of Lebanon and Israel for the continued
implementation by UNIFIL of all recommendations in the UNIFIL assessment report.
The Secretariat and UNIFIL are committed to carrying out this process in consultation
with and with support from the parties, members of the Security Council and troop contributing countries.
84. The continued self-acknowledged maintenance of unauthorized weapons
outside State control by Hizbullah and other non-State armed groups represents a
grave violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I call upon the Government of Lebanon to
take all actions necessary to ensure full implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), which require the
disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon so that there will be no weapons or
authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. Earlier decisions of the
Lebanese National Dialogue pertaining to the disarmament of non-Lebanese groups
and the dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada should be implemented.
85. The Government of Lebanon should abide by its policy of disassociation,
consistent with the B‘abda Declaration of 2012, and all Lebanese parties and nationa ls
should cease their involvement in the Syrian conflict and other conflicts in the region.
I condemn any movement of fighters and war materiel across the Lebanese -Syrian
border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
86. The United Nations fully supports efforts to improve border control, including
through the action plan of Lebanon to operationalize the integrated border
management strategy approved by the Government in October 2019.
87. I encourage both parties to continue talks to discuss the delineation of their
maritime and land boundaries. The United Nations, through its representatives, is
fully committed to supporting the process as requested by the parties and within its
capacity and mandate.
88. Legislative steps to counter domestic violence and sexual harassment represent
important advances in strengthening the legal framework to protect women. I look
forward to the Government of Lebanon issuing the requisite decrees to ensure their
enforcement.
89. The increased use of hate speech in Lebanon is of concern. Political leaders
should promote a balanced, fact-based dialogue and speak out against intolerance,
discriminatory stereotyping and instances of hate speech.
90. I commend Lebanon for its continued hospitality towards refugees and thank
donors for their unwavering support. While the United Nations and partners continue
to work to create the conditions for safe, dignified and voluntary returns, respect for
due process of law and the dignity of refugees remains indispensable.
91. With humanitarian needs rapidly rising among refugees, migrant workers and
Lebanese citizens alike, continued and flexible humanitarian and development
funding is essential to protect lives and maintain stability. I appeal to donors to fund
21-03229

15/19

S/2021/240

the strategic framework for reform, recovery and reconstruction accordingly and
welcome continued support for ongoing health emergency assistance and the Lebanon
Crisis Response Plan. Social protection systems and safety nets should include the
vulnerable refugee population. Furthermore, I reiterate my calls for the international
community to uphold its commitments so that UNRWA can continue providing relief
and services to the Palestine refugee community.
92. I reiterate my gratitude to all countries contributing military personnel and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon and encourage them to increase
the number of women among military personnel in UNIFIL. I commend and thank
my former Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Ján Kubiš, upon the completion of his
assignment, for his leadership and dedication in advancing the important work of the
United Nations in Lebanon. I thank the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force
Commander, Major General Stefano Del Col, the civilian and military personnel
under his leadership and the members of the United Nations country team for their
continued efforts.

16/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

Annex I
Restrictions on the freedom of access and movement of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon from 21 October 2020 to
19 February 2021
1.
In its resolution 2539 (2020), the Security Council called upon the Government
of Lebanon to facilitate the access of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in line with resolution 1701 (2006), while respecting Lebanese sovereignty.
2.
During the reporting period, UNIFIL conducted an average of 6,281 monthly
patrols during the day and night, of which 2,045 (33 per cent) were foot patrols. The
mission conducted an average of 2,430 patrols each month along the Blue Line , both
by vehicle and on foot (52 and 48 per cent, respectively). In addition, the mission
conducted an average of 51 helicopter patrols each month, as well as an average of
970 inspection activities, including the operation of temporary and permanent
checkpoints, and counter-rocket-launching operations. While the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL was respected in most cases, there were instances of restrictions
in the freedom of movement. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to object to some
patrol routes, which were proposed by UNIFIL in order to expand its presence in areas
outside main routes and municipal centres, on the grounds that they were either
private roads or involved areas of strategic importance to the Lebanese Armed Forces.
UNIFIL has consistently followed up on reported incidents with the appropriate
authorities, and continuously engages with the Lebanese Armed Forces to secure
freedom of movement and unrestricted access to all areas within its area of operations.
Access to all locations along the Blue Line
3.
As detailed in paragraph 6 of the report of the Secretary-General, the Lebanese
Armed Forces have facilitated access by UNIFIL to a number of locations of interest,
in connection with its investigations into the breaches of the cessation of hostilities
on 27 July and 25 August. However, UNIFIL is yet to gain full access to several other
sites of interest, including a number of Green without Borders sites, despite repeated
formal requests to the Lebanese Armed Forces. Access to those locations is required
both in connection with investigations and as part of the mission’s daily monitoring
of the Blue Line, as mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) and recalled in resolution
2539 (2020).
Freedom of movement incidents
4.
On 17 November, an Observer Group Lebanon patrol, while driving through the
village of Ayta al-Sha‘b, deviated from the main road into a narrow street. While
reversing to return to the main road, the road was blocked by an individual in civilian
clothes on a scooter. Shortly thereafter, more individuals in civilian clothes arrived in
four vehicles. The group looked inside the Observer Group Lebanon patrol vehicle
and took pictures. The patrol contacted the Lebanese Armed Forces and requested
assistance. While the Observer Group Lebanon personnel remained inside the vehicle,
some of the individuals knocked on its doors. One person also deflated one of the
patrol vehicle’s tyres. Shortly thereafter, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrived at the
scene and escorted the patrol from the area. UNIFIL met with the mukhtar and two
municipal officials, who stated that, owing to communication issues between the
patrol and the individuals, tensions had escalated. The officials also reiterated the
sensitivities among locals with regard to patrolling in residential neighbourhoods.
5.
On 3 December, a UNIFIL patrol observed a vehicle and four individuals in
civilian clothes, one of whom was taking pictures with a professional camera of the
area south of the Blue Line, near Yarun (Sector West). Shortly thereafter, while
21-03229

17/19

S/2021/240

driving, the patrol encountered the same vehicle blocking the road. Two occupants of
the vehicle approached the patrol and asked why they had taken photographs. The
individuals snatched a camera from the seat of the patrol vehicle and left the area.
The Lebanese Armed Forces were informed of the incident. The camera is yet to be
retrieved. UNIFIL is following up with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
6.
On 9 January, a UNIFIL two-vehicle patrol was driving on a narrow road near
Yarun. The patrol moved to the side of the road to give way to a civilian car coming
from the opposite direction. When the civilian car was passing, an individual reached
out from the car and smashed a window of one of the UNIFIL patrol vehicles with an
unknown object. No injuries to UNIFIL personnel were reported. UNIFIL informed
the Lebanese Armed Forces about the incident.
7.
On 27 January, a UNIFIL patrol observed two individuals in olive green attire
with two vehicles in the vicinity of Ramiyah (Sector West). One of the individuals,
who was carrying an AK-47 assault rifle, approached the patrol, made menacing hand
gestures and told the patrol to immediately leave the area. When the patrol reversed
and started driving away from the area, the patrol was followed by the two vehicles
for about five minutes. UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces about the
incident.
8.
On 30 January, when a UNIFIL patrol was conducting a static observation northeast of Rashaf (Sector West), a vehicle and a scooter arrived and blocked the road.
Four individuals in civilian clothes approached the UNIFIL patrol, questioned their
presence and asked the peacekeepers to leave the area. The four individuals also
filmed the patrol. Shortly thereafter, the group moved the scooter and car out of the
patrol’s way and followed it up to the main road as the patrol left the area. UNIFIL
informed the Lebanese Armed Forces about the incident. UNIFIL met with the mayor,
who stated that the peacekeepers had been on private property and, therefore, the
owners of the land had asked them to leave.
9.
On 9 February, five individuals in civilian clothes approached a UNIFIL patrol
in the vicinity of Hula (Sector East). One of the individuals took photographs of the
patrol and waved a stick at the patrol, demanding that it leave the area. As the patrol
subsequently left the area, the individual threw stones at the patrol vehicles and then
followed the patrol on a scooter. On being contacted by UNIFIL, the mayor of Hula
ascribed the incident to an “individual act” and promised to discuss it with members
of the municipal council. On 15 February, also in Hula, an individual in civilian
clothes threw stones at a UNIFIL patrol while several other individuals made rude
hand gestures. UNIFIL again informed the mayor of Hula, who said that he was not
aware of the incident.
10. On 11 February, approximately 25 individuals in civilian clothes blocked the
road of a two-vehicle UNIFIL patrol in Bint Jubayl (Sector West) by placing vehicles
across the road. While talking to the driver of one of the UNIFIL vehicles, one of the
individuals reached through the window and took the vehicle key, upon which four
peacekeepers exited the vehicles. Six individuals pulled one of the peacekeepers
aside, following which the three other peacekeepers outside their vehicles cocked
their weapons. The individuals then released the peacekeeper. After approximately
40 minutes, a UNIFIL reinforcement arrived, accompanied by the Lebanese Armed
Forces. The Lebanese Armed Forces talked to the individuals, who returned the
UNIFIL vehicle key. The UNIFIL patrol then left the area, accompanied by the
Lebanese Armed Forces. No peacekeepers were injured, but one UNIFIL vehicle
sustained minor damage. UNIFIL followed up with the mayor of Bint Jubayl, who
said that the patrol had entered private property.

18/19

21-03229

S/2021/240

Annex II
Implementation of the arms embargo
1.
In paragraph 20 of its resolution 2539 (2020), the Security Council recalled
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006), according to which all States should take the
necessary measures to prevent, by their nationals or from their territories or using flag
vessels or aircraft, the sale or supply of arms and related materiel to any entity or
individual in Lebanon other than those authorized by the Government of Lebanon or
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The United Nations
continued to engage with Member States on allegations of weapons transfers and
efforts to address such violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
2.
No response was received during the reporting period to my letter dated
22 October 2019 addressed to the President of Lebanon, in which I reiterated my
request that the Government of Lebanon share with the Secretariat any pertinent
information or developments related to the arms embargo.
3.
Paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006) stipulates that all States shall take the
necessary measures to prevent, inter alia, the sale or supply to any entity or individual
in Lebanon of arms and related materiel of all types. During the reporting period, no
new information was shared with the Secretariat in this regard.
4.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting overall compliance by the
parties with resolution 1701 (2006) in all its provisions and to advancing its
implementation. This applies to the implementation of the arms embargo under
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006) and any decision that would be adopted by
the Security Council in this regard. I look forward to continued dialogue with the
Council and its members on furthering our joint goal of the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

21-03229

19/19
