General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

128

5. Decides that in 1981 the Committee shall, if
necessary, hold its session in two parts, the first part in
May and, if the report of the Intergovernmental Group
of Experts on the United Nations Financing System for
Science and Technology for Development is ready for
consideration, the second part late in August or early in
September for not more than a week, mainly for the purpose of considering that report.

3. Urgently appeals to all Governments, particularly
those 'Jf developed countries, to contribute substantially to the Interim Fund so that the agreed target of no
less than $250 million may be reached by the earliest
possible date, and expresses its thanks to those Governments that have contributed to the Interim Fund.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
B
UNITED NATIONS INTERIM FUND FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development,""
Recognizing the vital importance of science and
technology to the development of developing countries
as an area of international co-operation and as a central
component of the new international economic order and
of the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, 91
Bearing in mind the provisions of its resolution 34 /218
of 19 December 1979, by which it established, inter alia,
the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development, and of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1980/48 of 23 July 1980,
Noting that on 19 May 1980 the Interim Fund was
declared operational,
Taking note of the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development on its first and second sessions 92 and of the first
meeting of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on
the United Nations Financing System for Science and
Technology for Development,°'
Recognizing that the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts, together with the practical
progress achieved through the activities of the Interim
Fund, will contribute to the long-term arrangements of
the Financing System,
Recognizing also the unprecedented efforts of developing countries in submitting more than seven hundred
projects for financing by the Interim Fund,
Concerned that, at the United Nations Pledging Conference for the Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development, held on 27 March 1980, the
agreed target of $250 million was not attained,
Convinced that both the Vienna Programme of Action
and General Assembly resolution 34 /218 provide a basis
for future consensus and collaboration in an area of
vit:i 1 importance to all countries,
I. Notes with concern that the financial resources
currently available to the United Nations Interim Fund
for Science and Technology for Development are
grossly inadequate to meet the already demonstrated
needs and aspirations of developing countries for
science and technology for development;
2. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring that the
Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development, as endorsed by the General
Assembly, is respected and fully implemented;
" Ibid.,
para. 10.

Thirty-fifth Session, Second Committee, 7th meeting,
•

35/68.

Report of the World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, as well as the agreed conclusions of
the Committee of the Whole Established under General
Assembly Resolution 32/ 174 on some aspects concerning food and agriculture, 96
Recalling also its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December I 974, by which it established the World Food
Council to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism to
provide over-all integrated and continuing attention to
the successful co-ordination and follow-up of policies
concerning food production, nutrition, food security,
food trade and food aid, as well as other related matters,
by all organizations of the United Nations system,
Recalling further the Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition, contained in the
Manila Communique of the World Food Council,9' which
was adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 32/52 of 8 December 1977, the Mexico Declaration of the World Food Council,9 8 adopted by the
Assembly in its resolution 33/90 of 15 December 1978,
and Assembly resolution 34/110 of 14 December 1979
on the report of the Council on the work of its fifth ministerial session, 99
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/58 of 24 July 1980 on the report of the World
Food Council on the work of its sixth ministerial session, ioo
Expressing its concern about the unsatisfactory
progress made by the international community towards
achieving the general objectives of the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition, IOI
Noting that the food outlook for many developing
countries in the 1980s, particularly in Africa, is even
more critical than in the past,
Noting also the growing imbalances in the world food
economy,
Noting with concern the strong impact of imports of
food-stuffs on the balance of payments of food-importing
"'!hid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/34/34),
part two, sect. II, para. I 8.
" Ibid., Thirty-second Session. Supplement No. I 9 (A/ 32/ 19),
part one, para. I.
"" Ibid., Thirty-third Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/33/19 and
Corr. I), part one, para. I.
·
"/hid., Thirty-fourth Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/34/ 19).
""' Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. /9 (A/35/ 19).
"" Report of the World Food Conjerence, Rome 5-/6 November /974
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E 75.11.A.3), chap. I.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the r~rts of the S~cond Commit!ee

developing countries, in particular the least developed
countries,
Reaffirming the strong commitment of the international community to overcoming hunger and malnutrition everywhere and, in that context, the need for
greater international action to improve the production
and distribution of food, particularly in low-income
countries with food deficits,
Emphasizing the vital importance of increased benefits
from international trade to the developing countries in
accelerating their process of development, which is now
endangered by growing protectionist pressures,
Noting the conclusion of the new and more adequate
Food Aid Convention, 1980 at almost double the level
earlier achieved, although regrettably still short of the
target of I O million tons, 102
Acknowledging with satisfaction the increasing efforts
and growing commitment by developing countries to
accelerating the development of their food and agricultural sectors, in particular through integrated national
planning,
1. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations
of the World Food Council at its sixth ministerial session, 103 and calls upon all Governments and appropriate international organizations to give earnest attention
to their implementation;
2. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the Government and people of the United Republic of Tanzania
for the excellent facilities and the generous hospitality
provided to the World Food Council at its sixth ministerial session;
3. Urges all developing countries with food deficits
to implement, in accordance with their national development programmes and priorities, measures to increase substantially their national food and agricultural
production;
4. Recognizes that to overcome hunger and malnutrition is the common responsibility of the international community and that immediate action should
concentrate on the food problems of those developing
countries with inadequate food production, and recognizes further that the solution of food problems requires, in the first instance, the determined action of developing countries and that in this context they need the
increased support of the international community;
5. Calls upon all countries, particularly those with
serious and growing food import deficits, to continue to
implement their food production policies and, as appropriate, adapt them to their circumstances and needs
within the framework of their over-all national development objectives and priorities;
6. Recognizes the role of food-sector strategies,
which emerged from the World Food Council, as a
means for interested developing countries to adopt an
integrated approach towards increasing food production, improving consumption and attracting the necessary additional international resources;
7. Calls upon the international community to support the national efforts of developing countries to increase their food and agricultural production by increased technical and capital assistance, in particular for
food-sector strategies that have already been adopted by
interested developing countries, taking into account at
"" See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. /9 (A/35/19), part one, para. 32. For the text of
the Convention, see TD/WHEAT.6/13.
'oJ Ibid., part one.

129

the same time the fact that the existence of a food-sector
strategy should not be a pre-condition for the granting
of development assistance;
8. Strongly urges developed countries, international
institutions and others able to provide development assistance to increase substantially their assistance on concessional terms to the food sector in order to facilitate
for developing countries the achievement of the agreed
target of a 4 per cent annual growth rate in agricultural
production, for which ~n estimated necessa~y_ elem~nt
of external assistance 1s $8.3 thousand milhon with
$6.5 thousand million on concessional terms, at 1975
prices, as indicated in the P_r?gramme _of A~tion to Era_dicate Hunger and Malnutnt10n contamed _m the Manila
Communique of the World Food Council;
9. Commends the World Food Council's appeal to
all countries and international agencies to undertake, on
a special emergency basis, additional food assistance to
countries in Africa currently experiencing critical food
shortages and commends the prompt action taken by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme in convening
a special meeting of donor countries and development
and aid institutions to review the situation with a view to
undertaking increased emergency assistance for that
area;
10. Calls upon developed and other donor countries
and international financial institutions to support, in
recognition of their commitment to a world without
hunger, the efforts of interested developing countries to
initiate or expand food-entitlement programmes, within
the context of their national plans and policies, as appropriate, and national food strategies, • and looks
forward to the results of the consultations envisaged in
paragraphs 30 and 31 of the report of the World Food
Council; 101
11. Expresses its concern over the increase in
protectionist trade practices that affect the economic development of the whole international community, particularly since they reduce the export possibilities of developing countries, affect their economic potential and
reduce their capacity to import the food they need and,
therefore, urges all countries to use their best efforts to
prevent the extension of protectionist policies;
12. Calls for the immediate renewal of the Food Aid
Convention of 1980 on the expiry of the Convention on
30 June I 98 I and strongly urges that every effort should
be made both to enlist new contributors and to increase
the commitments of existing ones, so that the Convention can be renewed by mid-1981 with a firm assurance
that 10 million tons will be the absolute minimum flow
of assistance, even in times of high prices and food
shortage;
13. Welcomes the endorsement by the World Food
Council, in paragraph 34 of its report, 103 of the initiative of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and
Programmes in proposing to examine at its next session
the proposal of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations that the International Emergency Food Reserve be made the subject of a legally binding
convention;
14. Stresses the urgent need for a new international
wheat agreement, as mentioned in paragraphs 37 and 38
of the report of the World Food Council; 101
15. Calls for the further exploration by the secretariat
of the World Food Council, in collaboration with the
appropriate agencies, of possible modalities of an arrangement for a food-crisis contingency pledge, taking

130

General Assembly- Thirty-fifth Session

into account, inter alia, the work of the ad hoe working
group established by the Committee on World Food
Security, as stated in paragraph 4(.J of the report of the
Council; 103
16. Welcomes the request of the World Food Council that the International Monetary Fund should consider, within the context of its financing facilities, the
feasibility of providing additional balance-of-payments
support to assist low-income, food-deficit countries to
meet increases in their food-import bills and welcomes
the decision by the Interim Committee of the Board of
Governors of the Fund to urge prompt consideration of
this matter by the Executive Board of the Fund;
17. Recommends that the international community
should take the necessary steps for the immediate implementation of resolution I 05 (V) of I June 1979 on international food trade of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 104
18. Recognizes the desirability of studying measures
to promote increased and more regionally balanced
food production and trade within the wider framework
of trade and its impact on the food situation of developing countries;
19. Notes with deep concern that only limited
progress has been achieved towards the solution of the
long-standing problems of international trade in agricultural products which adversely affect exports, particularly of developing countries, and whose solution could
make an important contribution to improving over-all
food production in the world;
20. Recommends that the World Food Council, in
accordance with its mandate, should give continuing attention to the impact of food trade on levels of food production in the world, in particular with reference to the
economies of the developing countries, using to the
maximum extent possible the necessary inputs which the
different organs and organizations of the United
Nations system should provide;
21. Fully supports the call of the World Food Council, in paragraph 21 of its report, l()J for the replenishment of the resources of the International Fund for Agricultural Development at a level sufficient to provide a
realistic attainment of its operations, in accordance with
the recommendations of its Governing Council.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/69.

Situation of food and agriculture in Africa

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that, over the last two decades,
the situation of food and agriculture in Africa has undergone a drastic deterioration, resulting in a decline of
food production per capita and a reduction of average
dietary standards below essential requirements,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Ec0nomic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
04
'
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.

Recalling also the relevant decisions and the recommendations of the World Food Conference, 11''
Gravely concerned at the critical food shortages
currently affecting many countries in the African region,
Recalling, in particular, Economic and Social Council
resolution 1980/58 of 24 July 1980 relating to the report
of the World Food Council on the work of its sixth ministerial session, 100
Taking into account the deep concern reflected in the
decisions on the food situation and agriculture outlook
in Africa adopted by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its
twentieth session, 10 '
Recognizing that the responsibility for the development of food and agricultural production lies primarily
with the developing countries themselves and that there
is an increasing effort and growing commitment by the
developing countries to accelerate the development of
their food and agricultural sectors,
Stressing that the current shortages demonstrate the
continued vulnerability of many countries in the region
to food crises owing to, inter alia, crop failures, drought,
soil erosion, low reserves and the high level of postharvest losses,
Recognizing the role of food-sector strategies, which
emerged from the World Food Council, as a means for
interested developing countries to adopt an integrated
approach for increasing food production, improving
consumption and attracting the necessary additional international resources,
Regretting that food aid has not been adequate to
cope with the serious food shortages in many African
countries,
Deeply concerned at the unabated encroachment of
the desert in many countries of Africa, which has continued to accentuate the food problem on that continent,
Recognizing the useful contribution that the effective
execution of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa I(" adopted on 29 April 1980 by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session devoted to economic matters, held at Lagos
on 28 and 29 April 1980, can make to the improvement
of the food situation, in particular, and to rapid over-all
development of Africa,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the Lagos Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia
Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa and,
in particular, of the provisions related to food and agriculture; 1110
2. Urges all the countries of Africa to implement, in
accordance with their national development programmes and priorities, measures to increase substantially their national food and agricultural production;
3. Calls upon the international community to continue to support efforts undertaken by African countries
at the national, subregional and regional levels to in"" See Report of the World Food Conference. Rome, 5-16 November
1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.11.A.3). chap. II.

'"'' Official Records c,f" the General Assembly, Thirty~fifth Session,
Supplement No. 19 (A 1 35/19).
'"' See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Report of the Conference of FA 0, Twentieth Session, Rom,•.
10-28 November 1979 (C 79/REP and Corr.2). para. 33
"" See A/S-11 /14, ,mnex I.
,.,., Ibid., chap. I
