A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/189
7 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/189. Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and all its subsequent resolutions concerning
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 47/125 of 18 December 1992, the General Assembly requested the
Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at its forty-ninth session a report on the state of regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights and to include therein the results of action taken
in pursuance of that resolution,
Recalling further Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March 1993, 1/
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights concerning advisory
services in the field of human rights, including its most recent resolution on that subject, 1994/69 of 9 March
1994, 2/

1/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap.
II, sect. A.
2/
95-77113

Ibid., 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/49/189
Page 2

Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 3/
Reaffirming that regional arrangements play a fundamental role in promoting and protecting human
rights and should reinforce universal human rights standards, as contained in international human rights
instruments, and their protection,
Recalling that the World Conference on Human Rights reiterated the need to consider the possibility of
establishing regional and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights where they
do not already exist,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 4/
Noting the progress achieved so far in the promotion and protection of human rights at the regional
level under the auspices of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the regional intergovernmental
organizations,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Welcomes the continuing cooperation and assistance of the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat in the further strengthening of the existing regional arrangements and regional machinery for the
promotion and protection of human rights, particularly in regard to advisory services and technical assistance,
public information and education, with a view to exchanging any information and experience in the field of
human rights;
3.
Welcomes also, in that respect, the close cooperation given by the Centre for Human Rights in
the organization of regional and subregional training courses or workshops in the field of human rights, aiming at
creating greater understanding of the promotion and protection of human rights issues in the regions and at
improving procedures and examining the various systems for the promotion and protection of the universally
accepted human rights standards;
4.
Stresses the importance of the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights, and
renews its appeal to all Governments to consider making use of the possibilities offered by the United Nations,
under this programme, of organizing information and/or training courses at the national level for government
personnel on the application of international human rights standards and the experience of relevant international
bodies;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General, as foreseen in the medium-term plan for the period 19921997, 5/ to continue to strengthen exchanges between the United Nations and regional intergovernmental
organizations dealing with human rights, and welcomes, in this connection, the fact that the Centre for Human
Rights will continue to organize national, regional and subregional workshops and training courses for

3/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

4/

A/49/321.

5/ See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/45/6/Rev.1),
vol. II.
/...

A/RES/49/189
Page 3

government officials engaged in the administration of justice and in the implementation of the international
human rights instruments and that more countries in all regions of the world are expected to develop forms of
cooperation and assistance with the Centre, in keeping with their specific needs;
6.
Invites States in areas where regional arrangements in the field of human rights do not yet exist
to consider concluding agreements with a view to the establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional machinery for the promotion and protection of human rights;
7.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to pay special attention to the most
appropriate ways of assisting, at their request, countries of the different regions under the programme of advisory
services and to make, where necessary, relevant recommendations;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session a
report on the state of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights and to include
therein the results of action taken in pursuance of the present resolution;
9.

Decides to consider this question further at its fifty-first session.

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
