General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

68

Deeply concerned over the threat to human dignity
and to society posed by the flow of illicit drugs,
Gratified by the adoption by international conferences of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances27
and the Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 28
Convinced that the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances would result in the necessary international
regulation of these substances,
Further convinced of the importance of the Protocol in strengthening the enforcement provisions of
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,29
Calls upon all States, provided they have not already done so, to adhere to:
(a) The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,

1961;
( b) The Protocol Amending the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1961;
(c) The Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3014 (XXVII). United Nations programme for
drug abuse control

The General Assembly,
Noting that drug abuse is a continuing problem in
many parts of the world,
Encouraged by the growing interest of Governments in dealing with drug abuse,
1. Welcomes the expanded operations of the United
Nations programme for drug abuse control, and especially the efforts made by the Division of Narcotic
Drugs of the Secretariat in the field of drug abuse
control;
2. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations
programme of action based on short-term and longterm policy, as approved by the General Assembly in
resolution 2719 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, and
affirms the need for more effective and extensive efforts by the United Nations system;
3. Appeals consequently to Governments for sustained support and voluntary contributions to the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, in any form
and according to their capacity;
4. Invites the Division of Narcotic Drugs, the
specialized agencies and other interested intergovernmental organizations to co-operate fully in the United
Nations programme of action;
5. Further invites the specialized agencies and other
interested intergovernmental organizations to pay
special attention, in the formulation of their own programmes relating to the socio-economic consequences
of drug abuse, to appropriate means of combating this
abuse.
2113th plenary meetinf?
18 December 1972
27 E/CONF.58/6 and Corr. l and 2.
28 E/CONF.63/8.
"II United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 751'i, p 151.

3020 (XXVII). Principles of international cooperation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty of
war crimes and crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2840 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1691 (LII) of 2 June 1972 concerning the
need to formulate principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity,
Convinced that the effective punishment of war
crimes and crimes against humanity is an important
element in preventing such crimes and putting an end
to them, as well as ensuring better protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms and promoting cooperation between peoples and international peace and
security,
1. Takes note of the draft principles submitted
to the Third Committee at the current session;30
2. Decides to transmit the above-mentioned draft
principles for further elaboration to the Commission
on Human Rights, together with the records of the
meetings at which the Third Committee debated this
item during the current session;
3. Requests the Commis-sion on Human Rights to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
draft principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Principles
of international co-operation in the detection, arrest,
extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war
crimes and crimes against humanity".
2114 th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3021 (XXVII). Crime prevention and <>ontrol

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned by the increasing seriousness and
proportions of the prohlcm of crime in many parts of
the world.
Conscious of the threat that crime in its various
forms presents to economic, social and cultural development and to man's quality of life,
Bearing in mind the call of the international community for more effective United Nations action in
crime prevention,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Developmcnt/11 which stipulates that social progress
and development shall aim equally at the progressive
attainment, inter alia, of the main goal of the provision of social defence measures and the dimination
nf conditions leading to crime and delinquency. especially jm ,·nilc (:l'liHquency,
:io Official Records of the General Ass«mb/y, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 52, document A. 1 8939, para 7.
BI Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution
1584 (L) of 21 May 1971 on criminality and social
change,
Commending the establishment of the Committee
on Crime Prevention and Control and the first report
of that Committee,32
Recognizing the right of each State to formulate
and implement, in accordance with its own conditions
and national requirements, the policies and measures
necessary to prevent crime and control delinquency,
Noting with appreciation the note by the SecretaryGeneral on crime prevention and control,33
1. Endorses the conclusions of the Fourth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Kyoto, Japan, from
17 to 26 August 1970,34 and the recommendations of
the Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders? 5 which met
after the Congress;
2. Endorses in particular the recommendation of
the Congress concerning meetings, seminars, training
courses and workshops of experts, at regional and
international levels, for the exchange of information,
knowledge, experience and expertise in the field of
crime prevention and control, taking full advantage of
the programme of advisory services of the United
Nations;
3. Supports the recommendations in the Declaration unanimously adopted by the Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, which emphasizes, among
other things, the need for strengthening international
co-operation in crime prevention and control;36
4. Invites Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of the situation concerning crime prevention
and control in their own countries and the measures
being taken to provide information, not later than the
end of 197 4, for a final report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session;
5. Urges Governments, organs of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other international
organizations concerned to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and, in particular, to
ensure the availability of effective technical aid to
countries desiring such assistance for the formulation
and adoption of policies, programmes and measures
for the prevention and control of crime and delinquency;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain from
Member States their views concerning the advisability
of holding an international conference of ministers
responsible for social defence or relevant ministers
to review problems of crime prevention and control
and to identify methods of prevention and control
at the international level;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to take
the necessary measures for the preparation of the
Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
;J 2 £/5}9J.

:n A/8844.
:11 Fuurth

United Nations Congress 011 the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.IV.8).
35 See E/CN.5/457.
36 The text of the Declaration is contained in the annex to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1584 (L).

69

8. Instructs the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the methods and ways likely
to be most effective in preventing crime and improving the treatment of offenders, including recommendations on the measures most appropriate in such areas
as law enforcement, judicial procedures and correctional practices;
9. Decides to consider this question at its twentyeighth session, taking into account action by the Commission on Social Development and the Economic
and Social Council.
2 I 14th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3022 (XXVII). Channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2633
(XXV) of 11 November 1970, 2659 (XXV) of
7 December 1970 and 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November
1971,
Welcoming the increasing and active awareness of
young people of their potential contribution to the
building of a better society, which requires that they
be more fully integrated into the political, economic
and social life of their countries,
Convinced that youth has an important role to
play in promoting the purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and the objectives of peace, international security and co-operation among nations, social
and economic progress and universal respect for human
rights,
Emphasizing the responsibility of society to educate
youth in a spirit of national and international service,
as well as the responsibility of youth towards society,
Noting that the existing methods of communication
and co-operation between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations could be improved
in order to meet the needs and aspirations of youth,
Aware of the need to increase the role of the United
Nations in developing contacts and communications
among national and international youth organizations,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the SecretaryGeneral's report on channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations;37
2. Endorses the conclusion expressed in the report
that the United Nations should pay particular attention
in the future to involving youth in programmes of national development and international co-operation as
well as in the activities of the United Nations;
3. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
utilize existing channels of communication with youth
and national and international youth organizations and
to seek to establish new channels;
4. Recommends that the Secretary-General evaluate
existing United Nations programmes and projects in
order to enable youth to participate fully at appropriate
levels of policy formulation and project implementation
and evaluation;
5. Recommends further that the Secretary-General
should take appropriate administrative action, with the
37 A/8743.
