S/PV.8288

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8288th meeting

Thursday, 14 June 2018, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Michon
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2018/541)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-18352 (E)
*1818352*

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2018/541)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/541, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to share with Security Council members the
most recent developments on the political, security and
humanitarian situation in Mali, as reflected in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/541).
The 12 months since the adoption of resolution
2364 (2017), in June 2017, were the most encouraging
in terms of progress in the peace process since the
signing, three years ago, of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which was the outcome
of the Algiers process. At the same time, the security
environment remains volatile, and unfortunately
it has led to the loss of life among the civilian
population, the Malian defence and security forces,
the French Barkhane force and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The number of MINUSMA Blue
Helmets to have lost their lives in Mali over the past
2/22

14/06/2018

year as a result of attacks has raised the total number to
101 since the deployment of the Mission.
It was in order to pay tribute to those fallen
peacekeepers that the Secretary-General decided to
visit Mali to commemorate the seventieth anniversary
of United Nations peacekeeping on 29 May. That visit
enabled him to observe the spirit of dialogue and
collective responsibility that enabled the Malian parties
to achieve considerable progress in implementing the
Agreement in recent months and to lay the foundation
for credible, inclusive and peaceful elections.
Progress in the implementation of the peace
Agreement includes, inter alia, the establishment of
interim authorities in the five regions in the north of
Mali; the strengthening of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Gao and its establishment in Kidal and
Timbuktu, with 160 and 47 combatants, respectively,
to date; and the start of the pre-registration phase for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, which is an extremely important
element in that context. That progress reflects a
positive momentum in the peace process, which
inspires hope. However, it falls short and comes after
three years of delays and persistent obstacles in the
implementation of the Agreement. Furthermore, during
the past year, some important steps to sustain the peace
process and strengthen political dialogue have not
been achieved. I would mention in that regard, among
others, the charter for national reconciliation, which
was intended to strengthen the gains of the Conference
of National Understanding, held in March 2017, and to
constitutional reform, which was postponed until after
the presidential election. Moreover, the involvement of
civil society, in particular women, in the peace process
remains insufficient to date. Peace must be built on
an inclusive and participatory foundation to ensure its
sustainability and ownership by all.
That imperative is all the more important given
that the past two weeks have been marked by worrying
political tensions, fuelled by the upcoming presidential
election, which is scheduled to be held in six weeks’
time. Those tensions culminated in demonstrations in
Bamako on 2 June, where there were violent clashes
among supporters of the opposition and Malian security
forces. That violence is regrettable, and the SecretaryGeneral condemned the ban on the holding of the
demonstration by the Malian authorities. Subsequently,
the authorization of a new request to demonstrate
introduced by the opposition and the peaceful holding
18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

of the march on 8 June bode well for an easing of
the situation, which is welcome and which we must
encourage and help the Malian actors to maintain.
The presidential election is a crucial stage
and should be a milestone in the consolidation of
democracy in Mali. Priority must given to cooperation
among all actors and the promotion an inclusive and
constructive political dialogue that is conducive
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, so that the
conditions are met for the holding of peaceful elections.
MINUSMA will continue to play an active role in that
regard, including by continuing to support the Malian
authorities and political actors through the good offices
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
as well as by providing logistical and technical support
and contributing to security for electoral activities.
The Special Representative’s good offices have already
helped to support key preparatory steps in the electoral
process, such as the review of the electoral law, but they
have also facilitated dialogue among political actors
and eased tensions following the demonstrations by the
opposition on 2 June.
We think it pertinent to stress that the United
Nations is not in a position to certify the election
results, as requested by the opposition parties, as that
activity is not part of the mandate of MINUSMA.
Furthermore, any certification exercise of an electoral
process must involve the whole process, and not only
the results of the elections, and would have required
prior authorization by the Security Council.
Following the elections, our attention should be
focused on mobilizing all actors in order to generate
new and significant steps towards the implementation
of key institutional reforms outlined in the Agreement.
I welcome the publication of the first report of the
independent observer, presented to the members of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee on 28 May at its
most recent regular meeting. The report underscores
the importance for the parties to focus their efforts
on the strategic pillars of the Agreement relating to
long-term objectives, including the creation of a new
governance architecture for Mali, the reconstitution
and redeployment of a representative national army
and the creation of a development zone for the north.
Furthermore, we hope that the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017),
concerning Mali, can help to remove some of the
obstacles that continue to undermine the implementation
of the Agreement.

S/PV. 8288

The worrying situation in central Mali presents us
with even more complex challenges. The political and
security environment in that region has highlighted not
only the lack of political dialogue, but also the challenges
posed to democratic and territorial governance, which
have been characterized by an erosion of the presence
and legitimacy of the State institutions.
It was in order to help respond to the multifaceted
challenges facing Mali and to breathe new life into
the implementation of the peace Agreement that the
Secretary-General mentioned in his report the idea
of a common vision — a pact — for peace that would
serve as a catalyst to strengthen the inclusive nature
of the political process before and after the elections.
That initiative would involve the Government, the
United Nations, the Security Council and other
international and regional partners. Its primary
objective would be to reaffirm the centrality of the
peace Agreement in resolving the crisis in Mali and
to underscore once again the commitment of the
United Nations to the mechanisms provided for in the
Agreement, in particular the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, chaired by Algeria, whose role is essential in
international mediation. The initiative could also cover
the key institutional reforms I have just mentioned, the
implementation of which should be accelerated the day
after the elections.
(spoke in English)
To better support such an integrated strategic
approach at the political level, the United Nations must
also take steps to improve integration at the operational
level, while leveraging the comparative advantages of
its different agencies, funds and programmes.
In that spirit, the recently concluded independent
strategic review of MINUSMA recommended that
the United Nations country team take the lead in
humanitarian, recovery, development and peacebuilding
efforts, including supporting Government efforts to
deliver long-awaited peace dividends in an equitable,
responsible and inclusive manner, including improving
access to basic social services, such as education, health
and clean water, as well as providing more livelihood
opportunities, in particular for women and youth.
United Nations efforts to prevent violent extremism
should also be based on a coordinated, cross-sector
strategy. To support those objectives, the review team
called upon the United Nations country team to enhance
its presence in the north and centre of the country.

18-183523/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

With regard to MINUSMA, the Secretary-General
is recommending a series of adjustments suggested by
the review, aimed at underscoring the primacy of politics
in the Mission’s role. That will involve a shift in focus,
prioritization and the implementation of the Mission’s
mandated tasks to maximize its role in support of the
Agreement and in amplifying the peace process.
The Mission is also to assess its current physical
footprint against political priorities, factoring in
the constraints posed by the operational theatre, the
difficulties in generating resources for the United
Nations efforts in Mali and how to more effectively work
with other stakeholders supporting peace and stability
in Mali. That will include adopting a more tailored
approach to the protection of civilians, particularly
in the centre of the country, which is characterized
by complex and localized dynamics, and leveraging
non-force assets.
Any changes in the Mission’s configuration will be
carefully evaluated, in consultation with partners on
the ground, and a timeline will be developed to ensure
a sequenced approach. In that regard, the Secretariat
has worked on an implementation framework. The
support and assistance of MINUSMA should be
regularly reviewed not only on the basis of progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement but also
with regard to governance and political reforms, in line
with the stated objectives of the proposed mobilization
for peace.
Moreover, given the critical juncture at which Mali
now finds itself a few weeks ahead of the elections, but
also in view of their aftermath, we will intensify our
reporting and monitoring efforts, including through the
use of consolidated benchmarks, drawing on the peace
Agreement and the initiative for peace, as well as the
plan for the implementation of the recommendations
of the strategic review. In line with that objective, we
would wish for future iterations of the report of the
Secretary-General to focus more closely on describing
progress against those benchmarks.
MINUSMA will continue to cooperate closely
with other security actors operating in Mali, including
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), Operation Barkhane and the European Union
Training Mission in Mali. I welcome this opportunity to
reiterate the steadfast support of the United Nations for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, to which MINUSMA stands
4/22

14/06/2018

ready to provide operational and logistical support, as
mandated by the Security Council.
At the same time, I wish to recall that States
members of the G-5 Sahel remain accountable for the
conduct of operations, with full respect for human
rights, international law and international humanitarian
law. Such gross human rights violations as those
reportedly perpetrated in Boulikessi on 19 May by
elements of the Malian armed forces operating under
the Joint Force must, and will, be effectively addressed
through the appropriate mechanisms. In that context,
the Government of Mali has already adopted a number
of measures to address that very serious situation. To
that end, MINUSMA continues to support the ongoing
investigations by the Malian and G-5 Sahel Joint
Force authorities.
Allow me to conclude by underlining that stronger
support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, including through
predictable and sustainable financial resources, is
critical not only to ensuring the success of the Joint
Force but also to reducing the risk of human rights
violations during counter-terrorism operations by
increasing the monitoring and oversight capacity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
for his very enlightening statement. I also welcome
the presence around the table of the Malian Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation and
thank him for having made the trip to New York in
order to participate in our work.
As the Secretary-General emphasized in his report
(S/2018/541), support for the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali must
remain the foremost priority of us all in Mali. Three
years after its signing, it is clear that many of the
commitments made have still not been implemented.
Such delays, which are partly due to the lack of political
will on the part of the stakeholders, are worrying, first,
because they increasingly call into question the very
relevance of the Agreement and, secondly, because
there can be no lasting stability in Mali, and more
broadly in the Sahel, without the full implementation
18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

of the Agreement. It is therefore urgent that significant
progress be made.
In that context, we noted with satisfaction the
mobilization of the Prime Minister of Mali and the
progress made in recent months. The SecretaryGeneral’s meeting with the parties during his visit to
Mali last month affirmed that positive momentum,
which must now be continued and built on. For us, in
the short term, that means strengthening the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
northern Mali, ensuring the effective functioning of
the local authorities and initiating the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. We will follow
those various elements closely over the coming months.
The responsibility of the international community,
in accordance with the actual terms of the peace
Agreement, is to take the necessary measures to
encourage all the parties to meet their commitments. In
that regard, the first report of the independent observer
is a useful contribution. We encourage him to continue
his work by issuing regular reports that identify
the obstacles, define the responsibilities and make
recommendations that will enable us to move forward.
All Malian actors must also be aware that the Security
Council is closely following the implementation of
their commitments. In that regard, France has started
work on identifying those responsible for hindering
the implementation of the Agreement on the ground.
Failure to implement the commitments contained in
the most recent road map would lead us to having to
broaden the scope of individuals that could be subject
to sanctions measures.
France fully shares the concerns expressed over the
situation in central Mali, which calls for a strong response
from the Malian authorities with the full support of
the international community and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). It is crucial that such a response
be based on a balanced approach that combines action
in the area of security and development, governance
and human rights efforts. In that regard, we are deeply
concerned about the allegations of various cases of
human rights violations in the context of counterterrorism operations undertaken by the Malian armed
forces. Such allegations must be promptly investigated
and the perpetrators prosecuted if they are proven. The
recommendations made by MINUSMA in the context
of the human rights due diligence policy must also be
fully implemented. The support that MINUSMA can

S/PV. 8288

provide to the Malian armed forces and the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel is, of course, linked
to that.
The upcoming electoral cycles over the next
months, in particular the presidential elections, will
be a significant milestone for Malian democracy. It
is especially important that the presidential election
be conducted in a peaceful, credible and transparent
way. The actions of the Government to enhance the
credibility of the electoral process at the technical
level are in the right direction. Those efforts must be
continued and accompanied by the resumption of a
constructive dialogue between the Government and
the opposition. In that regard, the good offices of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the representative of the African Union on the ground
should be welcomed. Lastly, the right to peaceful protest
and freedom of expression must be respected and all
actors must show the necessary restraint throughout the
electoral cycle.
Given those many challenges, the renewal of the
MINUSMA mandate for another 12 months is absolutely
essential to the stability of Mali and the region. The
recommendations of the strategic review, which are
included in the Secretary-General’s report, provide us
with an opportunity to ensure that the resources that
we are collectively harnessing in Mali are used in the
most effective way possible. We want to make the best
use of them.
In that context, France will approach the renewal
of the mandate with several objectives: first, promoting
a clear and realistic mandate with a limited number of
priorities that are adapted to the situation; secondly,
doing the utmost to ensure that the Mission has the
necessary capacities to discharge its mandate and
encourage every effort to reduce its security exposure
through targeted and adapted measures that are
coordinated with all the stakeholders on the ground;
thirdly, encouraging the Mission to better communicate
the specific nature of its mandate and its work to the
local actors, while recognizing that it is part of a
broader security architecture, where each force has its
added value and shares the same goal, namely, support
for the implementation of the peace Agreement;
fourthly, emphasizing the need for a balanced approach,
particularly in response to the increasing threat to the
central part of the country, in support of the Malian
authorities; and lastly, fifthly, recalling the importance

18-183525/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

of the good offices role of the Mission for the smooth
running of the upcoming electoral cycles.
Finally, more broadly, France is convinced that
support for the implementation of the peace Agreement
must continue to remain the strategic objective of
the Mission. That strategic objective must be pursued
within the framework of a partnership approach among
Mali, the Council and the United Nations and on the
basis of reciprocal commitments, the implementation
of which will be regularly monitored. Against that
backdrop, we fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a pact for peace, to be concluded
with the Malian authorities following the forthcoming
presidential elections.
Everyone should bear in mind that maintaining a
mission as large and exposed as MINUSMA in its current
configuration is not sustainable without substantial
progress on the peace process track. We must therefore
move forward together, in a responsible manner, in order
to ensure its success. France’s unwavering commitment
can be counted on in that regard.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): At the outset, allow me to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his very insightful
briefing. I also extend my thanks to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Coulibaly, for joining us
here in the Security Council.
On the fifth anniversary of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), it is time to take stock of the
Mission’s achievements and the remaining challenges.
I will address three main elements: first, the political
situation; secondly, the mandate; and, thirdly, the
effectiveness of peacekeeping.
First, with regard to the political situation, progress
in the peace process has been hard fought. While we
welcome recent promising developments, we must
recognize that the record over the past five years
has been bleak. The Malian parties must together
ensure expedited progress in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including the full and effective participation of women.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s suggestions to
give new impetus to the political process. That requires
the development of a pact for peace based on clear
criteria. Our patience is running out. The forthcoming
elections will be an important test for the Malian
6/22

14/06/2018

parties, who will have to prove their commitment to the
country’s stability. We call on the Malian authorities
to ensure an inclusive electoral process and political
dialogue, leaving space for debate and dissenting voices.
On that point, we recall the need for all actors, including
law enforcement agencies, to act with restraint.
Secondly, with respect MINUSMA’s mandate,
the Mission’s support to the political process and its
mediation have proved very valuable. We share the
Secretary-General’s view that the key to the Mission’s
success lies in setting clear priorities. First and
foremost, the MINUSMA must focus on supporting
the implementation of the main provisions of the
Agreement — the effective establishment of legitimate
State bodies and services, decentralization, security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes and reconciliation.
Furthermore, allegations of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
laws are too often not prosecuted. The importance
of the Mission’s accountability tasks, including in its
judicial and corrections work, cannot be minimized.
While, as mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General,
MINUSMA has a role to play in central Mali with
regard to reconciliation and conflict prevention at the
local level, that should not affect its primary mission
in the north.
The repercussions of Mali’s instability are felt
beyond the country’s borders, above all throughout
the Sahel and in Europe. The stability of Mali, and the
region as a whole, is crucial in combating threats such
as human trafficking and illegal migration, terrorism
and organized crime. Coordination and cooperation
between the various security actors are essential if we
are to respond effectively to those problems, including
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
Operation Barkhane and the European Union Mission.
In order to define effective strategies to support
sustainable peace and stability, MINUSMA must also
improve its information on how the illegal economy
influences conflict dynamics in Mali and beyond. That
includes trafficking in drugs, weapons and human
beings. Cooperation with United Nations entities, such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, is
crucial in that regard.
Thirdly, and finally, I will address the concerns
regarding the effectiveness of peacekeeping. After five
years in existence, we can consider that MINUSMA
18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

has reached maturity. Critical reflection on the
Mission can improve the achievement of its mandate.
The comprehensive action plan drawn up in response
to the Santos Cruz report and the measures already
taken to implement it are to be welcomed. We urge the
United Nations to implement the recommendations as
soon as possible. Given the complex context in which
the Mission takes place, compartmentalization must
be avoided. As the Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte
stated at the launch of Action for Peacekeeping, during
our presidency of the Council in March, an integrated
approach must be firmly applied at both strategic and
operational levels, not only within the framework of
the Mission but also in strategic coordination with the
United Nations country team (see S/PV.8218). In that
context, we call upon the United Nations to develop a
mission-wide strategic plan as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I salute all the men and women who
have done their utmost to promote peace and stability in
Mali since the launch of MINUSMA. We pay particular
tribute to the 174 peacekeepers who paid the highest
price in defending and promoting lasting peace in Mali.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his excellent briefing on the political, security and
humanitarian situations in Mali. I would also like to
thank Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
for his presence here today. I welcome him to New York.
My delegation would like to commend the personal
commitment of Secretary-General António Guterres to
work for the definitive settlement of the Malian crisis,
as demonstrated by his visit on 29 and 30 May, which
enabled him to exchange views with all stakeholders on
the challenges to be met with a view to the advent of
peace and stability in Mali.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the encouraging progress
made in the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which remains the
appropriate framework for all current initiatives to
restore peace and stability in that country. My delegation
therefore urges all stakeholders to take ownership of
the road map, adopted on 22 March, with a view to
the diligent implementation of the priority actions
defined by the Agreement Monitoring Committee, in
accordance with the recommendations of resolution
2295 (2016).

S/PV. 8288

In that connection, the presidential elections on
29 July constitute an important means of settling the
crisis in Mali. My country calls on the United Nations
Integrated Multidimensional Mission for Stabilization
in Mali (MINUSMA) to invest in securing the elections
by lending technical and logistical support to the Malian
armed forces, as well as redeploying administration
throughout the country.
The security situation remains concerning in
parts of Mali, due to ongoing asymmetrical attacks
by terrorist groups against civilians and MINUSMA
camps, as well as community violence in central Mali.
My delegation therefore invites the international
community to provide MINUSMA with the logistical
capacity required to prevent attacks and protect
convoys, such as early warning equipment, armoured
personnel carriers and medical evacuation and healthcare helicopters. Furthermore, the deployment of force
multipliers would bolster MINUSMA’s capabilities
and enable it to better protect United Nations staff
and civilians.
With regard to the protection of civilians, in
particular in the centre of the country, which has fallen
prey to inter-community violence, it is vital to deploy
United Nations police units and boost the capacity of
the local police in order to restore State authority. With
regard to the humanitarian situation, which is also a
source of concern, Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret
that the 2018 humanitarian response plan, which was
assessed at $263 million, has been financed at just
24 per cent.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes ongoing efforts to
operationalize the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017). A strengthened partnership between
MINUSMA and the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, as
well as greater coordination with all forces on Malian
territory — the Operation Barkhane forces, the Malian
armed forces and the European Union Training Mission
in Mali — will be a valuable asset in combating
terrorism. It is also important to continue building the
capacities of the Malian armed forces so as to enable
the Government to take gradual and irreversible
responsibility for the security of the country and of
its people.
My delegation commends Ellen Margrethe Løj for
her outstanding work at the head of an independent
team within the framework of the MINUSMA strategic

18-183527/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

review. The sound conclusions and relevant proposals
bode well for a better understanding of the current
security and political situation in Mali as we seek to
renew MINUSMA’s mandate. Côte d’Ivoire agrees with
the experts of the independent team that combating
terrorism and organized transnational crime is a
challenge for regional security and therefore requires a
coordinated and comprehensive approach. My country
endorses the proposed pact for peace between the
Malian Government, the Security Council, the United
Nations and international partners.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to renew
MINUSMA’s mandate. It urges all stakeholders in Mali
to redouble their efforts to implement the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in order to achieve a final
settlement of the crisis.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and welcome
His Excellency Mr. Coulibaly to the Council today.
The United Kingdom continues to support the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We recognize the
challenging circumstances in which its military and
civilian personnel operate and unequivocally condemn
the recent attacks against MINUSMA personnel.
MINUSMA must receive the tools it needs to protect its
personnel adequately. At the same time we applaud the
positive impact MINUSMA has had, in particular in
supporting the recent progress on the peace agreement
ahead of the upcoming elections.
As the Secretary-General makes clear in his recent
report (S/2018/541), the deteriorating humanitarian and
security situation in Mali is of great concern. During
the June-to-August lean season this year, more than
4.3 million people will require humanitarian assistance.
That is more than a quarter of the population. United
Kingdom is one of the largest humanitarian donors
to the Sahel region. Between 2015 and 2018, it has
provided over $250 million of humanitarian aid, with
an additional $67 million of assistance to the region
in 2018. The international community in Mali and the
Government must fulfil their humanitarian pledges and
commitments in the light of the impending crisis.
Political stability is crucial in order to address the
root causes of the situation in Mali. In that regard, the
United Kingdom welcomes the recent positive steps
taken by the parties towards the implementation of
8/22

14/06/2018

some of the key provisions of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the Prime Minister’s
support to implement the agreement ahead of the
upcoming elections. I agree with the representative of
France on the key concrete next steps that must be taken.
The Council has become increasingly concerned
about the slow pace of the implementation of the
peace agreement at a time when MINUSMA troops
are paying the price with their lives in unacceptable
numbers. I understand that elections are under way,
but I would urge the Malian Foreign Minister in the
most respectful and friendly way to take back to all
parties to the peace agreement and to the presidential
candidates the expectation of the Council for fast and
deep implementation of the agreement. Patience is
running out.
It is also important that the key constituencies of
Malian society, including women, play a central role
in the implementation of the peace agreement and
beyond. As we all know, an inclusive peace agreement
is much more likely to succeed. We hope the Malian
Government will observe the target it set for itself in its
law of 2015 for a 30 per cent minimum representation
for women in elected and nominated positions. The
upcoming elections, if they are credible, free and fair,
present an opportunity for Malians to express their
democratic rights and commitments. Above all, the
elections should not be the subject of violence. We call
for calm from all parties at this time and for MINUSMA
to support dialogue among the parties throughout the
upcoming electoral cycles.
The United Kingdom is concerned about recent
reports of human rights abuses in Mali and in particular
those allegedly committed by the armed forces. The
failure to protect civilians will erode trust in the
Government and feed extremist recruitment narratives.
We call upon all parties to comply with their obligations
and put an end to violations and abuses.
As we begin negotiations on MINUSMA’s mandate
renewal, I again underline the United Kingdom’s strong
support for the Mission. It is important that we address
the recommendations in the strategic review through
that process to continue to improve MINUSMA’s
effectiveness on the ground. That includes further
development of a long-term strategy for MINUSMA,
a clear prioritization of tasks and recognition that
other actors, including the United Nations country
team, may be better placed to deliver results. While
18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

we recognize the logic of consolidating MINUSMA’s
presence, we believe that maintaining the current
geographical focus is important for the implementation
of the peace agreement and the long-term stabilization
of the country.
Lastly, it is essential that all actors across Mali and
the Sahel take a coordinated and integrated approach, in
line with the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel. A solution that addresses the underlying causes of
instability is the only way to ensure long-term security
in the region. The ultimate solution will be a political
one, underpinned by effective security and economic
development. It must be inclusive, gender-responsive
and ensure the full and equal participation of the whole
of society, including in particular women, in order
to succeed. It must provide economic opportunities
and present an attractive alternative to violence and
extremism. That is the best way to improve the lives of
those who live in Mali and the best way to improve our
collective peace and security.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I very
much thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. I welcome Foreign Minister Coulibaly.
(spoke in French)
It is a pleasure to see him here again in New York.
(spoke in English)
We are gravely concerned about the continued
deterioration of the security situation and the
corresponding worsening of the humanitarian situation
in Mali. We are alarmed about the fact that over the past
six months, nine peacekeepers and seven contractors
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have
been killed and 36 peacekeepers injured. The ongoing
attacks against MINUSMA across central and northern
Mali present a serious challenge to the meaningful
implementation of MINUSMA’s mandate. The number
of casualties, coupled with the limited progress on the
ground, highlight the need to think carefully about
what we ask of MINUSMA.
The strategic review that the Under-SecretaryGeneral briefed us on has provided an opening for
a difficult conversation. Looking at the Council’s
observations over time and the helpful and specific
recommendations provided by the review team, it is
time to take action. This month, it is incumbent on the
Council to contemplate how we can enable MINUSMA

S/PV. 8288

to support a more secure Mali and ensure that it makes
substantive progress towards the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
First, we look towards July, when we expect free,
fair, credible and transparent elections, with the full
and meaningful participation of women. Successful
elections will be essential to securing the gains that Mali
has achieved so far. Establishing a meaningful dialogue
among the Government, the political opposition and
civil society, and ensuring that the political space
is open for peaceful demonstration are important to
ensuring that all parties see the elections as credible.
We urge all stakeholders to resolve any disputes through
established mechanisms, in accordance with the law.
We express our sincere appreciation to the Prime
Minister and leadership of the signatory armed groups
for their efforts over the past few months to find common
ground and build momentum towards implementation
of the peace agreement. But all of the parties have
wasted far too much time over the past three years,
during which little progress has been made. We share
the Secretary-General’s concern that there has not been
enough meaningful progress on the implementation of
the peace agreement, and we agree that MINUSMA
should focus more of its efforts and limited resources
on the political process. The Council should use all
available means to bring a sense of urgency to the
process and encourage quick progress in uniting the
Malian people around a common project. If we do not
see progress, then we should seriously consider how
long we can sustain the Mission without the serious and
active partnership of the parties.
MINUSMA operates in an incredibly challenging
security environment, with few resources available
to focus on initiatives beyond the protection of the
Mission itself. Given that reality, it is time to streamline
the mandate to increase support to political engagement
and scale down the Mission’s focus on less critical
activities. Such streamlining will necessitate tough
choices as we seek to eliminate, refine or sequence
mandated tasks that are either not directly supporting
the political process or have stalled altogether.
We, like others, are also worried about growing
instability in central Mali, and we support the review’s
recommendation that some reconfiguration of the force
in the north is necessary. The consolidation of bases
could reduce troop exposure and free MINUSMA
resources to complete tasks beyond force protection.

18-183529/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

Such an undertaking ought to be conducted at the
discretion of the Mission leadership, with the safety of
the Mission and its personnel in mind.
We also share the assessment that failure to
contain the crisis in the central region could have a
significantly detrimental impact on the stabilization
and social cohesion of the country, risking a reversal
of the small gains realized so far. We want to see
MINUSMA prioritize the expansion of the force’s
footprint and its community engagement in central
Mali to better address protection-of-civilian concerns.
The strategic review also raises the concern that we
share about the parameters of service provision to
non-United Nations entities. The report (S/2018/541)
rightly points out that support to non-United Nations
entities risks jeopardizing the Mission’s impartiality
and its legitimacy in the political space.
Finally, the United States applauds the United
Nations for its continued attention to human rights
incidents, especially the investigations into numerous
and credible allegations of violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. We would like to echo the concerns
regarding the Malian security forces, and we urge the
Government of Mali to swiftly investigate allegations
of human rights violations by its forces and hold
accountable those responsible. For Mali’s peace
process to succeed and its population to unite around its
Government, the people must not fear the very security
forces that are sent to protect them.
As elections approach, Mali is at yet another
crossroads. We in the Council are united in our support
of Mali and in our desire to see the country’s leaders
come together to make peace, govern the entire country
and ensure the Malian people’s well-being, safety
and opportunity.

14/06/2018

(spoke in Spanish)
Peru notes with concern the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Mali, particularly in the centre
and north of the country. Terrorist group activities,
clashes among armed groups, attacks perpetrated
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) personnel
and the limited presence of the State in various areas of
the country persist. However, we look forward to the new
road map for the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the role played
by the Agreement Monitoring Committee, the Carter
Center and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, as well as the
establishment of the mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu.
On this occasion, I will broach three specific
issues: first, the political process; secondly, the
security situation; and thirdly, the renewal of
MINUSMA’s mandate.
On my first point, after three years of waiting, it
is necessary to accelerate the implementation of the
peace agreement. The expectations generated by the
new road map must not lead to further frustration. To
that end, we deem it essential that Malian citizens take
full ownership of the process and that the international
community redouble its support. We wish to underline
that holding free and fair presidential elections is crucial
for the future of the country. It is important that the
process be conducted in a stable political context, with
regional and international backing, so as to guarantee
the mass participation of the population and engage
more women and young people in politics.

(spoke in French)

On the security situation, we commend the efforts of
the Malian Government in implementing the programme
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, as well as the reforms that it has been
promoting to strengthen its security services. However,
much remains to be done in that area. We believe that
it is necessary to pay special attention to the activities
of violent extremist groups, particularly in the centre
of the country, which exploit the limited presence of
the State to expand their influence and establish their
own administration. That reinforces the vicious circle
of intercommunal violence.

I would also like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
Mr. Тiéman Hubert Coulibaly, to New York.

We also note with concern that law enforcement
agencies share equal responsibility for increasing
human rights violations, although they are the very

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting
and thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for the valuable
information he has provided.

10/22

18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

entities called upon to protect the population and the
rule of law required to guarantee a sustainable peace.
In response, it is necessary to strengthen the judiciary
and guarantee access to justice. In that regard, we
believe that it is important to work on the prevention
and resolution of conflicts at the local level and to
address their root causes. That implies promoting
dialogue with communities and developing inclusive,
transparent and accountable institutions that are
capable of recognizing and addressing the legitimate
demands of the population.
Thirdly, Peru believes that the support needed by
the authorities and the Malian population to advance
the country’s political process and improve the security
situation is bolstered by the strategic review on the
activities of MINUSMA, which seeks to improve
the Mission’s performance and results in response to
the current situation on the ground. To that end, we
underscore the need to strengthen its support for the
achievement of the peace agreement, as well as the
political and security reforms that the country needs.
We agree with the recommendation presented by the
Secretary-General to the Council to renew the mandate
of the Mission for one year.
Peru recognizes and supports the work that
MINUSMA carries out in a particularly adverse
environment and in complicated operational situations.
We believe that its deployment on the ground is crucial to
promoting stability in Mali. In addition, it is important
that MINUSMA strengthen its coordination with the
United Nations country team, because responding to
the conflict and crisis and, ultimately, the building of a
sustainable peace, require a multidimensional, coherent
and integrated approach that includes all actors involved
in the development of the country.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing on the situation in the Republic
of Mali and developments in the activities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) on the ground. We also
join our colleagues in welcoming the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Republic of Mali, Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly.
Five years have elapsed since the establishment of
MINUSMA and three since the signing of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Unfortunately,

S/PV. 8288

despite these events, Mali has not yet found the stability
necessary to allow its people to live in an atmosphere of
peace. The high degree of complexity and fragility of
the humanitarian and security situation in that country,
which has spread throughout the Sahel region, highlights
the consequences of interventionism and regime change
policies since, following the 2011 conflict in Libya, the
side effects of that destabilization have included the
regrettable results of chaos and terrorism.
Asymmetric threats, terrorist threats, endless
clashes between armed groups and intercommunal
violence continue to jeopardize the integrity and lives
of the civilian population — not to mention the fact that
they have slowed down the country’s economic growth
and development, extended and compounded the
presence and consequences of transnational organized
crime in the subregion, and significantly diminished
the capacities of the Malian security forces, which have
suffered complex attacks while defending themselves
and protecting their population.
We are concerned that, in the northern and central
sectors of Mali, the presence of mercenaries, drug and
arms traffickers and human traffickers has turned their
criminal activities into a modus vivendi that impedes
the consolidation of the peace Agreement, and which
is also increasingly contributing to the deterioration of
the security and political situation.
We consider it crucial to continue supporting
the process of implementing the peace agreement.
In that regard, we call on the Malian Government
and the international community to join forces in
a more coherent and effective manner by building
and strengthening measures of mutual trust. In that
connection, we call once again on the countries that
have pledged financial support for MINUSMA to
honour their commitments; Mali urgently requires
the main guarantor of this process, the international
community, to vigorously promote the measures
necessary to help the Malian Government to strengthen
its presence throughout its territory, as well as to
contribute to the full reconstitution of its armed forces
in order to create adequate conditions for the protection
of the civilian population.
We also commend the important efforts of the
Government of Mali with regard to the appointment
of interim authorities, the creation of legislative and
electoral timetables, as well as the application of
benchmarks for the effective implementation of the

18-1835211/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

peace Agreement and its provisions in the framework
of the inclusive political dialogue. Prime Minister
Maïga’s visit to the most affected regions demonstrates
the Malian Government’s commitment to security.
We must also consider the significant mobilization
of resources generated from the national fund for the
support of territorial collectivities in the regions of
Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Taoudenni and Ménaka, which
clearly give a fundamental boost to the State presence
in those localities.
We also welcome the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of MINUSMA and thank him for his efforts.
We recognize that the evolving challenges facing the
Mission, including not only the violence of armed
groups, but also the growing threat of violent extremism,
transnational crime and asymmetric threats such as
improvised explosive devices. With respect to the latter
issue, we must commend the work of the United Nations
Mine Action Service in implementing a framework for
mitigating such threats through technical and strategic
advice, which has reduced the number of victims of
such threats.
With regard to the independent strategic review
of MINUSMA, we are concerned about information
regarding the lack of material capabilities that reduce its
mobility and impede the efficient projection of its presence
in the field. We also consider it important to continue
to promote the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding with the Malian Government to support
the armed forces in the operational, intelligence,
medical evacuation, explosive ordnance disposal and
management and demining activities. Those aspects
are of vital importance for both immediate and longterm stabilization in Mali. Therefore, the demobilized
elements must be effectively integrated throughout the
peace process through peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding activities.
Finally, it is clear that the security situation in Mali
and the Sahel region still presents major challenges.
Bolivia highlights the outstanding efforts made by
the regional and subregional organizations, led by the
African Union in cooperation and coordination with the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We call on
and strongly encourage the international community to
continue to contribute technical support and economic
and humanitarian cooperation to all initiatives that help
the population achieve stability and definitive peace in
Mali and the region.
12/22

14/06/2018

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his valuable briefing on the latest
developments in Mali, especially in the light of the
upcoming presidential elections in July and the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We also welcome the presence and participation of
Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
I would like to address three aspects as part
of our discussion today, namely the political
situation, the security situation and the renewal of
MINUSMA’s mandate.
First, on the political situation, we followed with
interest the latest visit of the Secretary-General to
Mali, particularly after all relevant parties have signed
the new road map in March. We are pleased that real
progress has been made recently in implementing the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
also welcome the efforts of the Prime Minister to move
the peace process forward, as well as the steps taken by
his Government, in cooperation with all relevant parties,
to activate the Operational Coordination Mechanism
and to provide the delivery of basic services to northern
Mali. We call on all parties to commit to implementing
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme as soon as possible.
We welcome the first report of the independent
observer, the Carter Center, and its comments with
respect to the implementation of the agreement. The
report stresses the need to build trust between the
Malian people and the Government while involving the
people in the political peace process. We believe that
achieving this objective will be totally contingent on
the implementation of the basic elements of the peace
Agreement, which is the main terms of reference to
solve the crisis in Mali, including carrying out the
necessary reforms and focusing on long-term and
sustainable stability. We call on all parties to cooperate
and to step up their efforts in order to make progress in
this area for achieving the aspirations of the friendly
Malian people.
We look forward to asmooth and transparent
holding of presidential elections in July that includes all
constituencies of Malian society. We appreciate the role
of MINUSMA in preparing for the electoral process by
18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

providing technical, security and logistical support. We
encourage the Mission to continue its support in the
coming period, especially after the elections, in order
to reduce tensions among all parties. We also call on
those parties to cooperate with the Malian authorities
to ensure the security of the electoral process.
Secondly, concerning the security situation in Mali,
we remain concerned as threats from terrorist groups
continue, evidenced by the awful recent attack on the
MINUSMA camp. We appreciate MINUSMA’s efforts
to contain that threat and to reduce any further damage.
The role of peacekeepers in Mali remains important
and critical, and the Security Council must ensure
their protection by providing them with the necessary
equipment in order to help them perform their work and
shoulder their responsibilities. We are deeply saddened
by the loss of life of 101 peacekeepers.
Terrorist groups pose a threat not only to
peacekeepers, Malian forces and the French force, but
also to Malian civilians, especially in central Mali. We
are concerned by the deaths of more than 40 civilians
during the period under review, and we welcome all the
initiatives of the Government to counter these threats.
Regrettably, we have noticed an increase in the use
of improvised explosive devices, rising to almost 100
incidents since the beginning of this year. That is why
the Mission must step up its efforts in training and
outreach, and we encourage it to pursue its efforts in
the future to reduce the damage resulting from these
explosive devices.
Finally, regarding the renewal of the MINUSMA
mandate, we welcome the findings of the strategic
review led by Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, and we thank
her very much for her efforts. We stress the need to take
the review’s recommendations into consideration in the
next renewal of the mandate. The scope of the mandate
must be clarified in order to ensure its effectiveness
and success in advancing the political process in
the country. We agree with the recommendation to
prioritize the tasks of the Mission so as to ensure the
full implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
very informative briefing on recent developments
in Mali.

S/PV. 8288

(spoke in French)
I take this opportunity to welcome the presence
among us of His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert
Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.
(spoke in English)
In the face of the upcoming renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), I would
like to focus my intervention around three issues:
the political process, the situation of women and the
MINUSMA mandate itself.
First, on the political process, the visit of Prime
Minister Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga to the northern
regions, including Kidal, the ongoing registration of
combatants, and progress in the implementation of the
road map are perceived as positive steps in the peace
process. The holding of inclusive, transparent and
credible elections will be crucial to securing the gains
achieved so far by the parties in the implementation
of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. It will therefore be crucial to create conditions
for secure, peaceful and transparent elections. Efforts
in this area, however, should be intensified and, despite
the circumstances of the electoral process, the full
implementation of the provisions of the agreement
should be a top priority for the Malian authorities and
completed as soon as possible.
We commend the neighbouring countries, including
Algeria, for their support for the peace process in Mali
and their commitment to ensuring the stabilization
of that country and the Sahel region. However, the
international community should increase its efforts
to comprehensively address the crisis in the country.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate our support for
all necessary measures taken by the Security Council
against individuals and entities engaged in actions or
policies that threaten the implementation of the peace
agreement in Mali.
Secondly, women continue to be underrepresented
in the mechanisms for implementing and monitoring
the peace agreement. Only 3 per cent of members
of the mechanisms are women, which is a very low
indicator. Regarding sexual and gender-based violence,
according to UN-Women more than 1 in 10 females
between the ages of 15 and 49 in Mali have experienced
sexual violence. There is currently no national law in

18-1835213/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

Mali specifically addressing violence against women.
Furthermore, women and the girls who suffer sexual
and gender-based violence are often stigmatized
or even excluded by their communities. Taking the
aforementioned problems into account, strong language
on gender equality and women’s rights, as well as
women’s meaningful participation in the peace process,
should be maintained in the upcoming resolution
on Mali.
The discussion of the new MINUSMA mandate is
relevant to the current security situation in Mali. Poland
supports the proposal to revitalize the United Nations
presence in the north in order to ensure the effectiveness
and impact of the Mission, and to strengthen its presence
in the centre of Mali, where the situation is critical and
the number of civilian casualties is unprecedented.
We would also welcome a strengthened and
more active leadership role for MINUSMA in Mali’s
peace process. There has been positive progress in
the implementation of key security provisions of the
peace agreement, but there remains much to be done
in such areas as security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration,
governance,
institutional reform, the fight against impunity, and
development. MINUSMA’s good offices should be
used in a more extensive manner to promote the rapid
implementation of all the outstanding provisions of
the political agreement so as to ensure the inclusivity
of the peace process, including the promoton of the
engagement of non-signatory actors.
Last but not least, we see added value in the
continuation of MINUSMA support to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and Poland supports
that effort. However, the leadership of MINUSMA has
to ensure that this engagement would not negatively
impact the Mission’s own capacity.
In conclusion, Poland commends the tireless efforts
of the men and women of MINUSMA in extremely
difficult circumstances, and looks forward to the
further extension of the MINUSMA mandate.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
recognizing the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali. We
thank him for being with us today.
Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his useful briefing to the Council today.
14/22

14/06/2018

We welcome the progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali in recent months. This
includes the establishment of Operational Coordination
Mechanisms in Kidal and Timbuktu and the Prime
Minister’s visit to the northern and central regions.
It is now crucial that the implementation of the
peace agreement be intensified and that the current
momentum be maintained through the presidential
election campaign. It is also imperative that the
eventual winner of the presidential election continue to
prioritize the peace process.
Inclusivity is an essential prerequisite for building
a sustainable peace in any country. That is also true
in Mali. As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/541), little progress has been made in ensuring
women’s meaningful engagement in the peace process.
We must step up our efforts in this regard, and we call
on all parties to urgently address this shortfall.
We are concerned by the lack of trust between the
Government and opposition parties, highlighted most
recently by violent clashes sparked by demonstrations.
It is crucial that political actors and parties put aside
their differences and work towards the holding of
inclusive, transparent and credible elections, for the
good of all Malians.
The continued deterioration of the situation in
central Mali, leading to an unprecedented number of
civilian casualties, remains of great concern. We are
particularly worried by serious allegations of human
rights abuses and violations in the context of counterterrorism operations being carried out by the Malian
armed forces. We call on the Government to step
up protection efforts in the region and to conduct
investigations of alleged abuses and violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Restoring trust in the Government and building the
legitimacy of State functions in the region, including by
providing basic social services, is essential. It will also
be important to take local dynamics into account and
address the fundamental causes of instability, including
conflicts over resources and land, inequalities,
exclusion and climate change.
Turning to the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), we welcome the conclusions
of the independent strategic review, as presented in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/541). It makes
18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

important recommendations on how to better align
the Mission’s objectives and strategic vision with
the realities on the ground and key provisions of the
Peace Agreement, including those on decentralization,
security-sector reform and reconciliation. The Peace
Agreement is the only possible path to peace and
stability in Mali, and supporting its implementation
should remain the Mission’s priority. For that reason,
we support the idea of enhancing MINUSMA’s
political role as well as developing a pact for peace,
which would link assistance to existing benchmarks
and timelines, including progress on governance and
institutional reforms.
We agree that the United Nations presence in Mali
needs greater strategic coherence, since, along with
integrated planning within the Mission, it remains
essential to fulfilling the objectives of a common vision
in support of the peace process and stabilization. It is
clear that we must reinvigorate the United Nations
efforts, together with those of the Malian authorities,
to address the situation in central Mali. We support the
recommendation of formulating a fully integrated plan
that takes the multidimensional nature of the challenges
in the region into account. Finally, it is important to
ensure that the Mission’s key civilian components, not
least in the area of human rights, are safeguarded. In
the light of the heavy security presence on the ground,
monitoring and reporting on such issues is essential.
The situation in Mali has implications for the wider
region. It is therefore important to ensure that the
implementation of the Peace Agreement can proceed
more rapidly and that peaceful, fair and transparent
elections will be held in July. The United Nations has
an important role to play in support of the national
efforts and will continue to have our full support.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to thank you for convening today’s
meeting, Mr. President, and to welcome Foreign
Minister Coulibaly to the Security Council. We would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.
The new Government in Mali has been working
hard since it took office to advance the Malian peace
process and implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, and has made some positive
progress. The Government, the signatory armed groups
and the relevant Malian stakeholders have made major
efforts in that regard, which we welcome. Meanwhile,

S/PV. 8288

however, the security situation in northern and central
Mali has got worse. There is rampant terrorist activity
both in Mali iself and in neighbouring regions,
which has a serious impact on the peace process. The
international community should support Mali in its
efforts to ensure peace and development.
First, it is important to assist the Malian parties
in implementing the Peace Agreement. China hopes
that the signatories to the Agreement will continue
to demonstrate the necessary political will, work to
implement all its provisions and engage in concerted
reconstruction and development efforts so that the
people can reap the benefit of a peace dividend.
Basing its efforts on respect for Mali’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, the international
community should continue to support the country’s
peace process and help it to enhance its own
development and governing capacity. The Malian
Government is making intensive preparations for the
forthcoming election in July. We hope that its concerted
efforts and those of the people of Mali will make it a
success. The international community should support
the people of Mali in making their own decisions. The
sanction mechanism for Mali should provide objective
support to the political process and function in strict
compliance with the Security Council’s mandate.
Secondly, the international community should help
Mali improve its security capabilities. The security
challenges in northern and central Mali are becoming
increasingly complex, and at the Government’s request,
the international community should continue to support
it in enhancing its security and counter-terror capacities,
so that it can gradually take on the responsibility for
maintaining the security of the entire country. The issue
of peace and security is closely tied to the situation in
the surrounding regions, so we need to take advantage
of regional cooperation to ensure an integrated
approach to dealing with the terrorist activities in
Mali and beyond. China welcomes the initiative of the
Group of Five for the Sahel in forming a Joint Force
to address security threats such as regional terrorism.
It is important that African countries seek greater
strength through unity and thereby safeguard peace
and security on their continent and in the rest of world.
China commends the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
for the preparations it has made to support the Joint
Force, and we hope that when conditions permit it will

18-1835215/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

begin providing the Joint Force with support as soon
as possible.
Thirdly, we should support MINUSMA’s work.
China commends and supports MINUSMA and Special
Representative Annadif in their efforts to promote the
Malian peace process and strengthen the country’s
security capacity. The Mission’s mandate expires at
the end of June, and China will engage actively in the
consultations on the draft resolution for its renewal. We
hope that MINUSMA will continue to communicate
with the Malian Government and help the country with
its capacity-building and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. The security of
MINUSMA’s peacekeepers is a serious issue. The
violent attacks this year have resulted in an increase
in the number of casualties. China notes the positive
measures that the Secretariat and the Mission have
taken to improve peacekeepers’ safety and security,
and we hope that MINUSMA will continue to work
to improve those areas and ensure that the necessary
supplies and resources are in place. It should also step
up its communication with troop-contributing countries
and donors in order to ensure that the Mission has all
the equipment and resources it needs to discharge its
mandate and protect itself.
There are more than 400 Chinese peacekeepers in
Mali serving in the medical, engineering and security
areas, and their work has been much praised. China
will continue to give its firm support to the cause
of fostering peace and development for the people
of Mali and to contributing to the country’s peace,
stability and prosperity alongside the rest of the
international community.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I am very pleased to be able
to greet and welcome His Excellency Mr. Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in supporting the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
as well as on the findings of the recent independent
strategic review.
We note with satisfaction the renewed momentum
that the Prime Minister has brought to the peace
process and the other measures that have contributed to

16/22

14/06/2018

progress in implementing the Peace Agreement, as the
Secretary-General mentions in his report (S/2018/541).
We believe that the Secretary-General’s solidarity visit
to Mali from 29 to 31 May gave impetus to that positive
momentum and sent a strong message in its recognition
of the contribution that MINUSMA’s sacrifices have
made to peace and stability in Mali. We welcome the
progress made in the operationalization of the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, and the commitment that
the signatories have made to the Mechanism. We also
commend the Government’s efforts to work with the
signatories and the various stakeholders to foster an
environment conducive to the holding of peaceful,
credible and transparent elections throughout the
country, especially the upcoming presidential election.
However, in the light of the recent violent clashes
sparked by the holding of demonstrations by opposition
parties, we call upon all Malian parties to exercise
maximum restraint, defuse political tensions through
dialogue and work for the creation of a conducive
environment for the smooth conduct of the elections.
We also urge the speedy completion of the preparations
for the conduct of peaceful and inclusive elections
within the time frame set by the Constitution.
Despite the progress registered, the continuing
deterioration of the security situation in Mali and
the intercommunal clashes in the central parts of the
country and violent attacks mainly targeting Tuareg
communities in the south of the Ménaka region remain
a source of concern. We strongly condemn the terrorist
attacks against MINUSMA, the Malian defence and
security forces, as well at the international forces
and civilians in the north and centre of Mali. The
destructive actions of the terrorists and armed groups
are undermining the State’s authority and worsening
the humanitarian situation. Urgent action is needed to
quickly reverse the situation.
Despite all the enormous political and security
challenges and constraints related to human resources
and equipment, MINUSMA forces are undertaking
commendable tasks in supporting the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We appreciate the continued support of MINUSMA, in
cooperation with other international partners, for the
Malian authorities’ efforts to combat terrorism and
international organized crime, including information
and intelligence sharing, as well as planning, training

18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

and capacity-building. The role of MINUSMA
continues to be indispensable, and we support the
extension of its mandate for another 12 months in line
with the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
We note the outcomes of the independent strategic
review of MINUSMA and we believe the Mission’s
robust posture should be maintained. We also note
with great interest that the review recommended, as
did the Secretary-General, strengthening MINUSMA’s
support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel through assessed contributions. We look forward
to engaging in the discussion on the renewal of the
mandate of the Mission.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is grateful
for the convening of this meeting and the comprehensive
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix. We
are also pleased to welcome once again to New York
His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
Just a few days after the three-year anniversary of the
signing of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali as a result of the Algiers process, once again we
have an opportunity to assess the progress achieved in
the implementation of the Agreement and to evaluate
the work and functioning of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). My Government welcomes
the achievements made by the Government and the
signatory movements in the implementation of the
Agreement, as noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/541), although some challenges
still remain. We especially underscore the timeline
for priority actions and the road map — adopted,
respectively, in January and March.
With regard to the measures and reforms on matters
of security and defence, the redeployment of the army
to several of the country’s cities and the tentative
resumption of mixed patrols composed of elements of
the Malian defence and security forces and the platforms
in the north, as agreed in 2016 within the framework of
the Operational Coordination Mechanism, are positive
signs that generate trust among the security forces and
the various local armed groups. It should be recalled
that the mixed patrols have been considered the
impetus for the reconfiguration of the Malian armed
forces, in which former members of rebel armed groups

S/PV. 8288

are included, and that the Mechanism’s mission is
fundamentally to protect and promote the progressive
stabilization of the northern regions of the country.
Equatorial Guinea commends the efforts of the
Government to stabilize the country and welcomes the
Prime Minister’s recent visit to the north, which we
believe will contribute to finding a lasting solution to
the problem.
Despite this encouraging climate, we believe that
it is important that there be significant short- and
medium-term progress in the economic and social
spheres. In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea encourages the parties to redouble their efforts
to ensure the timely implementation of the Agreement.
Although the parties have reiterated their commitment
to its implementation, the anticipated peace dividends,
such as the provision of basic services, have not yet
materialized for the population, despite the Agreement’s
provisions to establish a strategy for the development of
the northern regions.
We hope that this positive trend of progress in
the implementation of the Agreement will continue
through the holding of the presidential elections in
July. In that regard, my Government endorses the
3 June communiqué of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission calling on political actors in Mali
to act with restraint and to refrain from any action that
could increase tension and provoke greater political
polarization. It is also important for the political leaders
in Mali to ensure the holding of presidential elections
under the necessary conditions of peace, security and
transparency, so that they contribute to ending the
crisis in Mali.
The political process in Mali must continue, as
reflected in the country’s Constitution. That requires
strict compliance with the planned timetable for
elections, namely, presidential elections now and
legislative elections later. In the light of the mandate of
MINUSMA under resolution 2364 (2017), the Mission
must continue to provide technical support and exercise
its good offices for the holding of the elections. We
believe that those are aspects that should be included in
the Mission’s mandate.
My Government commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General in conducting the independent
strategic review of MINUSMA and agrees with its
primary recommendations, namely, to support national

18-1835217/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

dialogue in order to promote ownership of the Agreement
by the people of Mali and a strengthening of the nation
beyond State reform; to promote a common vision
among regional and international actors in support of
the peace and stabilization process; and to promote a
peace agreement among the Government, the Security
Council, the United Nations and international partners
under which assistance would be provided in accordance
with clear reference points, including with regard to
progress, good governance and political reforms.
MINUSMA has helped to stabilize the situation in
the country. We believe that its current form has been
very useful for the country and, therefore, we think it
should continue as such. We support the renewal of its
current mandate.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his comprehensive briefing. My delegation joins others
in warmly welcoming Mr. Tiéman Coulibaly, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Mali, to today’s meeting.
We fully endorse the recommendations of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/541) and
would like to make the following observations for the
Council’s consideration.
First, our main priority should be to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. Kazakhstan welcomes the
increased cooperation between the Malian Government
and other signatories, which has resulted in progress as
evident in the deployment of mixed patrols in Kidal and
Timbuktu and the registration of combatants eligible
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the African Union and the other relevant actors
for their important role in facilitating the dialogue
among the signatories.
My delegation encourages the parties to continue to
show genuine will in advancing the implementation of
the Agreement. We underscore the need to focus on the
three long-term strategic pillars of the Agreement that
are emphasized in the independent observer’s report.
We reiterate that the Agreement’s key provisions with
regard to encouraging national reconciliation, ensuring
basic services and strengthening resilience, economic
development, good governance and the rule of law
are essential to the process of establishing lasting

18/22

14/06/2018

peace and stability in Mali. The genuine inclusion of
women and young people in the peace process and in
decision-making is also important to enduring stability.
Another crucial task is ensuring the transparent, fair,
peaceful and inclusive conduct of the presidential
elections in July. We welcome the Government’s
electoral reforms and call on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the international community to
provide adequate financial and technical assistance to
the Government, which is crucial to the success of the
electoral process.
Addressing the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in northern and central Mali is equally important. We
therefore call on international partners and donors to
fund the humanitarian response plan for 2018. We urge
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
With regard to the upcoming renewal of the
MINUSMA mandate, we support the independent
strategic review’s recommendations, including on
ensuring a tailored approach to the protection of
civilians mandate and prioritizing the Mission’s tasks
so as to increase its role in advancing the peace process.
In order to address the Mission’s capability gaps, it is
critical to provide the contingents with better equipment
and predeployment training commensurate with the
situation of asymmetric conflict that Mali presents. It
is also worth considering the concept of equipmentcontributing countries.
Kazakhstan firmly believes that fully operationalizing
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel will
substantially strengthen the efforts of MINUSMA and
the Malian national security forces to combat terrorism
and other cross-border threats. Finally, like others, we
strongly condemn the violent attacks by terrorist groups
on civilians, humanitarian workers, the Malian security
forces and MINUSMA personnel. In conclusion,
we would like to commend Special Representative
Annadif and all the brave men and women representing
the United Nations in Mali who are committed to peace
in such a hazardous and challenging environment.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. We welcome
Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign

18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali, to
today’s meeting.
We support Bamako’s efforts to normalize the
situation in Mali. We note that in the past few months
the process of implementing the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has somewhat
accelerated. The mixed patrols have finally been
deployed to Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu and the processes
for the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants are continuing.
There have been no significant violations in the
preparations for the upcoming 29 July presidential
elections. In that regard, we urge all Malian stakeholders
to refrain from provocative action and work together in
order to ensure that they go off peacefully.
However, there are still many reasons to be
concerned. The geographic scope of terrorist and
extremist activity has significantly expanded and
we are seeing inter-ethnic clashes. The authorities’
presence in many areas of central and northern Mali
is still extremely limited, and unfortunately people’s
basic social needs there are not being met, while the
humanitarian situation in the country is close to the
crisis levels of 2012. In such circumstances there is
nothing for the local young people to do besides joining
the ranks of terrorist or criminal groups.
We have carefully read the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in Mali (S/2018/541) and the
independent strategic review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). In general, we agree with their
views and conclusions. Given the fact that in five years
the crisis in Mali has not been resolved despite the
peacekeeping presence there, we have to reconsider the
current approach. We agree with the strategic review’s
assessment that it is unlikely that the situation in the
country can be normalized by military means alone.
We must focus on political mechanisms that can be
developed and implemented by the Malians themselves.
The only way to resolve the country’s numerous
complex issues is for its citizens themselves to play a
direct leading role in the processes, which of course
need international and regional support. If it is backed
by the Malians themselves, we believe the strategic
review’s idea of a pact for peace could be a basis for
making progress.
We also support the Secretary-General’s proposal
to review the priority areas of MINUSMA’s work

S/PV. 8288

with a view to ensuring that it can fulfil its political
tasks. First, however, the process should be gradual,
and secondly, it should not interfere with the Mission’s
task of protecting the civilian population and helping
to re-establish the national security forces. The issue
of supplying the Mission with material and technical
resources, including helicopters, is also very urgent,
and we ask the countries that have made respective
commitments to fulfil them as soon as possible.
It will be difficult to achieve a settlement in Mali
without normalizing the situation in the region as a
whole, while the situation in the country is a significant
factor for security in Africa in general. We support
the concrete steps taken by the Group of Five for the
Sahel to establish their Joint Force in order to combat
terrorism and organized crime, and we hope it will be
fully deployed as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June and to assure you of our
full cooperation. I would also like to congratulate the
delegation of Poland on its exemplary conduct of the
Council’s work during the previous month. I would like
to express our gratitude to all of the members of the
Council for their ongoing support to the peace process
in Mali. And I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his support and for his recent visit to Mali
from 29 to 30 May in solidarity with the Malian people
and the Blue Helmets.
My delegation takes note of the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/541), and we
thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive and
faithful presentation of the report, including on the
recent developments in Mali that have occurred since
it was published.
First, we welcome the fact that the report emphasizes
the recent progress made in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including the start of operations for the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal, Timbuktu and
Gao; the Government’s provision of heavy weapons

18-1835219/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

to strengthen the capabilities of the Mechanism’s Gao
battalion, considering that it has been operational since
2017; the ongoing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, with preregistration of former
combatants; the establishment of interim authorities in
regions that had been awaiting them and the provision
of 8 billion African Financial Community francs in
investment and technical support. Such progress also
includes the transmission to the National Assembly
of a draft law on the creation of territorial authorities
in the regions of Мénaka and Taoudenni and the
commencement of work on security sector reform. In
addition to the total end of the belligerence between the
Malian parties since the signing of the Agreement in
2015, those achievements constitute important steps in
the peace process in Mali.
I am also pleased that the report underlines the
determination of the Malian parties to work together
to continue to step up the implementation of the
Agreement. The Malian parties reaffirmed, with one
voice, such commitment to the Secretary-General
at his meeting with the members of the Agreement’s
Monitoring Committee in Bamako on 30 May.
The progress made speaks to the firm and constant
political will of the President of the Republic of Mali, the
Government and all the Malian parties to implement the
Agreement, together with the international community.
Such political will has been expressed through
various initiatives since 2013 — beginning with the
preliminary Ouagadougou agreement, the generalized
decentralization of states in 2014, national meetings,
the Conference on National Understanding, the
charter on national understanding, the law on national
understanding, which absolves all those involved in
armed rebellions, excluding those who were prosecuted
for serious crimes, and our own petition to the Council
for a sanctions regime to encourage all parties to the
Agreement to implement it. I want to remind members
of the Council of that because it is important to bear
in mind.
It is true that the implementation of the Agreement
is experiencing some delays, but the factors causing
those delays have been gradually identified. I would like
to add that the intense work carried out by the Council
and MINUSMA, and related efforts of the Government,
have made possible the undertaking of efforts that
Council members have themselves observed. There
is a need to step up that approach to continue along

20/22

14/06/2018

those lines so that while we prepare for the presidential
elections, which were broadly mentioned today, the
implementation of the Agreement continues without
our efforts losing momentum.
The situation in the central part of the country
is one of the Government’s major concerns with
regard to attacks by terrorist groups and incidents
involving communities, as well as the lack of agropastoral production to ensure food security. That is
why we believe that the integrated security plan for
central regions, adopted in February 2017, is the ideal
framework for the holistic response we are providing,
with the support of our international partners.
As the Security Council prepares to adopt a draft
resolution to extend the mandate of MINUSMA for one
year, it is important to share with Council members
the real expectations of our Government. In that
connection, I will begin by addressing the support
needed for the electoral process. As members know,
the first round of the presidential elections is scheduled
for 29 July — 45 days from now. The holding of those
elections, under the required conditions of transparency
and credibility, is crucial for the consolidation of
democracy and the legitimacy of the institutions in our
country. That is why the Government, in upholding the
Bamako declaration of 3 November 2000, is requesting
substantial support from MINUSMA, particularly in
the areas of security and logistics.
At the same time, the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Agreement must continue.
We urge MINUSMA to take measures to enable Mali to
re-establish its authority over its entire territory, protect
civilian populations, support the redeployment of the
Administration, support the provision of basic social
services to the population, strengthen cooperation with
the national defence and security forces and accelerate
planned support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel for its effective operationalization.
In order to enable MINUSMA to fully and
properly implement its mandate, the Government of
Mali requests that the capacities of that important
Mission be strengthened in terms of training,
logistics and operational resources. With regard to
the reconfiguration of MINUSMA forces referred
to in the report, the Government of the Republic of
Mali expresses its preference for maintaining and
strengthening the current arrangements in view of the
challenges involved in organizing and securing the

18-18352

14/06/2018

The situation in Mali

presidential, legislative, regional and local elections,
which run from July 2018 to August 2019. Also, the
reconfiguration, as proposed, could entail, if it were
implemented now, the risk of creating a security
vacuum, which could jeopardize the progress achieved
in the peace process and regional stability.
In that context, the most credible option is to
expedite the implementation of the relevant provisions
of articles 21 and 54 of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation, which stipulate, inter alia, that the
redeployment of the reconstituted armed and security
forces shall be carried out under the leadership of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism with the support
of MINUSMA and that the international community
is the guarantor of the scrupulous implementation of
the Agreement.
The report under review indicates an increase in
cases of human rights violations, including inhumane
and degrading treatment, arbitrary detention and
extrajudicial executions, with particular reference
to the Malian defence and security forces working in
the context of anti-terrorist operations. In that regard,
as I have said before when addressing the Council, I
would like to strongly reiterate the commitment of
the Government of the Republic of Mali to respect,
and ensure respect for, human rights. I reaffirm here
my country’s full commitment to the successful
investigation of every case reported in the report. In that
connection, I note that administrative and disciplinary
measures have been taken with regard to military units
deployed in the regions concerned, military prosecutors
have been seized to clarify the reported cases and the
results of those investigations will be published as soon
as possible.
As I have had to emphasize before the Council, the
Government of Mali, in compliance with the directives
of the President of Republic, observes a zero-tolerance
policy on human rights violations. We have specifically
asked MINUSMA to share with us the information
it has so that we can work together to ensure that all
investigation processes are completed and judicial
action is taken if necessary. In that regard, I welcome
the Secretary-General’s recognition, in paragraphs 37
and 38 of his report, that the Government has clearly
reiterated its commitment to not tolerate abuses
against civilians.
The Government of Mali is aware of the urgent
need to make the presidential elections on 29 July as

S/PV. 8288

transparent and peaceful as possible. It is working
to that end daily and without respite. It is in that
context that a consultation framework has been set
up, including the political parties of the presidential
majority, the opposition and civil society. At the same
time, I can assure members of the Council that the
material and logistical arrangements are in place to
ensure free, reliable and peaceful elections. An audit of
the electoral register was conducted, which was carried
out by a team from the International Organization of
la Francophonie that found the register to be reliable.
I would mention that the chair of the audit committee
was a representative from the opposition. New voter
registration cards have been printed and will be
distributed in the coming days. A consensus-based
revision of the electoral law was conducted and put
to the vote in the National Assembly. The Malian
opposition did not vote against it. That demonstrates
a genuine space for dialogue and highlights efforts to
ensure full inclusion in the preparations for elections
and the full participation of all Malian stakeholders in
the political process.
The Government will do its utmost to ensure
that elections are conducted in a safe environment
across the country. More than 11,000 members of the
Malian defence and security forces will be deployed,
in addition to our MINUSMA partners, the French
Operation Barkhane force and contributions from
signatory movements. We must commend and thank all
our partners for the assistance that each has provided to
ensure success in the upcoming elections, which will be
important for peacebuilding in Mali and in the Sahel.
As the Council knows, combating terrorist groups
and other transnational organized crime elements
remains a priority for the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel. To that end, I again request that
the Council ensure that the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel be granted a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
predictable and permanent funding, including through
the United Nations.
I would like to reiterate that the Government
of Mali remains fully determined to honour its
commitments in implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which, for us, is the only
reference framework for a lasting settlement of the
crisis and the only political endeavour that could help
us rebuild national unity.

18-1835221/22

S/PV.8288

The situation in Mali

Lastly, on behalf of the Government and the people
of Mali, I should like once again to pay tribute to the
memory of all Malians and non-Malians alike, both

22/22

14/06/2018

military personnel and civilians, who have lost their
lives in Mali.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

18-18352
