S/PV.7279

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7279th meeting

Tuesday, 14 October 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

14-56749 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1456749*

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Anthony
Banbury, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response; Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Banbury,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Accra.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Banbury.
Mr. Banbury: I thank members of the Council
for this opportunity to provide the Council with an
overview of operational developments related to the
Ebola crisis and of the establishment of the first-ever
United Nations system-wide mission and the first-ever
emergency health mission — the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER). This is a
unique mission designed to confront an unprecedented,
deadly and growing crisis. Since the Secretary-General
announced the creation of the Global Ebola Response
Coalition on 1 September, a number of important steps
have been taken to accelerate the response to the Ebola
crisis and to galvanize the international community,
among them the establishment of UNMEER on
19 September.
I am inspired by the leadership of President Alpha
Condé of Guinea, President Ernest Bai Koroma of
Sierra Leone and President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of
Liberia. I am humbled by the hard work and dedication
of national and international personnel fighting Ebola
on the front lines as health-care workers, members of
burial teams, contact tracers, logisticians and many
2/14

14/10/2014

other functions. I am grateful for the commitments by
Member States of their civilian and military personnel,
material and money. But I am deeply worried that all
of that combined is not nearly enough to stop Ebola,
which got a head start on us. It is far ahead of us, it is
running faster than us and it is winning the race. We
cannot let Ebola win, for if it wins, we the people of
the United Nations will lose so very much. We will lose
things that we cannot lose. We cannot let that happen.
The World Health Organization (WHO) advises
that the four things we collectively must do to stop the
Ebola virus are to identify and trace contacts, manage
cases, ensure safe burials and provide people with
information they can use to protect themselves. Each
of those things is critical, and each involves complex
operations on the ground. If we fail at any of them,
we fail entirely. The WHO also advises that within 60
days we must ensure that 70 per cent of infected people
are in a care facility and that 70 per cent of burials are
carried out without causing further infection. We need
to do that within 60 days from 1 October. If we reach
those targets, then we can turn this epidemic around.
The excruciating challenge is that, with each passing
day, as more people are infected and the number of
people infected grows exponentially, the absolute value
of those targets grows rapidly and thye become more
distant and more difficult to achieve.
If we do not reach the targets within 60 days and
the numbers spike, many more people will die. This
is what we are fighting for now: we are fighting to
prevent unavoidable deaths. We are fighting for people
who are alive and healthy today, but who will become
infected by Ebola and die if we do not put in place the
necessary emergency response. That is the entire focus
of everyone in UNMEER. Our plan to stop the crisis.
To do the four things I mentioned that the WHO says
we must do is the right plan for the current crisis. But
if we do not get ahead of the crisis, if we do not reach
our targets and the number of people with Ebola rises
dramatically, as some have predicted, the plan we have
is not scalable to the size of such a new crisis. We either
stop Ebola now or we face an entirely unprecedented
situation for which we do not have a plan.
To illustrate that challenge we can look at the
expected number of new Ebola infections per week at
the 60-day mark, namely, 1 December. My colleague
Dr. Bruce Aylward, of the WHO and UNMEER,
stated today that we can expect a new caseload of
approximately 10,000 people per week by 1 December.

14-56749

14/10/2014

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7279

That means that we need 7,000 beds for treatment.
Under current planning and projections, we expect
to have approximately 4,300 beds in Ebola-treatment
centres by that date. However, many of those beds have
no staff to operate them under current plans. To make
up for the gap in beds, we must build about 2,700 beds
in community care centres, or about 300 such centres.
We will also need staff to manage the facilities and care
for the people in the beds. Those staff need to be trained
so they themselves do not fall sick, and they need to be
paid and properly equipped. Those projected numbers
also assume that all the facilities and beds will be used
to maximum efficiency, with no beds left unfilled,
regardless of the geographical location of the facility.

including personnel from the WHO, the World Food
Programme, UNICEF, the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Department
of Field Support, the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Public Information, the Department
of Safety and Security, the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General, the Regional Service Centre in
Entebbe, eight field missions and the United States
Centers for Disease Control. Soon we will also have
an expert from the Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention. We also have liaison officers from the
United Kingdom, the United States and Germany.

The disease is spreading most rapidly in urban
concentrations. Over half of the new cases will be in
one urban centre alone. We will need to provide tailored
special assistance to urban settings. The same expansion
of activity to achieve the same intended effect is true
for all the other interventions that are necessary to turn
the epidemic around. For example, we estimate that we
need approximately 15 more diagnostic laboratories
capable of processing 100 samples per day each. We
also need to go from about 50 burial teams to about
500, and we need to equip those teams with about 1,000
vehicles. The workers and the burial teams need to be
given protective suits and chlorine sprayers, and they
need to be trained and paid. We need to do all of that
before 1 December.

We have deployed a plane and five helicopters. We
have deployed 69 vehicles, and 140 more are coming
soon. We have put in place robust telecommunication
and Internet links. We have done all of that in record
time. Never before have I seen the United Nations, so
many of its parts, move so fast in such a unified manner.
The Secretary-General has given clear instructions:
Move. Move fast. Do not let discussion and red tape
slow us down. I am grateful to the heads of United
Nations departments and agencies who have embraced
this approach. The United Nations system is throwing
all its might and capability into the fight against Ebola.

With every day that passes the number of sick
people increases, creating the need for this greater
response. As time passes, we need to do more contact
tracing, and that means more trained staff with more
motorcycles and more cell phones. Time passing
means a more robust supply chain. It means more
transportation assets. It means more United Nations
international and national staff. It means more medical
support to the staff and security arrangements for them.
It means more partners on the ground. It means more
generators and laptops and bandwidth. It especially
means more money, and many more things. It means
more complex crisis management.
Time is our biggest enemy. We must use every
moment of every day to our advantage, and that is
what UNMEER is doing. Since its establishment by the
Secretary-General 25 days ago , UNMEER has set up
a headquarters in Accra and deployed an operational
presence to the three most-affected countries. We
have deployed a total of 84 international staff,

We have been empowered by the Secretary-General
with special authority to hire staff quickly, transfer
assets, purchase materials and take action in the best
interests of the Organization and in furtherance of our
commitment to bring the Ebola crisis to a conclusion.
More broadly, UNMEER is playing the critical role
of crisis manager. Much good and great work has
been done by national Governments, United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
civil society actors and others these past few months.
But responding to a complex crisis, especially one
that cuts across multiple national boundaries and is as
difficult and fraught with risk as this one, requires an
overall perspective, and it requires a comprehensive
operational plan.
UNMEER is working with partners to put in place
such a plan, one that sets clear objectives, identifies
all the lines of activity necessary to achieve those
objectives, assigns responsibility for each activity and
puts in place metrics and reporting systems to measure
performance. The operational plan will ensure that
no gaps are left unfilled and that scarce resources are
officially allocated to the highest priority requirements.

14-567493/14

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

The plan will be in support of national efforts and
will show national authorities what support they can
expect from the United Nations and when. National
Governments will always retain ownership of the Ebola
response in their countries.
This planning process is operationally and
organizationally complex due to the multiplicity of
actors. For example, something seemingly so simple
as community care centres needs detailed planning. I
mentioned earlier that we needed to build about 300 of
them. Who will speak to the community about Ebola
and about putting a care centre in the community? Who
will build the centre? Who will staff it and who will
train the staff? Who will pay the staff and how will
they be paid? Where will the money come from? What
supplies will the centre require? How often will they
need to be resupplied? Who will deliver the supplies
and how? How will the hazardous waste be disposed
of and who will do that? What will be the source of the
clean water that is necessary for washing? Who will
test the patients in the centre for Ebola? How far away
will the testing laboratories be? How will the samples
be transported. Et cetera.
Community care centres are just one issue that
needs such detailed planning and commitment by
partners. For each major line of activity within an Ebola
response plan, there are an equal number of vital actions
that need to be properly addressed. The operational
response is especially challenging, because we need
to put all elements of the response together correctly
everywhere. The contact identification and tracing, case
management, safe burials and community engagement
all need to be done properly wherever Ebola is. Ebola
is spread across a very broad geographical area. If we
fail in any one area, then the microscopic virus will
find that chink in our armour and continue to spread.
As long as there is a single case of Ebola anywhere in
any of the three countries, then the deadly virus is a
threat to all countries and all peoples. The very best
way to protect the people of non-infected countries is
by helping the people of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone to stop Ebola now where it is. As recent events
have shown, however, Ebola represents a risk today
to people in non-affected countries. It is urgent and
essential that all countries, especially those identified
by the WHO as highest priority and high priority, take
immediate steps to prevent the spread of Ebola to their
countries and steps to prepare themselves to act quickly
in the event of a local case to prevent further spread.

4/14

14/10/2014

UNMEER will support the WHO and national
efforts at prevention and preparedness where
appropriate. We will also put in place a rapid response
capability with reserve stocks of equipment and
materiel and pre-identified medical personnel and
transportation assets to move quickly to the site of an
outbreak if so requested by national authorities. But
those efforts must be bolstered by bilateral assistance.
Today the United Nations lost a member of our
family when a United Nations volunteer working in the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) died of
Ebola. He is the second United Nations staff member
to have died from the disease. I am very grateful to the
medical team in Germany that worked so valiantly to
try to save his life. We all mourn his passing and the
passing of his colleague. I pay tribute to the dedication
and commitment of the members of the United Nations
country teams and UNMIL who have been working on
the front lines of the fight against this disease from the
beginning. I am deeply grateful to the United Nations
personnel who are literally flocking to UNMEER to
join this fight. We all owe a debt of gratitude to the
national and international personnel on whose bravery
and skills we now collectively depend. We also owe it
to the national personnel that they get paid a decent
wage for the work they are doing and that they get
paid on time. The world must not punish its own first
responders by stigmatization based on hysteria and a
misunderstanding of the facts of Ebola.
There is much bad news about Ebola. The good
news is that we know how to stop it. We know what
needs to be done, and we can do it. But UNMEER
cannot do it alone. The affected countries cannot do it
alone. Even the combination of all the actors now on the
ground — national and international, United Nations,
bilateral and NGOs — cannot stop Ebola by themselves.
We need more NGOs to send trained Ebola treatment
and unit managers and health workers. We need more
Governments to build and operate Ebola treatment
units and diagnostic laboratories. We need more
foreign medical teams. We need logistics and transport
support. And we need money to pay for the rapid
acceleration of the operational response. We especially
need — and we owe it to the personnel working on
the front line — reliable, high quality medical care
for any person engaged in Ebola response, including
medical evacuation where appropriate. We need all of
that urgently. The penalty for delay is enormous. The
penalty for failure is inconceivable and unacceptable.

14-56749

14/10/2014

Peace and security in Africa

We must act now. We must act together. We must defeat
Ebola, and we must do it fast.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Banbury for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you, Madam
President, for giving us this opportunity to discuss what
could be a consequence of this major epidemiological
crisis, namely, the undermining of all the achievements
that have been the product of lengthy work by the
United Nations and our three peacekeeping missions in
West Africa. While today this may be about Liberia, we
have to be very attentive to what could happen in Côte
d’Ivoire or perhaps even in Mali. For now, however, I
shall focus on Liberia.
Human tragedies are unfolding on an unprecedented
scale in Liberia. At the same time, Liberia is a country
to which 11 years ago we deployed a peacekeeping
operation. Despite a certain degree of fragility, I think
we can say that the Mission has accomplished real
progress on the path towards peace and stability. I
believe this is an opportunity to thank all staff members
for their commitment.
Let us recall the history — a century of systemic
exclusion, decades of dysfunction, 14 years of
successive civil war, each year more brutal than the
previous one. But today there are achievements. Yes,
they are precarious, but they are significant: the return
to constitutional order in 2006, a modest but significant
expansion of the economy and access by the population
to the most basic services. We can say that Liberia is on
the path towards transformation, and this is where the
Ebola crisis changes all prospects. A whole series of
phenomena are developing. I witnessed them first-hand
when I visited a month ago to inspect the status of our
Mission to see just what the problems were.
First, political and social divisions are widening;
the public health system is on the verge of collapse; the
economy is coming to a standstill as civilian flights
have halted and fewer ships are docking in Monrovia;
and certain businesses — logging, mining — have
stopped or packed up because the owners have decided
to relocate outside of the country during the crisis. In
sum, the prospects and impacts on the most vulnerable
populations are deteriorating.
We have been addressing the agenda that the
Council adopted in 2012 to promote political reform

S/PV.7279

and national reconciliation and assist the country,
despite remaining divisions, in gradually expanding its
political sphere and fostering improved understanding
on the part of the Government, thereby promoting
State-building in the interest of its citizens.
Nevertheless, I believe the crisis has demonstrated
the crucial nature of those tasks. While they are in fact
under way, they have not yet achieved results.
One could imagine that such an enormous
crisis could bring people together, as long as serious
communication on transparent decision-making takes
place, as long the allocation of resources is transparent
and as long as all of those issues are addressed.
Unfortunately, however, it must be admitted that
there is major and growing distrust on the part of
the population towards State institutions. Questions
directed at leadership have resulted in certain changes,
including resignations by key Government officials.
We have also seen in the media that a strengthened
commitment on the part of the Government is necessary
regarding health care workers, some of whom are on
strike and many of whom, I am happy to say, are working
with courage and determination despite conditions that,
one must admit, are truly appalling.
More broadly speaking, the entire health care
system is crumbling. Women are dying in childbirth due
to lack of care. People are dying from malaria because
no health care is available. Children risk dying from
curable diseases because the vaccination campaigns
have been suspended. There is a widening crisis in
Liberia whose consequences are difficult to gauge.
It is also true that the Ebola crisis has led to
noticeable political tension and a degree of uncertainty.
The Council will know that elections were to have
taken place this very day. Clearly, it was not an option.
The decision was taken to postpone them. Furthermore,
there is a debate in a Liberia regarding the nature of the
political and legal body authorized to take that decision.
For the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the importance is to continue to urge leaders
and political actors to seek agreement in order to make
progress in protecting public health and to enable the
continuing operation of the legislative branch.
The Council is also aware that President
Johnson-Sirleaf requested Parliament to extend her
powers in the context of the state of emergency that was
decreed in August. She also sought ways and means

14-567495/14

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

to ensure that the State could take over private assets
and sometimes even limit the use of such assets in the
interest of security and the public health system. Again,
there was no agreement in Parliament on whether to
grant or to not grant those extraordinary emergency
powers to the executive branch.
In terms of UNMIL, what is important is to respect
the rule of law and the rights of the citizens. That has
prompted us to take a closer look at the changes being
considered — the restrictions that could potentially
be established — to ensure that such measures do not
extend beyond the absolutely necessary tasks of such
an emergency. That requires the ongoing commitment
of all Liberian stakeholders, bearing in mind the goal
of seeking consensus each and every time, as well
as the agreement of all, in order to ensure effective
governance and a Government that is accountable and
transparent, all the while ensuring the protection of the
population from the further spread of Ebola.
Fortunately, up to now there has not been any
tangible deterioration on the security front. There was
tension in July and August. There was the incident at
West Point where, according to media reports, a 15-year
old adolescent died after being wounded by Liberian
army soldiers. The situation has somewhat improved
since that time, but it needs close follow-up. Public
discontent remains high, and any public discontent
anywhere represents an additional risk factor in terms
of security.
We are working very closely with Liberia’s
security institutions to plan security operations that
may be deemed necessary in the context of a state of
emergency. As the Council is aware, the army has been
removed from domestic security operations. Instead
it is concentrating efforts on building humanitarian
infrastructure and securing Liberia’s still highly porous
borders.
I would like to add a few words regarding
the situation in Liberia, concerning the human
consequences of the crisis. When I visited Monrovia one
month ago, I was struck by the fact that people did not
touch each other any more. People do not shake hands
any more — they wave at one another, at a distance at
best. That is taking place in a complicated, complex
society that has suffered and remains deeply divided. It
is a caring and even tactile society. Traditionally people
touch each other and kiss each other. None of that
remains. I believe that is something that should draw
our attention, for the last rites given when a person dies
6/14

14/10/2014

are a major part of society. Circumstances now dictate
that even when one loves someone, one cannot express
one’s love or affection or be close to them. I believe that
is causing a lot of pain.
I return to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). Until now, no United Nations staff had
been affected. However, despite all of the vigilance,
a Liberian member of the Mission died at the end of
the September. The cause was most likely of Ebola,
although we are not entirely sure. As the Council is
aware, last night an international staff member of
UNMIL died in Germany after having been diagnosed
and then evacuated to Europe on 8 October. There are
now 39 other UNMIL staff members, half of whom are
military staff personnel, who are quarantined or under
close watch.
I think what needs to be understood clearly, and it is
the reason that I visited Monrovia, is that our missions
are made up of men and women who have families,
people they love and people who love them. They have
the legitimate expectation of being able to return home
once their mission has ended. We must continue to do
everything possible to ensure that they can fulfil their
role and ensure that the Mission can again fulfil its role
in maintaining peace and security. It is complicated
work. The maximum possible guarantees must be
provided in terms of treatment in the country and
evacuation — as required. Of course, that is something
on which we need to garner the utmost support from the
members of the Council and from the group of nations
that comprise the international community.
In conclusion, I will mention the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire and in Mali. Fortunately, at this point no
cases have been reported in either country. The two
Governments have taken extremely robust measures
to prevent the spread of Ebola in their territories or,
if that were to happen, to prepare themselves for it. It
should be noted that Côte d’Ivoire and Mali have much
more advanced health-care systems than most of their
neighbours.
Extensive preparations have been undertaken by the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to respond to any potential outbreak of
the epidemic, including developing emergency plans,
operational plans based on a variety of scenarios, as
well as business continuity plans for the missions if,
in spite of all efforts, there is an accident. They have
put in place plans for medical isolation and treatment
14-56749

14/10/2014

Peace and security in Africa

facilities, all with the support of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, with which the
cooperation has been excellent, and other stakeholders.
I would like to conclude by expressing my
deep gratitude to all our personnel who, in tragic
circumstances and an environment whose danger we
are taking the full measure of, do their jobs in spite
of everything with courage and determination. In
expressing my sadness for all the victims, including
the victim we have been personally mourning since last
night, I think we owe them assurances that the United
Nations is doing everything it can in this collaborative
effort to try to keep things from getting even worse.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: As the Ebola outbreak enters its
forty-second week, there is growing concern about its
impact on peace and security, not only in the affected
countries but also in the wider region of West Africa.
The outbreak has hampered the efforts of regional
groupings in implementing cross-border security
strategies and in taking steps to strengthen regional
economic and monetary integration. Nationally, it
has delayed progress in a number of key electoral and
constitutional review processes. At the local level,
weak Government structures and mistrust between
communities and authorities have led to violent
incidents resulting in a number of fatalities.
As some have correctly observed, in a subregion
emerging from protracted conflict, the danger Ebola
poses to social unrest and violence is ever present.
Moreover, far-fetched or not, some in the counterterrorism field have begun to mention Ebola and
terrorism in the same sentence.
In the three most affected countries — Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone — the implementation
of critical Government programmes has slowed
considerably, as national authorities have been forced
to refocus their energies and resources on stopping,
treating and preventing the spread of the Ebola outbreak.
The role of Governments has also been affected, as
some elected officials and civil servants have become
victims of the disease.
Ebola is significantly disrupting the economic
sustainability of those countries, with dire consequences
for the delivery of essential State services. As work

S/PV.7279

disruptions continue in the construction, mining,
manufacturing, tourism and transportation sectors due
to concerns over the spread of the disease, the effect
on the economies and the development prospects
of the affected countries could be devastating and
destabilizing. There are also concerns about the
continuity of critical projects focused on building peace
and ensuring sustainable stability in the three countries.
Moreover, the adverse consequences of isolation and
stigmatization on peace and security in the affected
countries should not be underestimated.
In Sierra Leone, in the face of the outbreak, political
parties have been relatively unified in efforts to fight
the disease, making appearances on national television
and radio in support of sensitization efforts. However,
consultations in the constitutional review process
have been delayed. It remains to be seen whether the
referendum that is expected to take place before the
next elections will be affected.
In Liberia, the political challenges arising from the
Ebola outbreak are daunting. In the past few months,
the constitutional review process was temporarily
suspended due to the ongoing state of emergency, and
senatorial elections scheduled for October may be
postponed. Those delays, coupled with preparations
for the next general elections in 2017, will significantly
stretch the capacity and resources of the National
Elections Commission and could compromise the
integrity of the electoral processes, raise tensions and
even threaten political stability.
In Guinea, little progress has been made in the last
few months in preparing for municipal elections that
were planned to take place this year. Major political
activities of the ruling and opposition parties have
slowed as both sides continue to focus their efforts on
fighting the outbreak. That has also delayed crucial
efforts to bridge the political divide between the
Government and opposition parties.
The security situation in the three most affected
countries has also suffered significant impacts since
the outbreak of the disease. The Governments of
the three affected countries have declared states of
emergency, passed restrictive laws and taken measures
aimed at restricting the spread of the disease. They have
also imposed curfews, cordoned off and quarantined
communities and robustly deployed security forces,
with the objective of enforcing Ebola response measures
designed to protect health workers and quarantine
facilities and to maintain public order. The states of

14-567497/14

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

emergency were also temporarily accompanied by the
closure of schools and restrictions on public meetings
and gatherings. Since the outbreak of the disease, there
have been incidents of violence perpetrated against
health workers and public officials. We have also
witnessed community riots fuelled by mistrust and
ignorance of, or misinformation about, the disease, as
well as threats of strike action by health workers and
burial teams.
In south-eastern Guinea, the security situation
remains tense in the regional capital of Nzérékoré,
following last month’s murder in the nearby town of
Womey of a team of Guinean health and Government
officials who had been distributing information about
the outbreak. There have also been riots in Nzérékoré
itself following rumours that people were being
contaminated by health workers trying to decontaminate
a market area. Since February, treatment centres and
health workers have also been sporadically attacked by
communities accusing medical workers of bringing the
virus to the region.
In Sierra Leone, lack of information about the
medical facts of the disease has fuelled resentment,
leading to low-level public disturbances, attacks on the
police and attempts to vandalize treatment centres in
Freetown. In Liberia, attacks on security forces, the
looting of clinics and the deployment of riot police to
quell demonstrations by angry crowds have also been
witnessed. Over the past weekend, Liberian nurses
have also threatened strike action. These actions and
reactions have heightened political tension and have the
potential to cause a descent into violence and undermine
public security and safety.
The Ebola outbreak has isolated Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone from the wider region. Except for
Mali, all neighbours have closed their common land
borders and are maintaining restrictions on incoming
flights from the three affected countries. Their isolation
is projected to have grave economic consequences for
the three countries and for the subregion. The World
Bank has assessed that economic growth rates in the
three countries would decline by the end of this year
and that the region could face a substantial loss of gross
domestic product output by the end of 2015, depending
on the spread of the virus. That would undoubtedly
have a detrimental impact on struggling populations, on
domestic politics and, critically, on stability. The longer
the Ebola outbreak continues, the more it threatens to
tear at the countries’ social fabric, arouse political

8/14

14/10/2014

divisions and threaten to unravel hard-won gains in
democratic practices and good governance.
There has been an encouraging engagement of
regional peace and security mechanisms in efforts
against the outbreak and to help mitigate its adverse
consequences. The recent decision of the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council to authorize
the deployment of an AU military and civilian
humanitarian mission was an important contribution.
The African Union decision involves the deployment
of medical, paramedical and military personnel to the
affected countries, working in partnership with the
United Nations system to enhance the international
community’s response to the disease and its potential
consequences for political stability and the peace and
security of the affected countries and the subregion.
On their part, the heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
have directed the Commission, in liaison with the
West African Health Organization, to adopt a regional
approach aimed at containing and managing the Ebola
outbreak, and requested the Commission to mobilize
armed and security forces to strengthen the regional
response against the disease.
The Mano River Union is also working to ensure a
coherent regional approach in tackling Ebola. The Union
is working with the United Nations and other partners
to develop field activities in response to Ebola as part of
its strategy for cross-border security in the subregion.
This will include increased support for the Mano River
Union joint border security and confidence-building
units in border communities between the three affected
countries.
The outbreak of Ebola has exacerbated the peace
and security challenges faced by national institutions
and Governments in the West African region. As we
have seen in the cases of Nigeria and Senegal, swift and
effective action by national authorities has succeeded
in containing the spread of the virus. The international
community must continue to provide support to the
subregion and affected countries in their efforts to
effectively stop, treat and prevent a looming pandemic,
to ensure that the hard-won peace and security gains
made in the subregion are protected and preserved.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
14-56749

14/10/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): Let me thank the
Council for giving us this opportunity to once again
reiterate the need for urgent action in our response to
the Ebola virus disease.
Sierra Leone welcomes the efforts of the
Council and of the General Assembly and their
swift action — the move from formal and informal
deliberations to unprecedented resolutions — in the
context of the response of this House.
Our gratitude also goes to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Banbury, Under-Secretary-General Hervé
Ladsous, Mr. Nabarro, Mr. Fukuda, Ms. Margaret Chan
and all those United Nations officials who continue, day
in and day out, to battle at the forefront of this disease.
It is evident to all of us now that what we face is a
global situation — a global calamity, if you will. What
started off as a medical emergency has now metastasized
into a truly frightening economic and security scourge
that we all must address. We are grateful for the efforts
that have been made to date to set up the Mission.
We urge that the Mission and all those involved in its
planning ensure that its vital work of coordination and
collaboration be carried out as swiftly as possible. The
deployment of staff, essential supplies and logistical
chains must take place as rapidly as possible.
Our gratitude goes to all the members of the
Council, who, in their various ways, have contributed
logistics, personnel, ideas and other support so as to
meet this scourge. Now more than ever we must live
up to the promise of the Organization and act truly as
one — act truly united.
Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia find themselves at
the epicentre of this scourge, and, despite the best efforts
of their public-health systems, public administrations
and Governments, they have been overwhelmed. We
look to the outside world, to this community of nations,
to help.
Some may say that the call or the response was
delayed, but now is not the time for us to look back;
now is not the time for an audit of what has been done
individually, regionally or nationally. Now is the time
for increased and deepening action.
To all those who have contributed and have done
what they could, we are grateful, but we ask those who
can do more to do more. We ask all of those who have
pledged contributions to turn those pledges swiftly into
contributions. Now more than ever, this is the time for

S/PV.7279

us to make and accelerate the transition from resolution
to action.
On the ground, the numbers are truly horrifying.
The number of infections, the number of deaths, the
level of misery — all tax our collective imagination and
all tax our collective efforts. Now, however, is not the
time to retreat into a fear born of ignorance but to move
to actions born of knowledge. The greater the media
presence around this scourge, the more it appears that
medical fiction seems to be taking over from medical
fact. Let us be guided by the best medical minds and the
best medical advice that we can rely on. Let us not give
in to ignorance, fear or emotion, which would paralyse
us into inaction.
A Sudanese United Nations official recently passed
away in Leipzig despite all the efforts made to airlift him,
medevac him and give him the best treatment available.
We have seen that countries with the strongest, or
perhaps stronger, public-health systems are also being
challenged. There is a nurse in Dallas, Texas, who is in
isolation. A Liberian gentleman, Thomas Eric Duncan,
has passed away. A Spanish priest has fallen victim to
this scourge, and a Spanish nurse is in quarantine.
We must not fear Ebola, because Ebola can be
defeated. The best medical protocols and the best
medical minds tell us so. What simply needs to be done
is to identify, contain, control and eradicate. To that
end, supplies, logistics and human resources must go to
the places where they are most needed. We are grateful
to those on the front lines, who, day in and day out,
hour after hour, risk making the ultimate sacrifice to
act in the finest tradition of the medical profession to
help others.
The Mission that has been deployed — the first
of its kind — is indeed best described as a publichealth Mission. It is not a special political mission. It
is not a transitional administration. It is not a classic
peacekeeping mission. It is quite simply a mission
designed to save lives. It is a mission of health keepers.
As we express sympathy for the families of
the deceased, let us also celebrate those who have
survived. Let us also provide them with the relevant
support so they can be reintegrated into their respective
communities, and let us also explore the promise that
the plasma in their blood holds for others.
We, as an Organization and a community of nations,
have to act in concert because quite simply what six
months ago was considered a West African problem

14-567499/14

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

14/10/2014

is now truly a global problem. The trust fund that is
being set up is woefully underfunded. MS. Chan has
also spoken about a twenty-fold increase in support and
resources that are needed. We ask that those members
of the Chamber who have joined the fight and shown
leadership continue to be resolute and continue to show
leadership.

grateful for the leadership shown by the African Union
(AU) and other regional and continental organizations
that have all stepped into the fight. We are truly grateful
for international organizations, such as the European
Union, the World Health Organization (WHO) and all
the members of the United Nations family that have
joined the fight.

What is perhaps most striking about this disease
is that it strips the caregiver of the most basic power
that he or she has — the power of touch. It turns that
very gift into a potential transmitter of the disease. It
seeks to strip us of our basic humanity — the ability to
care for one another, the ability of a mother to hug and
comfort an ailing child, the ability of a father to hug
and comfort a grandfather or a grandmother.

But we do ask most sincerely and most humbly
for a deepening of action and support. We are grateful
for the leadership shown to date, but leadership alone
cannot win the fight. All of us individually, collectively,
regionally and continentally must do all we can to
join the fight. What threatens a subregion today, what
threatens a continent tomorrow, has the possiblity of
engulfing the whole world. To the ambassadors of
the three most affected States, Ebola is no longer an
abstract issue, as all of us have relatives, family and
fellow citizens who face varying degrees of hardship,
varying degrees of fear from this scourge.

As affected countries, we not only face the grim
reality of day-to-day survival; the grim reality of
corpses not being able to be burried in time, of patients
not being able to be received in time in treatment and
isolation centres. We also face daily indignities or
growing indignities, which I think this Chamber should
be aware of. The national football team of Sierra Leone
recently went to meet another team to play a scheduled
match. They were isolated in the area of the hotel where
they were staying. The bus that took them to and from
the field was the subject of insults — people crying
“Ebola! Ebola! Ebola!” Young children ran away from
them and they were treated in a manner that would test
the resilience of the strongest of us all.
We ask that we move and act not out of discrimination
or ignorance, but out of facts and the fact that we face a
common threat. Extraordinary measures are called for,
and Sierra Leone, through the leadership of Mr. Ernest
Bai Koroma, recently instituted what has been called
a lockdown and a temporary shutdown in order to
educate and seek to establish the number of cases in
the capital and beyond. That act, while criticized and
misunderstood by some, has proven to be a success and
has been praised as such by qualified medical minds.
We, together, as the three most affected countries,
act in unison because we fully realize that eradicating
Ebola in Liberia will nto solve it in Guinea or solve it in
Sierra Leone. Similarly, eradicating it in Sierra Leone
or taking action in Sierra Leone, will not help Guinea
or Liberia.
We are grateful for the leadership shown by the
Mano River Union, under the chairmanship of President
Alpha Condé and Secretary-General Daraba. We are

10/14

The President, in a recent televised statement to
the World Bank, indicated the critical needs that are
required in Sierra Leone to fight this fight. We are in a
position to provide details on those needs. The task plan
devised in conjunction with WHO — with Margaret
Chan and her team, the Mano River Union and the
AU — is available and can be shared with all. However,
what we have learned is that there is a deepening crisis.
All that has been prepared over the past three to six
months is fast becoming irrelevant in terms of supplies,
resources and the deployment of personnel. The
World Bank has indicated quite clearly the economic
repercussions of Ebola and the impact it will have on
the associated economic development of those nations.
Not long ago we gathered in this Chamber to
celebrate the transition of Sierra Leone from a State
in conflict to a post-conflict State, and to celebrate
its fragile but substantive achievements. It is with a
measure of sadness that we appear in the Chamber again
for the second time to talk not of continued progress,
but of a deepening crisis. Above all, what we require
is a sense of hope, a sense that the United Nations and
the community of nations that it represents will not
abandon the fight, will not fail us and will not relent
until the scourge of Ebola has been removed.
What emanated from West Africa has now become a
cause for concern and worry in the United States, Spain
and other countries of Europe, and other countries far
beyond. We ask that all possible actions that are being
considered be taken on the basis of medical facts.
14-56749

14/10/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Quarantines at airports and the isolation of countries
simply do not work. That is not what I believe or what
the three most affected nations believe; it is what the
best medical minds tell us. There must be a dedicated
air bridge in and out of the region to ensure that relevant
supplies go in. We therefore urge our neighbours, both
near and far, to facilitate those efforts.
We also are grateful to the private sector and
non-governmental organizations, the finest of which is
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF). What MSF has shown
us is that we, as nations and Members of the United
Nations, must do more because if one non-governmental
organization can do all that MSF has done, it puts us to
shame if we cannot match its efforts and increase our
participation.
As the representatives of the three most affected
nations, it is our task to maintain the momentum and
focus on this deadly scourge. But as I said before, the
fight — the challenge — is not for us alone. It is truly
a global challenge. Let me just end with this thought.
The depth of fear and emotion that has been expended
to date concerning Ebola must be matched by the
resolute will of all of us to beat the scourge and meet
the challenge.
We, as representatives of the three most-affected
countries, are available to answer all questions, respond
to all queries and make any clarifications necessary
regarding the actions of our Governments. We simply
ask that, in the reporting of what is being done on the
ground and on the front line, we be consulted and asked
to state our views so as to avoid unnecessary panic,
misinformation or misrepresentation of the true facts.
Above all, what we do here and what we say here must
make a difference for those who are on the front line.
Promises of action, pledges and contributions, financial
or otherwise, must translate into effective and muchneeded supplies on the ground as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to participate in this
briefing to the Council on the implications of the
continuing spread of the Ebola virus disease on peace
and security in the Mano River Basin.
I would also like to thank the previous
speakers — the Head of the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER),
Mr. Anthony Banbury; the Under-Secretary-General

S/PV.7279

for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous; and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun — for their enlightening
presentations and the insights they have shared.
Allow me to pay tribute to the fallen heroes and
heroines: — the medical staff, national and expatriate
alike, such as those of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), and others who have died in the
course of the Ebola response.
In the month of September alone, this body was
addressed on two separate occasions by the Minister of
National Defence and the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Liberia (see S/PV.7268). They outlined in great detail
the multidimensional impact of the disease on our
country and its citizens: the erosion of the very fabric
of the society, the assault on culture, the deepening of
existing divisions, the loss of lives and livelihoods, the
dwindling revenue, and the dire projections of economic
growth. The Council is aware of all of these things.
The welcome initiatives undertaken by the
Secretary-General, the Council and the General
Assembly brought into sharp focus the urgent need for
international action. And we have indeed witnessed a
higher level of engagement. The actions taken to rapidly
establish UNMEER in Accra were but one example;
there are many others — of people dipping into their
pockets and of action being taken.
While the situation on the ground is undoubtedly
improving a little, we must be honest and admit that it
has not changed substantially. Liberia, with a population
of 4 million, the smallest of the three most affected
countries, is still leading in the rate of infections and
deaths. The spread of the disease continues to outpace
action; meaning that we are not yet ahead of the curve.
The Government, with support of UNMIL, the
United States military and many other faithful partners,
is racing against time to establish new isolation and
treatment centres, which remain the single most critical
need, because if we cannot take in people reporting the
disease, we can do nothing — we cannot do a contact
trace or manage the case until we have the facilities
to bring people in when they report themselves. Such
facilities do not exist at present.
Other needs include professional medical staff,
medical supplies, including protective gear and
equipment, and transport facilities. There are also
important non-medical needs, such as upgrading the
airport tarmac, augmenting storage facilities and

14-5674911/14

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

increasing food stocks. Liberia is immensely grateful
for all of the expressions of solidarity, which have taken
various forms, including from the media. We are grateful
for the very generous contributions and commitments
made by Member States. Our common challenge now is
to urgently translate those commitments into tangible
and impactful support on the ground. It is a challenge
we all share.
As Council members are aware, Liberia was actively
engaged in the implementation of a joint programme
with the Peacebuilding Commission when the Ebola
virus struck. We were focused on strengthening the
rule of law, implementing measures for security sector
reform and promoting national reconciliation, as
well as very much engaged in a constitutional review
process, all in an effort to consolidate peace and
reinforce a fledgling democracy. Even the formula for a
responsible drawdown of UNMIL had been agreed and
was under implementation. Youth unemployment and
containing the spread of small arms and light weapons
and transnational crime were challenges high on the
national agenda. On all of these fronts, much progress
had been registered and Liberians had begun to enjoy
some dividends of peace.
The Ebola onslaught, because it is nothing less
than that, interrupted these activities and now presents
some risks to the gains that we had made. Our society
has been placed under immense stress by this virus.
Access to food is limited by the high prices of local
and imported goods. Livelihoods have been lost or
threatened. The movement of and interaction among
people are restricted by necessity. A state of emergency,
the closure of educational institutions and extended
leave for non-essential civil servants — all of these
measures remain in place. The senatorial elections,
scheduled to take place this month, have had to be
postponed to 2015. Paltry resources, already almost
exclusively reallocated to the Ebola response, are still
inadequate to address the demands of health workers
threatening strike action.
I hope that I have provided insights, in addition to
what was said by Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous said, into a set
of circumstances full of triggers for conflict. Injected
into an already fragile post-conflict country, this could
be a recipe for disaster. Or this could be the fuse that
ignites the international community to do even more.
In the spirit of my President’s statement to the
World Bank last week, Liberia urges that all efforts
12/14

14/10/2014

be made to contain the disease through a more timely
and decisive response. This means the construction of
treatment and testing centres that are fully staffed and
functional as soon as possible and the identification of
burial sites. It also means improving and strengthening
the regular health-care system because many deaths are
resulting from a lack of access to health facilities to
treat routine illnesses. Concurrently, we must remain
mindful of the imperative of mitigating the economic
consequences of the Ebola crisis, which have caused
a shifting of resources from ongoing development
activities under our Agenda for Transformation.
This will require support to stimulate our productive
sectors, in particular agriculture, and enable our people
to resume self-sustaining livelihood endeavours. The
more they remain idle, the greater the prospects for
trouble.
As we have heard in many forums, especially from
the Deputy Secretary-General, peace, development
and human rights are intertwined. We must protect
the gains made in Liberia on all three fronts, to which
the Council has contributed immensely, and we must
support and protect those on the front lines. We should
also continue to bring all our energies to bear in the
response at the national level and with our regional and
global partnerships.
Liberia looks to the future with what I would say
is guarded optimism, inspired by the resilience of its
people and the heartwarming demonstration by the
international community of care and belief in our
common humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guinea.
Mr. Touré (Guinea) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in organizing this
meeting, an indication of the Council’s willingness
to continue to mobilize the international community
in a comprehensive and urgent response to the Ebola
haemorrhagic fever virus. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Anthony Banbury, Under-Secretary-General Hervé
Ladsous, and Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun for the pertinent information they have just
shared with us, confirming the extent and complexity of
the health and socioeconomic crisis that is threatening
peace and security in the countries affected.
A number of meetings have been held since the
historic one on 18 September that acknowledged that

14-56749

14/10/2014

Peace and security in Africa

the Ebola epidemic is a threat to international peace and
security (S/PV.7268), including, among many others,
the high-level General Assembly meeting on Ebola
organized by the Secretary-General (A/69/PV.3), at
which the Secretary-General’s resolution on deploying
the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response was unanimously adopted (resolution 69/1).
My country also welcomes the many announcements
of assistance and interventions in the field by bilateral
and multilateral partners, aimed at identifying the best
strategies for stopping the furious spread of the disease
as quickly as possible.
However, it is clear that the number of victims
continues to grow alarmingly and the economic, social
and humanitarian consequences are worsening, with
one of its effects being a general panic among the
populations of the affected countries and beyond. Apart
from the loss of life and the dislocation to society, we
risk seeing the collapse of our economies over the next
few years, since the epidemic affects every aspect
of people’s lives, including health services and the
production, sale and export of food.
The exponential spread of the epidemic, coupled
with the weakness of our health systems and our lack
of resources, has prevented States from responding
effectively to its challenges. That gap between people’s
expectations and the States’ actual capacity to protect
them and fight the disease has created a crisis of
confidence and mistrust between Guinea’s authorities
and its citizens, which in turn has contributed to the
panic and ungoverned movement that has aggravated
transmission of the disease. Being badly informed, some
people have behaved inappropriately or dangerously,
sometimes denying the disease’s very existence
or accusing the Government of offending cultural
norms and attempting to carry out ethnic cleansing.
Such attitudes and perceptions threaten our country’s
stability, and major political tensions are to be avoided,
especially in view of the upcoming elections.
In order to respond effectively to the most pressing
needs of the affected countries, the Government of
Guinea urges the international community to prioritize
its efforts in the following way. First, we need a
comprehensive and urgent response. The sooner the
international community acts, the more successful
we can be in overcoming this epidemic, which has
the potential to spread rapidly to other African
countries and beyond the continent. That is why my
Government is asking for a forceful, speedy assistance

S/PV.7279

effort. For our part, we are committed to minimizing
administrative procedures in order to expedite the
delivery and distribution of aid and above all to ensure
the process’s complete transparency. Faced with the
ongoing spread of the virus as it has been described by
health agencies such as the World Health Organization
and the United States Centers for Disease Control,
as well as by several of this afternoon’s speakers, my
delegation believes that for the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response to be able to rise to the
challenge it is vital that it take a new approach through
an accelerated deployment that differs from that of
classic peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, we must strengthen the weak local health
systems of the countries affected, including by training
local medical staff and by providing mobile treatment
centres, helicopters, vehicles, personal protective
equipment and qualified medical staff.
Thirdly, we should take a new approach to
communication, globally as well as locally, in order to
improve the way we convey our messages of awareness.
We therefore emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response includes a strong communications component
that will work to improve the locals’ awareness of the
best practices to adopt and also to overcome their
reluctance to cooperate with humanitarian staff.
Fourthly, we need financial aid for the countries
affected, whose economies have been hard hit by the
epidemic, as the international financial institutions
have acknowledged. In acting to stop the spread of the
virus and care for the sick, the affected countries have
been forced to make expenditures that their budgets
did not provide for. Investments in some sectors have
simply come to a halt. The World Bank has estimated
that economic growth in the countries affected by
Ebola will be significantly reduced if the epidemic is
not quickly quelled.
In order to benefit from first-hand, helpful
information, my delegation suggests that the Security
Council invite to its next meeting doctors who are
on the front line and are the first responders in the
countries affected. The time for talk is over. We must
act quickly, not only to stop the advance of this health
crisis and save lives while there is still time, but above
all to preserve the stability and the gains made in
recent years by the three countries most affected by
the epidemic, particularly in terms of peacebuilding
and social tranquillity. In order to achieve that, we

14-5674913/14

S/PV.7279

Peace and security in Africa

must isolate Ebola itself, not the countries affected by
it. We need hardly remind the Council that those three
countries are still on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission of the United Nations.
The Security Council will therefore understand the
urgency of a robust response to eradicate this terrible
epidemic, which is spreading death and despair, while
undermining the gains of our States in terms of creating
an environment for peace, stability and sustainable
development. It is an issue of collective security that
requires a comprehensive and coordinated approach.

14/14

14/10/2014

Finally, I would like to reiterate the deep gratitude
of Guinea, and in particular of the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Condé, to all
partners for their valuable support and to the courageous
health-care workers, who strive daily to combat the
epidemic, often risking their lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

14-56749
