,2

General Assembly -

882 (IX). Personnel policy of the United Nations: amendment to the staff regulations
of the United Nations

Ninth Session

884 (IX).

Admini8trative and budgetary coordination between the United Nations and
the specialized agencies

The General Assembly

The General Assembly

Adopts as an amendment to the staff regulations
of the United Nations the text annexed to the present
resolution. This amendment shall become effective on
1 January 1955.
ANNEX
Staff regulation 1.6 (amended text)
No staff member shall accept any honour, decoration, favour,
gift or remuneration from any Government excepting for war
service; nor shall a staff member accept any honour, decoration,
favour, gift or remuneration from any source external to the
Organization, without first obtaining the approval of the Secretary-General. Approval shall be granted only in exceptional
cases and where such acceptance is not incompatible with the
terms of regulation 1.2 of the staff regulations and with the
individual's status as an international civil servant.

512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.

883 (IX). Personnel policy of the United Nations: question of educational facilities for
the children of staff members

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report 11 of the SecretaryGeneral on personnel policy, paragraphs 22 to 26 of
which deal with problems relating to the education
grant established under the staff regulations, and the
fifteenth report 18 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the ninth
session of the General Assembly,
Considering that the education grant was established
with the purpose of enabling the children of staff
members, despite the fact that their parents were
expatriated, to benefit from the influence of their
national characteristics in their education,
l. N ates with satisfaction the Secretary-General's
statement that the question of educational facilities is
being studied by the International Civil Service Advisory Board;
2. Requests the International Civil Service Advisory Board to consider appropriate measures for providing children of staff members with special facilities
for the study of their mother tongue in cases where
they are obliged to attend local schools in which the
instruction is given in a language other than the mother
tongue;
3. Recommends the Secretary-General, in preparing
his report on the staff regulations for submission to
the General Assembly at its tenth session, to give
special consideration to the question whether measures
should be taken to make a larger number of staff members than at present eligible for the benefit of the
education grant.
512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, document A/2777.
1a Ibid., document A/2788.

1. Takes note of the report19 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
dealing with the administrative budgets of the specialized agencies for 1955;
2. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the recommendations and suggestions made in the
Advisory Committee's report and to the views expressed in the Fifth Committee at the ninth session
of the General Assembly.
512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.

885 (IX). Audit reports relating to expenditure
by specialized agencies of technical assistance funds allocated from the Special
Account

The General Assembly
Takes note of the audit reports 20 relating to expenditure by specialized agencies of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account, for the
financial year ended 31 December 1953 and of the
observations 21 thereon of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.

886 (IX). Organization of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Considering its resolution 784 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 in which it recommended that the SecretaryGeneral should proceed along the lines of his report
to the eighth session on the organization of the
Secretariat contained in document A/2554, 22
Having examined the report 23 of the SecretaryGeneral to the ninth session on the organization of the
Secretariat and the comments contained in the report"
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's intention to
bring under detailed review in 1955 those United
Nat ions offices and activities external to Head,1uarters,
as well as the secretariats of the subsidiary bodies of
the United Nations,
Considering the Secretary-General's statements during the discussion of the item in the Fifth Committee
of the General Assembly,
1. N ates with appreciation the Secretary-General's
report on the reorganization of the Secretariat and
further notes his statements in the Fifth Committee
Ibid., agenda item 43, document A/2835.
See document A/2721.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/2852.
22 Ibid., Eighth Session, Annexes, agenda item 48.
23 Ibid., Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document
A/2731.
24 Ibid., document A/2745.
19
2o

21
