United Nations

A/RES/66/197

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 February 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 19 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2011
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/66/440/Add.1)]

66/197. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 and 57/270 A of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, as
well as its resolutions 64/236 of 24 December 2009 and 65/152 of 20 December
2010 and all other relevant resolutions on the implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Agenda 21, 2 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”), 5 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, 6 the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

11-47064

*1147064*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/197

Consensus 7 and the outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, 8
Recalling further its decision to hold the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development in Brazil in 2012, 9
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 10

2.
Also takes note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development on its second session, 11 and
endorses its decision 2/1, entitled “Process for the preparation of the draft outcome
document for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development”, as
contained in chapter VI of the report;
Decides that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
3.
shall be held from 20 to 22 June 2012 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and recommends for
adoption by the Conference the provisional agenda of the Conference as set forth in
annex I to the present resolution;
Encourages Member States to be represented at the Conference at the
4.
highest possible level, including Heads of State or Government;
5.
Decides that the Conference shall be composed of six plenary meetings,
on the basis of two meetings a day, and four high-level round-table sessions, to be
held in concurrence with the plenary meetings, except during the opening and
closing plenary meetings;
Also decides that the Conference shall be organized in accordance with
6.
the organization of work set forth in annex II to the present resolution;
7.
Notes the need to expedite the process for conclusion of the draft
provisional rules of procedure of the Conference as early as possible in 2012 and, in
this regard, notes the decision of the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee to initiate
informal consultations on this matter to be concluded in a timely manner;
Calls upon all Member States to continue to actively engage in the
8.
preparatory process, and in the Conference itself, with a view to reaching a
successful outcome of the Conference;
Decides that the third session of the Preparatory Committee shall be held
9.
from 13 to 15 June 2012 in Rio de Janeiro;
10. Strongly encourages Member States to conclude negotiations on the draft
outcome document at the third session of the Preparatory Committee;
11. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide all
appropriate support to the work of the preparatory process of the Conference and to
the Conference itself and to ensure inter-agency cooperation and effective
participation and coherence within the United Nations system, as well as the
efficient use of resources, so that the objective and the two themes of the
Conference can be addressed;

_______________
7

Resolution 63/239, annex.
See resolution 65/1.
9
See resolution 64/236, para. 20.
10
A/66/287.
11
A/CONF.216/PC/9.
8

2

A/RES/66/197

12. Invites Member States, observers and all relevant stakeholders, including
the regional commissions, United Nations organizations and bodies, other relevant
intergovernmental and regional organizations, international financial institutions and
major groups involved in sustainable development, to participate fully and
effectively in the Conference and to provide ideas and proposals reflecting their
experiences and lessons learned as a contribution to the preparatory process of the
Conference, as agreed in the preparatory process by Member States;
13. Encourages Governments, in their national preparations for the
Conference, to continue to actively involve and to coordinate inputs from all
national agencies responsible for economic development, social development and
environmental protection;
14. Emphasizes the importance of the support of the United Nations
development system, as appropriate, for national preparations for the Conference,
upon the request of national authorities;
15. Reiterates its deep concern that the resources available in the voluntary
Trust Fund to Support the Work of the Commission on Sustainable Development are
insufficient to fund the participation of representatives from developing countries,
as well as representatives of major groups, in the meetings of the preparatory
process of the Conference and in the Conference itself;
16. Urges international and bilateral donors and other countries and entities
in a position to do so to provide contributions to the voluntary Trust Fund for the
Conference in a timely manner and requests the Secretary-General to make further
efforts to use the limited resources in the Trust Fund in an efficient, effective and
transparent manner in order to enhance the active participation of representatives
from developing countries in the preparatory process of the Conference (comprising
the remaining intersessional meetings, informal informal negotiations and the third
session of the Preparatory Committee), and in the Conference itself, and in this
regard encourages the Secretary-General, when using the resources of the Trust
Fund, to prioritize the coverage of economy-class air tickets, daily subsistence and
terminal expenses;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the outcome of the
Conference to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development”,
taking into account the outcome of the Conference.
91st plenary meeting
22 December 2011

Annex I
Provisional agenda of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 20 to 22 June 2012
1.

Opening of the Conference.

2.

Election of the President.

3.

Adoption of the rules of procedure.
3

A/RES/66/197

4.

Adoption of the agenda of the Conference.

5.

Election of officers other than the President.

6.

Organization of work, including the establishment of subsidiary bodies, and
other organizational matters.

7.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

8.

General debate.

9.

Reports of the round tables.

10.

Outcome of the Conference.

11.

Adoption of the report of the Conference.

12.

Closure of the Conference.

Annex II
Proposed organization of work of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 20 to 22 June 2012
1.
The arrangements set out below have been formulated pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 64/236.
2.
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development will be held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012.
I.

Organization of work

A
Plenary meetings
3.
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development will consist of a
total of six high-level plenary meetings to be held, as follows:
Wednesday, 20 June 2012: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 21 June 2012: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 22 June 2012: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Evening sessions may be held, if required. All plenary meetings will be held at the
Riocentro Exhibition and Convention Center.
4.
The list of speakers for the plenary meetings will be established by the
drawing of lots, in accordance with the customary protocol that ensures that Heads
of State or Government speak first, followed by other heads of delegation. The
Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, Palestine, in its capacity as observer, and
the European Union, in its capacity as observer, will be included in the list of
speakers. Statements will be limited to five minutes. Detailed arrangements will be
communicated in a timely manner through a note by the Secretariat, prepared in
close consultations with the host country and the Bureau of the Preparatory
Committee.
5.
The formal opening plenary meeting, to be held during the morning of
Wednesday, 20 June, will consider all procedural and organizational matters,
4

A/RES/66/197

including the adoption of the rules of procedure and of the agenda, the election of
the President of the Conference, the election of officers, the establishment of a Main
Committee, the appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee and
arrangements for the preparation of the report of the Conference, and other matters.
The plenary meeting will also hear statements from the President of the Economic
and Social Council and the nine major groups.
6.
At the ceremonial opening of the Conference, which will be held on
Wednesday, 20 June, during the afternoon plenary meeting, statements will be made
by the President of the Conference, the President of the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
Conference.
7.
The closing plenary meeting, to be held during the afternoon of Friday,
22 June, is expected to conclude with the presentation of the summaries by the
Rapporteurs of the high-level round tables and the adoption of the outcome
document and the report of the Conference.
B
Main Committee
8.
A Main Committee, established in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the Conference, will meet, if necessary, in parallel with plenary meetings except
during the opening and closing meetings. The Main Committee would be seized
with finalizing any outstanding matters.
C
High-level round tables
9.
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development will hold four
high-level round-table sessions in parallel with the plenary meetings, as follows:
Wednesday, 20 June 2012: from 4.30 to 7.30 p.m.
Thursday, 21 June 2012: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 22 June 2012: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
10. The four high-level round-table sessions will have a common theme: “Looking
at the way forward in implementing the expected outcomes of the Conference”.
11. Each high-level round table will have two Co-Chairs and a Rapporteur, to be
appointed by the President of the Conference from among the Heads of State or
Government and ministers attending the Conference, in accordance with the
principle of equitable geographical distribution and taking into account invitations
for nominations to be extended to the Chairs of regional groups.
12. The outcomes of the round tables should be reflected in the summaries by the
Rapporteurs, which should be submitted to the closing plenary meeting of the
Conference and included in the final report of the Conference.
13. The four round-table sessions will be interactive and multi-stakeholder in
nature, with seventy seats each: up to fifty for Government delegations and at least
twenty for other participants, including representatives of observers, entities of the
United Nations system and other accredited intergovernmental organizations and
major groups. Member States and other participants are encouraged to be
represented at the round tables at the highest possible level. Participants will be
invited by the Secretariat to sign up for participation in one of the round tables in
advance of the Conference, bearing in mind the total number of participants outlined
5

A/RES/66/197

above. The opening of the inscription for participation in the round tables will be
announced in the Journal of the United Nations.
14. Any given State, observer, entity of the United Nations system or other
accredited intergovernmental organization or representative of a major group may
participate in only one of the round tables. Each participant may be accompanied by
one adviser.
15. The list of participants in each round-table session will be made available prior
to the meeting.
16. The proceedings of the round tables will be telecast in an “overflow room”
which will be open to the media and all other accredited participants.
II.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference: appointment of the
members of the Credentials Committee

17. A Credentials Committee will be appointed according to the rules of procedure
of the Conference.
III. Participants
A
Member States and observers
18. The Conference, including the plenary and informal meetings, will be open to
participation by all States Members of the United Nations, the Holy See, in its
capacity as observer State, Palestine, in its capacity as observer, and the European
Union, in its capacity as observer, as well as intergovernmental organizations and
other entities having received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to
participate as observers in the sessions and the work of all international conferences
convened under its auspices, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the
Conference.
B
Institutional stakeholders
19. Other relevant intergovernmental organizations that were accredited to the
World Summit on Sustainable Development and to the Commission on Sustainable
Development, as well as relevant organizations of the United Nations system, may
participate in the deliberations of the Conference, as appropriate, in accordance with
the rules of procedure of the Conference.
20. In addition, interested intergovernmental organizations that were not
accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable Development or to the Commission
on Sustainable Development may apply to the General Assembly for accreditation
following the established accreditation procedure. Online registration and
accreditation forms will be available at the Conference website. 12

_______________
12

6

http://www.uncsd2012.org/rio20.

A/RES/66/197

C
Major groups
21. Non-governmental organizations and other major groups that were accredited
to the World Summit on Sustainable Development and those that are in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council are invited to participate in the
deliberations of the Conference, as appropriate, in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the Conference.
22. In addition, interested non-governmental organizations and other major groups
that are not in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council or were not
accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable Development or to the Commission
on Sustainable Development may apply to the General Assembly for accreditation
following the established accreditation procedure. 13
IV.

Secretariat

23. The Secretary-General of the Conference serves as focal point within the
Secretariat of the United Nations for providing support to the organization of the
Conference, in cooperation with the host country authorities.
V.

Documentation

24. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations
conferences, the official documentation of the Conference will include documents
issued before, during and after the Conference.
25. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations
conferences, it is recommended that the report of the Conference consist of the
decisions of the Conference, a brief account of the proceedings and a reportorial
account of the work of the Conference and the action taken at the plenary meetings.
26. Summaries of the plenary meetings and high-level round-table discussions
should also be included in the report of the Conference.
VI. Organization of parallel meetings and other events of the Conference
27. Parallel meetings and other events, including a partnership forum and learning
centres, will be held during the same hours as the plenary meetings and the round
tables, if they are held in the main building. The partnership forum and learning
centres will constitute an official part of the Conference. Interpretation for such
meetings will be provided on an as-available basis.
VII. Side events
28. Special events, including briefings, seminars, workshops and panel discussions
on issues related to sustainable development, will be organized by Member States,
organizations of the United Nations system and accredited institutional and
non-institutional stakeholders for the benefit of the participants in the Conference.
Guidelines for organizing special events and the calendar of those events will be
made available at the Conference website.12

_______________
13

See decision 66/544.

7

A/RES/66/197

VIII. Media coverage
29. Press materials will be prepared by the Department of Public Information of
the Secretariat for journalists covering the Conference. In addition, regular press
releases will be issued on the results of plenary meetings, round tables and other
events. All relevant documentation will be made available electronically at the
Conference website.12
30. The plenary meetings and round tables, as well as press conferences, will be
broadcast live to the media area. A programme of special media briefings and press
conferences will be announced.

8
