30

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Se~sion

territories occupied by Israel since 1967, to consult,
as appropriate, with the International Committee of the
Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the
welfare and human rights of the population of the
occupied territories, and to report to the SecretaryGeneral as soon as possible and whenever the need
arises thereafter;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To render all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to the
occupied territories with a view to investigating Israeli
policies and practices affecting the human rights of the
population of those territories;
( b) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
of the Special Committee and of information regarding its activities and findings, by all means available
through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session on the tasks entrusted to him;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories".
2193rd plenary meeting
7 December 1973

315! (XXVIII). Policies of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa
A
TRADE UNION ACTION AGAINST APARTHEID

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2671 D (XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2775 H (XXVI) of 29 November 1971
and 2923 F (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Apartheid concerning the International Conference of Trade Unions against Apartheid, 15
Strongly convinced of the importance of the participation of the trade union movement in the international
campaign against apartheid,
I. Commends the resolution adopted on 16 June
1973 by the International Conference of Trade Unions
against Apartheid 16 to the attention of Governments.
specialized agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate steps to promote and facilitate the effective participation of the trade union organizations in the observance of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination;
3. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid
to maintain liaison with the Preparatory Committee
for the International Conforence of Trade Unions
against Apartheid with a view to promoting maximum
participation by the trade unions at the national and
international levels in action against apartheid in South
Africa;
4. Requests the Unit on Apartheid and the Office
of Public Information of the Secretariat to make
special efforts, in co-operation with the International
15 A/9169 and Corr. I.
16 Ibid., annex I.

Labour Organisation and in accordance with the recommendations contained in paragraph 32 of the report
of the Special Committee, to acquaint trade unions all
over the world with the situation in South Africa and
to publicize the activities of the trade union movement
aimed at the eradication of apartheid in South Africa.
2201st plenary meeting
14 December 197 3
B
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
ON APARTHEID

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Apartheid, 17
Considering the need to intensify United Nations
efforts towards the eradication of apartheid in South
Africa and to secure greater co-ordination of such
efforts,
I. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid
to intensify its efforts in the discharge of its mandate
along the lines indicated in paragraph 289 of its report;
2. Calls upon all United Nations organs to take
note of the mandate of the Special Committee constantly to review a.II aspects of apartheid in South
Africa, with a view to avoiding any duplication of work;
3. Authorizes the Special Committee to hold a special session in Europe in I 974;
4. Further authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To send missions to Governments of Member
States for consultations on action against apartheid;
( b) To send representatives to the Organization of
African Unity for consultations on co-operation with
regard to action against apartheid;
(c) To participate in conferences concerned with
apartheid;
(d) To hold consultations with experts, African
liberation movements recognized by the Organization
of African Unity, anti-apartheid movements, trade
union organizations and other non-governmental organizations concerned with the campaign against
apartheid, in order to consider ways and means of intensifying international action against apartheid.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON APARTHEID

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Apa.rtheid, 18
Taking note of the report: of the Secretary-General,u
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Unit on
Apartheid and the Office of Public Information of the
Secretariat for the dissemination of information on
apartheid in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
2923 D (XXVII) of 15 November 1972,
Strongly convinced of the need to intensify greatly
the efforts to acquaint world public opinion with the
imperative need for the eradication of apartheid in
South Africa,
17 Official Recnrds of the General Asscmhlv,
Session, Supplement No. 22 ( A/9022)

18 Jbid.

IV A/9165.

J"we111y-ci[;hth

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

l. Requests the Unit on Apartheid and the Office
of Public Information of. the Secretariat, in consultation with the Special Committee on Apartheid and in
the light of the relevant recommendations contained
in the Special Committee's report, to step up their
efforts to publicize as widely as possible:
(a) The evils and dangers of apartheid in South

Africa;
(b) The legitimate and just struggle of the people
of South Africa for the eradication of apartheid;
(c) The efforts of the United Nations to promote
the eradication of apartheid;
(d) Actions against apartheid taken by specialized
agencies, regional organizations, anti-apartheid movements and other non-governmental organizations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to produce more films and audio-visual material
on apartheid and to promote the widest possible distribution of such material through the production of
additional language versions;
3. Invites Governments and non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Unit on Apartheid
and the Office of Public Information in the production
and widest possible dissemination of publications and
other information material on apartheid in as many
languages as possible;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements to enable the Unit on Apartheid,
in co-operation with the Office of Public Information:
(a) To secure the printing and distribution of
pamphlets in various languages;
(b) To produce special publications for trade unions,
student organizations and other groups as appropriate;
( c) To publicize information on the activities of the
United Nations, specialized agencies, Member States
and non-governmental organizations agajnst apartheid;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to establish as
soon as possible an information centre in lln independent African State neighbouring South Africa, at
that State's request, taking into consideration the financial difficulties of the host country;
6. Requests and authorizes the Secretary-General
to invite voluntary contributions by States and organizations to be used, in consultation with the Special
Committee, for the expansion of the activities of the
Unit on Apartheid, in particular with regard to:
(a) The production of publications in languages
other than the official languages of the United Nations;
( b) Grants to appropriate non-governmental organizations and institutions for the reprinting and redissemination of United Nations information material on
apartheid and for the production of audiotvisual ma••
terial on apartheid.
2201st plerw.ry meeting
14 December J 97 3

D
INTENSTFICl1TlON AND CO-·ORDINATION OF
UNITED NATIONS ACTION AGAINST APARTHEID

The General Assr1~1hly,
llu,·ing considere) the reports of tlie Srccial Committee un Apartheid,''(,
20 Of!irial Rewrd,1 c>J th~· General Assembly, I wenty-eighth
Session, Supp/em,:nt T\',, ''2 ( A/9022); A/9168, A/9169 and
Corr.I, A/9180-S/l 10()5

31

Gravely concerned about the explosive situation in
South Africa ,and in southern Africa as a whole,
Determined to promote more effective international
action against apartheid as a matter of priority during
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination,
Considering that greater co-ordination among United
Nations bodies and specialized agencies is essential
for the development of an international campaign
against apartheid under the auspices of the United
Nations,
1. Commends the Special Committee on Apartheid
for its efforts to promote, in the discharge of its mandate, concerted international action against apartheid;
2. Requests the Special Committee:
(a) To continue to follow, as a matter of priority,
the developments concerning the implementation of
relevant United Nations resolutions and the co.\laboration of States and economic and other interests with
the South African regime, and to report to the General
Assembly and the Security Council as appropriate;
(b) To submit special reports to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on:
( i) Actions against apartheid taken by specialized
agencies and other intergovernmental organizations;
(ii) Assistance provided by foreign economic interests to the South African regime in resisting
international action against apartheid;
(iii) Assistance provided by Governments and nongovernmental organizations to the oppressed
people of South Africa and their liberation
movements;
(iv) Violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council by the South African
regime;
( v) Arbitrary laws and regulations enacted and
applied by the South African regime to repress
the legitimate struggle for freedom;
( c) To promote a world-wide campaign for the release of all those imprisoned or restricted for their
opposition to apartheid;
3. Further requests the Special Committee to continue and intensify its co-operation with the other
United Nations organs concerned with southern Africa,
particularly the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and the United Nations Council for
Namibia, especially with respect to:
(a) Representation at national and international
conferences;
(b) Missions away from United Nations Hcr1dquarters;
(c) Consultations with specialized agencies, the
Organization of African Unity and non-governmental
organizations;
(d) St
,; concerning the economic and other interests impeding decolonization and the eradication of
apartheid in southern Afnca,
( e) Disseminr1tion cf inforrnaoon;
(f) The observance of the \Veek of Solidarity with
the Colonial Peoplvs of Southern Africa and Cape Verde
Fighting for freedom, Tndcpcndcnce and Equal Rights;

32

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

(g) The holding of joint meetings or the establishment of joint working groups, if necessary, to consider
means of co-ordinating their programmes of work;
4. Requests all United Nations organs to consult
with the Special Committee on Apartheid before undertaking any studies or investigations relating to
apartheid in South Africa in order that duplication
may be avoided;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to reinforce the
Unit on Apartheid of the Secretariat, so as to enable
it to discharge the tasks indicated in pa,ragraph 300 of
the report of the Special Committee, 21 and to provide
it with the necessary staff and resources.

2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

E
ACTION BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS

The General Assembly,
Conscious that the eradication of apartheid and
racial discrimination in South Africa is in the interests
of aH humanity,
Considering that it is essential tl) ensure the participation in the international campaign against apartheid
of all specialized agencies and other organizations in
the United Nations system, as well as the maximum
co-ordination of their efforts,
Further considering that the participation of the
public in the campaigns against apartheid is of great
importance and should be encouraged,
Taking note of the relevant recommendations in the
report of the Special Committee on Apartheid, 22
Noting with great appreciation the work of the Special Committee in promoting concerted action by intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,

1. Calls upon aLI Governments to initiate action in
the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations, as necessary, to intensify concerted efforts
against apartheid and, in particular, to formulate programmes of action against apartheid in the light of the
recommendations in the report of the Special Committee on Apartheid;
2. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization:
(a) To expedite the publication and distribution of
the educational kit on racial discrimination and apartheicl in southern Africa:
( b) To continue its programme of studies, seminars
and conferences on the role of culture in combating
colonialism, racism and apartheid and, in particular,
to consider convening, in co-operation with the Special
Committee, a conference of prominent educators, writers and other intellectuals to discuss their role in the
~truggle against apartheid:

3. Commends the activities of anti-apartheid movements. trade unions and ether non-governmental org,mizations engaged in campaigns fer the isolation of
~ 1 O{jicia/ Records of 1he Gen,ni/ Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 22 ( A/9022).
~2 lhid.

the South African racist regime and in support of the
liberation movements of the South African people;
4. Invites all organizations, institutions and information media to intensify and develop such campaigns
in observance of the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination and in co-operation
with the Special Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the Special
Committee to take appropriate steps to encourage
public action against apartheid:
(a) By facilitating consultative status for organi•
zations actively engaged in support of United Nation,
resolutions against apartheid;
( b) By publicizing their actions through the Olfice
of Public Information and the Unit on Apartheid of
the Secretariat;
(c) By encouraging the establishment of national
committees against apartheid where they do not exist.
and maintaining the closest liaison with such committees.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December I 973

F
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,2:1
to which is annexed the report of the Committee L)f
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
Conscious of the continuing and increasing needs
for humanitarian assistance arising from the persecution
of persons under repressive and discriminatory legis
lation in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary•·
General and the Committee of Trustees to promote
contributions to the Trust Fund,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
l)rganizations and individuals that have contributed tn
the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Again appeals to all States, organizations and
individuals for generous annual contributions to the
Trust Fund and for direct contributions to the voluntary agencies concerned;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations
Trust Fund for South Africa, to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
present needs relating to humanitarian assistance within
the terms of reference of the Tmst Fund.
2201st plenary meeling
14 DffemhPr !97?

SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA RESUI TING FROJ\f
THE POLICIES OF APARTHEHI

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the policies of apartheid
of the Government of South Africa and the rclcvnnt
resolutions of the Security Council,
~:l A/9235.

Retmlutions adopted on the t·eports of the Special Political Committee

-------------------------------------------

Having considered the reports of the Special Committee on Apartheid, 24
Takillg note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2923 (XXVII) of
15 November 1972, 25
Taking into accouflt the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid
in Southern Africa, 26
Reaffirming that the practice of apartheid constitutes
a crime against humanity,
Reaffirming that the policies and actions of the
South African regime have created and continue to
pose a serious threat to international peace and security,
Emphasizing the collusion between Portuguese
colonialism, the apartheid regime and zionism, as
exemplified by the political, military and financial aid
supplied to each other by Portugal, South Africa and
Israel,
1. Condemns the South African regime for its repeated acts of inhumanity and aggression and its continued defiance of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
2. Reaffirms that the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa by all available means for the total
eradication of apartheid is legitimate and deserves the
support of the international community;
3. Reiterates the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate with the Organization of African Unity
for the intensification of efforts to promote the total
eradication of apartheid;
4. Condemns the actions of those States and companies which continue to provide to the South African
regime military equipment and supplies, and assistance
for the local manufacture of such equipment and supplies, or other forms of military co-operation in violation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council;
5. Condemns, in particular, the unholy alliance between Portuguese colonialism, South African racism,
zionism and Israeli imperialism;
6. Requests the Security Council to consider urgently
the situation in South Africa and the aggressive actions
of the South African regime with a view to adopting
effective measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, to resolve the grave situation in
the area and, in particular:
( n) To ensure that all Governments implement fully
the arms embargo against South Africa, without any
exceptions as to the type of weapons, and prohibit any
violations of the arms embargo by companies and individuals within their jurisdiction;
( /J) To call upon the Governments concerned to
refrain from importing any military supplies manufoctured by, or in collaboration with, South Africa;
(c) To call upon the Governments concerned to
!crminate any existing military arrangements with the
South African regime and to refrain from entering into
any such arrangements;
7. Condemns the actions of States which, by their
c:ontmued political, military, economic and other col:!4 O(ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session. Supplement No. 22 (A/9022); A/9168, A/9169 and

Co:-1.l, A/9180-S/11005.
~ 5 A/9165.

2 6 A/9061.

laboration with the South African regime, encourage
it to persist in its inhuman and criminal policies, and
calls upon them urgently to cease all such collaboration with South Africa;
8. Calls upon those States which have not yet done
so, as a first step:
(a) To terminate exchanges of military attaches
with the South African regime;
( b) To close trade promotion offices in South Africa
and to deny facilities for offices of South African trade
commissioners;
(c) To terminate all tariff preferences to South
Africa;
(d) To refuse any credits for trade with South
Africa and any guarantees for investment in South
Africa;
(e) To deny facilities for South African immigration offices and to prohibit advertisements for emigration to South Africa;
9. Commends Governments which have boycotted,
and organizations and individuals that have campaigned
for the boycott of, exchanges with racially selected
sports teams from South Africa;
10. Calls upon all Governments which have not yrt
done so:
(a) To take all necessary action to ensure the cessation of exchanges with South African sports teams
selected in violation of the Olympic principle;
( b) To draw the attention of national sports organizations to the provisions of United Nations resolutions
on apartheid in sports;
( c) To deny any assistance or recognition to ex changes with racist sports teams from South Africa;
(d) To end all cultural, educational and civic contacts and exchanges with racist institutions in South
Africa;
11. Declares that the South African regime has no
right to represent the people of South Africa and that
the liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity are the authentic representatives
of the overwhelming majority of the South African
people;
12. Authorizes the Special Committee on Apartheid,
in consultation with the Organization of African Unity,
to associate the South African liberation movements
closely with its work;
13. Reque.sts all specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations to deny membership or
privileges of membership to the South African regime
and to invite, in consultation with the Organization of
African Unity, representatives of the liberation movements of the South African people recognized by that
organization to participate in their meetings;
14. Condemns the policy of "Bantustans" imposed
by the South African regime and calls upon all Gov-crnmen ts and organizations not to accord any form of
recognition to any institution or authority created
thereby;
•
15. Appeals to all Governments and organizations
to provide generous humanitarian, educational, political
and other assistance to the oppressed people of South
Africa and their libe,ation movements in their struggle
for freedom.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
