A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/74
26 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 93
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/52/623)]
52/74.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/142 of 13 December 1996,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,1 prepared pursuant to its resolution 845 (IX) of
22 November 1954,
Conscious of the importance of promoting the educational advancement of the inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of offers of scholarships is essential to meet the
increasing need of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories for educational and training assistance, and
considering that students in those Territories should be encouraged to avail themselves of such offers,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;

1

A/52/388 and Add.1 and 2.

98-76387

/...

A/RES/52/74
Page 2

3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, wherever
possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to ensure the widespread and continuous
dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and
training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail
themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present
resolution.
69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
