S/PV.8955

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8955th meeting

Wednesday, 26 January 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-23999 (E)
*2223999*

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, and Ms. Thuraya Hijazi, Director of the Release
Me project in northern Syria.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Recalling the Security Council’s latest note by
the President (S/2017/507) on its working methods,
I wish to encourage all speakers, both members and
non-members of the Council, to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less. Note 507 also encourages briefers
to be succinct and to focus on key issues. In that spirit,
briefers are further encouraged to limit their initial
remarks to between seven and 10 minutes. Everyone is
also encouraged to wear a mask at all times, including
while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I thank you, Madam President. It is
a pleasure to be back here in New York in person and to
be able to greet everyone.
Let me at the outset stress that Syrians continue to
suffer deeply and that the violence in Syria is indeed
continuing. This past month alone has seen air strikes
in Idlib that reportedly killed civilians and damaged
civilian infrastructure; mutual shelling across front
lines; a flare-up of hostilities in the north-east; attacks
with improvised explosive devices that killed civilians
in northern Syria; air strikes attributed to Israel
damaging the port of Latakia; continued violence in the
south; a growing number of security incidents related
to drug smuggling; and attacks by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including on civilians and
humanitarian actors, in north-eastern and central Syria.
2/20

26/01/2022

In recent days, as we have seen on the news, there
has been an unprecedented attempt at a prison break by
thousands of detainees with suspected ISIL affiliation
in Hasakah, sparking clashes with air strikes from the
United States-led Global Coalition against Daesh in
support of the Syrian Democratic Forces on the ground.
There have reportedly been dozens of fatalities.
We understand that in the past few hours the Syrian
Democratic Forces have taken back control, and all or
most of the ISIL fighters seem to have surrendered.
However, the situation is still unfolding. We remain
very concerned about the safety and security of the
civilians caught up in this situation, many of whom
have been displaced. UNICEF drew attention to
reports of ISIL members being holed up in dormitories
for minors, putting hundreds of children in detention
at risk. Even if this particular ISIL uprising may
have been quashed, the episode brings back terrible
memories of the prison breaks that fuelled the original
rise of ISIL in 2014 and 2015. I see it as a clear message
to us all of the importance of uniting to combat the
threat of internationally proscribed terrorist groups and
of resolving the broader conflict in which terrorism
inevitably thrives.
We must remember in that context that the tragedy
of the Syrian people is only deepening. Fourteen million
civilians now need humanitarian assistance. More than
12 million remain displaced and many are right now
facing freezing winter conditions. Tens of thousands
are detained, abducted or missing. Syria’s economy has
collapsed. Criminality and smuggling are flourishing.
There are also reports of young people seeking any
opportunity to leave the country, sometimes falling prey
to traffickers and warlords. Education is fragmented
and severely degraded, as indeed are institutions and
infrastructure across the board. The country remains
de facto divided, and society is deeply fractured.
Syrians see no concrete progress towards a political
solution. Despite the continued violence and suffering,
it is also clear that there is a strategic stalemate. There
have been no shifts in the front lines for nearly two
years. It is clear that no existing actor or group of actors
can determine the trajectory or outcome of the conflict,
and indeed that a military solution remains an illusion.
I have continued to engage widely on these realities,
including in visits this past month to Tehran and
Doha, and in a meeting with the Syrian Negotiations
Commission. On Monday, I briefed a meeting of Foreign
Ministers in the European Union Foreign Affairs
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Council. In addition, in late December Ms. Khawla
Matar, Deputy Special Envoy for Syria, attended an
Astana format meeting where she met senior officials
from Russia, Turkey and Iran, the Syrian Government
and opposition and regional observers. She also
participated in a meeting of the Working Group on the
Release of Detainees/Abductees, Handover of Bodies
and Identification of Missing Persons. Participants in
that meeting made some positive proposals, ideas that
if implemented would mark some genuine progress on
this file. But what is absolutely needed now is to follow
up on those ideas, as we are urging all stakeholders
to do.
More broadly, I am calling anew for serious
diplomatic discussions on a range of steps that could
begin to impact the conflict dynamics, build some
trust and confidence between and among Syrians and
international stakeholders, and make progress step by
step, step for step, within the framework of resolution
2254 (2015). I have been convening senior officials
from key stakeholders in bilateral consultations in
Geneva. The Syrian Government and the Syrian
Negotiations Commission are of course invited to
Geneva for those consultations, and I hope to engage
them further soon. Meanwhile, following consultations
in December with Russia, the European Union, Turkey
and Qatar, in January I consulted the League of Arab
States, Germany, France, Italy, the United Kingdom
and the United States in Geneva. I will be continuing
the consultations with additional interlocutors in the
coming period. This is a rolling process in which it
will be necessary to revert to interlocutors repeatedly
over time.
My question for all the interlocutors is the same:
can they identify not only what they demand, but also
what they are prepared to put on the table in exchange
for steps from the other side? Frankly, I welcome fresh
ideas from any quarter that could bring about action on
issues such as detainees, abductees and missing persons;
humanitarian assistance and early recovery, building
on the progress made in adopting and continuing to
implement resolution 2585 (2021); the conditions for
safe, dignified and voluntary refugee returns; restoring
socioeconomic conditions — which, as the Council
is aware, have collapsed after more than a decade of
war and conflict, corruption, mismanagement, the
Lebanese financial crisis, the coronavirus disease and,
indeed, sanctions. Solidifying calm throughout Syria
and interim stabilization is of course a key aspect as is,

S/PV. 8955

at the same time, cooperating in countering terrorism.
Then there are also what I call diplomatic issues.
In time, I hope that we can begin to identify and
agree on incremental, reciprocal, mutual, realistic,
precise and verifiable steps that could be taken in
parallel in areas such as these. That would build trust
and confidence, make an impact on the suffering of the
Syrian people and help to move the political process
forward. Our goal remains to create the kind of safe,
calm, neutral environment where a constitutional
process could take hold, and ultimately where elections
can take place administered under United Nations
supervision, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015).
All of this would be in the context of respecting and
restoring Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity and enabling the Syrians to determine their
own future. As part of that, I am actively engaged in
seeking to reconvene the Syrian-led and -owned and
United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee.
The Committee’s work so far remains disappointing.
The present challenge is to ensure that the delegations
not only submit constitutional texts but are prepared
to revise them in the light of the discussions to try to
find some common ground or at least to narrow their
differences. We need a productive drafting process,
according to the Committee’s mandate. Let me remind
the Council that as outlined in its terms of reference, the
Committee must work expeditiously and continuously
to produce results and make continued progress.
I am continuing to engage, including with both
co-Chairs, in an effort to produce a clear understanding,
and some ideas have been floated. I am ready to convene
a seventh session of the Constitutional Committee
in Geneva as soon as understandings are in place. It
remains my wish that we could then have several
sessions in the months ahead and indeed do serious
work. When we have the agreement of the co-Chairs,
we will of course brief the civil-society Middle Third
in preparation for a seventh session.
You will be pleased to know, Madam President,
that from here I will fly to Oslo to meet with the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board. I thank the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Norway for its kind and generous
invitation to the Board, as well as the Norwegian
Centre for Conflict Resolution and UN-Women for their
logistical support. The members of the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board continue to advise me on a broad
range of questions related to the crisis in Syria and its
resolution. Their suggestions are serious and practical.

22-239993/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

My team also continues to engage Syrian women more
broadly, and I value their contributions to resolving
the conflict. We equally look forward in the coming
weeks to convening participants in Geneva through the
Civil Society Support Room. We are also continuing
our constant engagement with a diverse group of civilsociety actors through a dedicated digital platform.
I can promise the Council that I will continue to
spare no effort to engage the Syrian Government and
the opposition, all sectors of Syrian society — men
and women — and all key international stakeholders,
in pursuit of my mandate in line with resolution 2254
(2015). It is an enormous challenge to make real progress
that can make a difference to the Syrian people, but that
is what we must do. I will therefore need everyone’s
guidance and support.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hijazi.
Ms. Hijazi (spoke in Arabic): My name is Thuraya
Hijazi. I am a feminist and political activist and the
Director of the Release Me project in north-western
Syria, which works to empower women survivors
of violence and to develop local peace programmes.
I am also a former detainee in the Syrian regime’s
prisons. Today I want to attempt to convey the voices
of women in my country because, as the Security
Council is aware, we will soon mark 11 years since
the beginning of the Syrian revolution, which has
become a deep-rooted crisis, notwithstanding the
repeatedly frustrated attempts of all Syrians to realize
their dream of bringing about political change. The
Syrian regime, which is still holding steady owing to
unconditional support from Russia and Iran, has yet to
be held accountable, while the international community
remains silent. Meanwhile, as a result of international
interventions, the Syrian opposition has been unable to
restructure itself in order to be able to present itself as
an alternative to the regime.
It is the country’s entire people who are paying
the price throughout Syria. Syria today has become
four Syrias, each of them a large detention centre
imprisoning those living within it. Ninety per cent of
Syrians live below the poverty line and 60 per cent
suffer from food insecurity. There are 9 million Syrians
living outside the areas controlled by the regime, and
5.6 million Syrians are in need of humanitarian aid
and relief mechanisms, which the Security Council
constantly politicizes. In addition, there are more than
4/20

26/01/2022

2.4 million children in Syria not enrolled in school, and
approximately 40 per cent of them are girls who make
up one of the country’s most vulnerable groups. We can
only imagine what future awaits them.
Despite every effort, especially those of the Special
Envoy for Syria, the Security Council has so far failed to
find a political solution to the Syrian issue. As a result,
Syria has become a humanitarian tragedy, held hostage
and subject to regional and international conflicts,
which has made us Syrians lose hope for a just political
solution. That is reflected in the fact that the areas of
influence in Syria’s de facto geographic divisions are
backed by certain countries that are granted immunity
for all violations of international humanitarian law.
We know that the de facto Powers, having achieved
organizational, administrative and military progress,
want a future political solution that guarantees their
control and gains in the areas under their influence.
We also know that the Council is aware that Russia and
some Arab regimes have made attempts to normalize
relations with the regime despite all the atrocities it has
committed against Syria and the Syrians.
We know that internationally and regionally
Russia is taking advantage of the fluctuating position
of the United States and the absence of European
influence. It is attempting to restore and strengthen the
legitimacy of the regime by highlighting certain issues
and exceptions, such as the revival of the Arab Gas
Pipeline and the efforts of the United Arab Emirates to
encourage Syria’s return to the League of Arab States,
among other things. We have also listened with concern
to Special Envoy Geir Pedersen’s recent statements
in support of normalizing relations with the regime
under the pretext of so-called engagement. All of
those developments have had a negative impact on the
implementation of the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection
Act, given the absence of alternative or economic and
diplomatic measures from the international community
that can contribute to achieving justice and peace
in Syria.
In my capacity as a witness to Syrian women’s
participation in the revolution since it was launched, and
to the many violations that the Syrian regime commits
against women inside and outside prisons, I would like
to inform the Council that women’s problems are not
limited to the spread of systemic violence that occurs
when perpetrators cannot be deterred. They are also
rooted in the United Nations reports that monitor the
violence and explain the extent of its spread and impact
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

on women and society but that unfortunately do not
provide any action plans. They merely treat the victims
as statistics.
As women politicians, we know the root causes
of the abuses that women are subjected to, as well as
their connection to the political economy of war and
violence. We also know the impact of sexual violence
on the status of women and their reproductive and
political roles. We also know that the politicization
of humanitarian issues by the Syrian regime and
its international allies has contributed to increasing
the economic and legal vulnerability of women and
depriving them of education and health. If the conflict
persists, Syria will become a source of extremism and
a regional centre for organized crime, particularly in
terms of drug smuggling, which is a major source of
revenue for the regime. The camps and shelters, which
already lack services, will also become spaces for the
commission of every kind of violence against women
and girls. Empowered by their strength and will, Syrian
women seek to transcend the role of the victim of the
killings, arrests, displacements and asylum-seeking
they have experienced. We seek to counter all the
forms of exclusion that patriarchal authorities impose
on us in armed conflicts. We are trying to leverage our
experiences to bring about radical change so that we can
assume our role in rebuilding Syria. We therefore call
on the Security Council to take the following actions.
The Council must put pressure on the Syrian
regime to release detainees and uncover the fate of the
forcibly disappeared without undertaking negotiations.
It must adopt mechanisms to ensure that there is no
normalization of relations with the regime. The Council
must put pressure on the regime and the de facto Powers
to allow international organizations to investigate
crimes committed by force of arms and prevent impunity
for the perpetrators. It must emphasize that any Syrian
leadership must represent the will of the Syrian people,
including young men and women, and be free from
any external interference. The Council also needs to
advance the political process to reach a comprehensive
and sustainable political solution that includes the
active participation of women, in accordance with the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), resolution
2254 (2015) and other relevant resolutions. It should
link the political solution to accountability in a way that
guarantees women’s rights. It should link reconstruction
to a comprehensive political solution and to the
voluntary and safe return of Syrian refugees. Lastly,

S/PV. 8955

it should support the criminalization of all violence
against women by guaranteeing a consensus-based,
gender-sensitive Constitution based on all international
conventions. Gender analysis and feminist policies
should always be high on the negotiation agenda.
We therefore urge the Council to push for the
launch of genuine negotiations under its auspices and
under the umbrella of international law, and including
all the countries involved in the Syrian war. Perhaps our
dream of building a civil and democratic Syrian State
without the Al-Assad regime or any form of tyranny
may come true. Seeing the Council working hard to
fulfil those demands will enable hundreds of women to
be ready to participate actively in the political process
and run as contenders for all positions and levels of
decision-making, as we rightly deserve.
The President: I thank Ms. Hijazi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for his tireless and ongoing
efforts to find a political solution to this protracted
and devastating conflict. My special thanks also go to
Ms. Thuraya Hijazi. While their briefings can often be
painful to hear and their messages are often pointed,
we applaud Syrian civil-society actors like her for their
courageous work. The United States also supports the
engagement of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board,
and we call for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the agenda on women and peace and security.
As we approach the eleventh anniversary of the
Syrian uprising, the United States stands with the
Syrian people and continues to advance multiple
objectives in pursuit of a peaceful and lasting solution
to the conflict.
The first of those objectives is sustaining the
campaign of the United States and the Coalition to
prevent the resurgence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS), which we view as a cornerstone of our
counter-terrorism efforts in the region. The ongoing
situation at the detention centre in Hasakah, which
Mr. Pedersen referenced, is a stark reminder that ISIS
remains a real threat.
The second objective is sustaining local ceasefires
across the country, which is key to keeping the levels of
violence down throughout Syria.

22-239995/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, we are working to support the expansion
of full, unhindered humanitarian access throughout
Syria. We will continue to urge the Security Council
to not only reauthorize Bab Al-Hawa but also to reopen
border crossings at Al-Yarubiyah and Bab Al-Salam
to allow access for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Those actions are essential to meeting the
ever-growing emergency needs of the Syrian people
across the country.
Fourthly, the United States continues to press
for accountability, particularly for chemical-weapon
violations, crimes against humanity and war crimes
and to ensure respect for human rights.
Finally, we are working to support a Syrian-led
political process, as envisioned and agreed by the
Council in resolution 2254 (2015). As the Special Envoy
has indicated, it is only through that inclusive political
process, with the participation of the Syrian people,
that we can reach a durable solution to the conflict.
We understand that some States have offered lessthan-constructive comments about the Special Envoy’s
efforts to advance political dialogue. The Syrian
regime’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Faisal Mekdad, stated
publicly last week that the step-for-step model as a way
to resolve the crisis in Syria was unacceptable to it. We
encourage all stakeholders, especially the direct parties
to the conflict, to support the Special Envoy’s efforts
to facilitate a political resolution to the crisis in Syria.
We share the Special Envoy’s frustration at the
Syrian Constitutional Committee’s lack of progress
and agree that any future meetings of the small drafting
group should be based on an agreement between the
sides on the modalities for discussing draft texts
and their revisions. We are disappointed with the
unwillingness of the participants from the Al-Assad
regime to make progress towards that end, including in
the sixth round of negotiations.
We remain deeply concerned about the tens of
thousands of Syrians believed to have been arbitrarily
detained or forcibly disappeared by the Al-Assad
regime. We encourage Special Envoy Pedersen to focus
on promoting a large-scale and unconditional release
of detainees, in coordination with the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the families of the
missing and detained. We also ask him to do all he can
to push the Al-Assad regime to provide information to
6/20

26/01/2022

families about the status of their missing and detained
loved ones.
We are alarmed by reports of repeated and
continued attacks by the regime and its allies that are
impacting health-care workers and medical facilities in
Syria. Among the health-care professionals reportedly
targeted are the workers who responded to the regime’s
chemical-weapon attacks in eastern Ghouta, as well
as those who are trying to stop the spread of the
coronavirus disease. We call on all parties to cease
attacks that affect health-care workers and medical
facilities and demand accountability for those acts.
We condemn the reported attacks by the Russian
military in Idlib, particularly those affecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including the bombing
on 2 January that damaged a water station near Idlib,
which has cut off access to water for nearly a quarter
of a million Syrians. As the United Nations Deputy
Regional Humanitarian Coordinator in Syria said
earlier this month, the continued destruction of civilian
infrastructure will only cause more civilian suffering.
We urge the regime and its Russian backers to cease
their attacks, particularly those impacting civilians, in
this vulnerable region.
Finally, there can be no lasting peace in Syria
without accountability for the regime’s atrocities, some
of which constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The United States supports efforts to collect,
consolidate, preserve and analyse evidence of abuses
committed in Syria. That work is critical to supporting
justice and accountability efforts that will pave the way
for a stable and enduring peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for briefing us
on the situation in Syria. We also listened carefully to
Ms. Thuraya Hijazi’s remarks.
We support the continuation of inter-Syrian
consultations in Geneva in the framework of the
Constitutional Committee. We believe that there is
no alternative to promoting a Syrian-led and -owned
settlement process, with the support of the United Nations
and without external interference or the imposition of
artificial deadlines. We should point out that Damascus
is prepared to do that and has confirmed its intention
to go to Switzerland to participate constructively in
the seventh session of the drafting commission of the
Constitutional Committee. In view of that, we will
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

continue to work with the Syrians, the Special Envoy
and other stakeholders, first and foremost our Astana
partners. To that end, representatives of Russia, Iran
and Turkey, with the participation of interested parties,
held a meeting in December 2021 in Nur-Sultan. We
hope that Mr. Pedersen will also focus on convening
the Constitutional Committee without getting
distracted by other initiatives, especially if the Syrians
themselves — the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the opposition — do not support them.
The efforts on the political front are all the more
necessary because the situation in a number of regions
in Syria remains tense. Problems persist in the areas
that Damascus does not control — Idlib, the area east
of the Euphrates and the zone of Turkish operations in
northern Syria. We believe that long-term peace and
security in Syria can be achieved only through the full
restoration of the Syrian Government’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, including its control of its
national borders and natural resources, along with the
continuation of efforts to combat terrorism.
We are deeply concerned about the reports of raids
in Syria’s north-east by terrorists from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, who attacked a prison housing
dangerous jihadists, some of whom escaped. We believe
that the Security Council needs additional information
about the incident. In that regard, we have requested
that a separate briefing on that issue and the situation
in north-east Syria in general be provided in a timely
manner.
The situation in and around Syria would be
generally improved by a resumption of the natural ties
between Syrian and its Arab neighbours, including on
the political and economic fronts, as well as the full
restoration of Damascus to the Arab family.
In conclusion, we must say that the Security Council’s
consideration of various aspects of the situation in Syria
for two days in a row is a very abnormal approach and
a very irrational use of its resources. We regret the fact
that in planning the Council’s programme of work, our
Western colleagues chose to prioritize political reasons
over common sense. We urge that priority be given to
the quality of our meetings rather than their quantity.
If necessary, meetings can always be requested, as we
have shown through our initiative today.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his insightful briefing.

S/PV. 8955

We understand the difficulty of his task, given the
complexity of the issues at stake in Syria. We also
listened carefully to Ms. Thuraya Hijazi’s briefing.
Six years after the adoption of resolution 2254
(2015), there are still difficulties in implementing it.
This situation has helped to perpetuate the torment
and suffering of the Syrian people. A political solution
is the primary path to achieving peace in Syria. It
requires the establishment of a ceasefire, the restoration
of State authority throughout Syria’s territory and the
engagement of all the parties in a dialogue in good faith.
After six rounds of discussions in Geneva, the
negotiating parties have yet to agree on an outline for a
national constitution that corresponds to the aspirations
of the Syrian people. The fragmentation of the Syrian
political class and the lack of trust among the various
actors destroy any chance of giving substance to
this dialogue, particularly within the Constitutional
Committee, despite the hopes raised by its inclusive
structure. It is important to stress that the absence
of delays in the round of negotiations inherent in the
Syrian political process should not be considered a
blank cheque for apathy. It is clear that the political
stalemate is casting a shadow over the efforts of the
Syrian Government to enable the country to emerge
from the isolation it is in, as well as its ability to attract
foreign investors for the purpose of mending the social
and economic fabric.
Women have an important role to play in settling
the political climate in Syria. Ms. Hijazi’s poignant
message is a plea that reveals the importance of that
role. We note with interest the involvement of women
in the peace process, particularly in the context of
discussions with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
Beyond the difficulties and dead ends, it is vital that all
actors working to find a viable solution to the Syrian
political crisis bear in mind the course set by the first
paragraph of resolution 2254 (2015), relating to the
preservation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria.
We would like to conclude by expressing our
support for the work being done by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
in a complex environment, while encouraging all the
stakeholders and actors in the subregion to demonstrate
greater commitment to finding a solution for the peace
process in Syria.

22-239997/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Like
my colleagues, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Pedersen for his very comprehensive briefing. I have
also listened carefully to the statement by Ms. Hijazi. I
want to highlight the following points regarding some
relevant issues.
First, with respect to the political process, China
supports the advancement of a Syrian-led and -owned
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). We hope that the next round of the Constitutional
Committee will begin soon. We should point out that
the relevant work should remain independent and
free of external interference. We also welcome the
new round of meetings of the Astana process that
took place last month and hope that the process will
continue to contribute to a comprehensive solution
to the Syrian issue. China has always emphasized
that constitution-building and elections alone are not
enough. To truly make progress on the political track, the
international community needs an integrated approach
to the major issues that endanger Syria’s sovereignty,
security and development in order to create conditions
that can enable the political process there.
Secondly, regarding the occupation of Syria by
external forces, Syrian sovereignty should be fully
respected. That principle should always be insisted on
when dealing with the Syrian issue. No foreign troops
are permitted to be deployed in Syria, including the
Golan, without the consent of the Syrian Government.
Whether we are talking about the military operations
across the Syrian border, the construction of settlements
in the Golan area or the theft of oil from north-eastern
Syria, all have undermined the country’s sovereignty,
violated the interests of the Syrian people and interfered
with the international community’s efforts to achieve
a political settlement. China urges the countries
concerned to earnestly respect Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, abide by the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, and end the occupation
and annexation of Syria and the attacks on it.
Thirdly, regarding the fight against terrorism,
China is concerned about the recent attack on the
prison housing terrorist detainees in north-eastern
Syria, which may have resulted in their escape. We
urge the relevant parties to ensure that such incidents
do not happen again. The existence of terrorism in
Syria is not something that we can regard as normal.
The international community must take a clear stance
on counter-terrorism, act to cooperate in countering
8/20

26/01/2022

terrorism in accordance with international law and
the relevant Council resolutions and jointly fight
terrorist forces in Syria. We should respect the
Syrian Government’s leadership in fighting terrorism
and refrain from engaging in double standards.
China is willing to strengthen communication and
coordination with Syria to help it improve its capacity
to fight terrorism.
Fourthly, regarding cooperation among the countries
of the region, the situation in Syria bears on regional
security and stability, and a speedy and comprehensive
solution to the Syrian issue is in the common interests of
the States of the region. China welcomes efforts by the
relevant countries to strengthen diplomatic, economic
and trade interaction with Syria and is pleased that Arab
countries are actively considering ensuring Syria’s
serious return to the League of Arab States. We hope
that such encouraging momentum will yield practical
results and form synergies with the good offices of the
United Nations. The international community should
encourage the countries of the region to strengthen
dialogue and cooperation and create positive conditions
for them.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our consistent
position, which is that having the Council consider the
issue of Syria three times in one month does not facilitate
an integrated and comprehensive consideration of the
relevant issues. Serious consideration should be given
to combining them into one meeting or making other,
more reasonable arrangements. That will not only help
us seek a package solution to the relevant issues but
also economize on the Council’s resources.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his comprehensive
briefing and vigorous diplomatic efforts to advance
the political process. We also listened carefully to the
briefing by Ms. Thuraya Hijazi.
More than a decade has passed since the beginning
of the Syrian crisis. The United Arab Emirates firmly
believes that the international community must develop
a new approach to dealing with the Syrian crisis in order
to end it peacefully and sustainably. To that end, my
country would like to focus on the following aspects.
First, the United Arab Emirates believes that opening
channels of communication and building bridges are the
most successful paths to resolving the protracted crisis
in a way that alleviates people’s suffering and achieves
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

stability. The recent visit to Damascus of His Highness
Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, our Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation,
was part of my country’s bridge-building efforts in
the region. We believe that dialogue, constructive
participation and support for all diplomatic efforts will
help to end the Syrian crisis. The visit aimed to change
the general perceptions on the ground with regard to a
solution to the protracted Syrian crisis. Accordingly, we
believe that it is important to strengthen and activate the
Arab role in a way that is supportive of and consistent
with Mr. Pedersen’s diplomatic efforts. That will help
to achieve progress on the political track with the aim
of ending the crisis and restoring security and stability
to Syria and the region.
Secondly, we agree with the Special Envoy’s
emphasis on creating opportunities for gradual and
tangible steps, which require collective efforts to
support and reinvigorate the Constitutional Committee.
My country therefore calls for current efforts to focus
on strengthening dialogue and overcoming the obstacles
that have prevented an agreement on constitutional
principles. In that context, the flexibility and realism
that the Special Envoy urged after his consultations
with Syrian, regional and international actors must be
taken into consideration. The United Arab Emirates
emphasizes that a political solution is the only way to
end the crisis in Syria. We also stress that achieving
genuine progress on the political process requires all
parties to make necessary concessions in good faith and
to pursue confidence-building measures in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Thirdly, creating an environment conducive to
peace and stability in Syria requires ending foreign
interference in Syrian affairs. We stress the importance
of maintaining the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. In that context,
the United Arab Emirates supports the call of the
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for Syria
to reach an immediate and sustainable nationwide
ceasefire. Likewise, efforts must continue to counter
terrorism in Syria. The persistence of terrorist activities
is one of the most destabilizing factors for security in
Syria and the region. In that regard, it is alarming that
Da’esh continues to launch terrorist attacks, including
the recent dangerous developments in the Ghweiran
neighbourhood of Hasakah governorate, as well as
the continued targeting of parts of Deir ez-Zor and
eastern Homs.

S/PV. 8955

In conclusion, we hope that 2022 will be the year
that the international community makes all the efforts
needed to achieve tangible progress towards ending the
Syrian crisis, with a view to fulfilling the aspirations of
our brother people of Syria and providing them with a
decent living in a safe and stable homeland. We assure
the Council that the United Arab Emirates will work
with all Council members to achieve those goals.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and
Ms. Hijazi for their briefings, and to welcome the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey. We appreciate
Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to advance the political process
as well as his consultations with international actors,
including in the framework of the Astana process.
However, as the Special Envoy has said, there has been
little progress, which is very regrettable.
We are concerned about the fact that the security
situation continues to deteriorate. Attacks have been
recorded in Idlib province, where the civil water supply
infrastructure was damaged, as well as at the port of
Latakia. The recent attack on a prison in Hasakah
shows that the Islamic State is gaining strength. We
are also very concerned about the welfare and safety of
the hundreds of children held in that prison. They are
victims of terrorism and their lives are at risk, which is
why we call on their States of nationality to repatriate
them urgently.
Given the Council’s failure to refer the case of Syria
to the International Criminal Court, we commend the
progress achieved on other fronts, such as the sentence
handed down on 13 January by a court in Koblenz,
Germany, against the officer in charge of Al-Khatib
prison in Damascus, who was found guilty of crimes
against humanity. That ruling, as well as another issued
in February of last year by the same court, can provide
victims with a sense of justice and represent progress in
the process towards accountability.
Finally, Mexico condemns the violations of Syria’s
territorial integrity and calls for a reversal of the plans
announced last December to build Israeli settlements
in the Golan.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to welcome
Special Envoy Pedersen, thank him for his briefing and
commend him for his work and efforts. I also thank
Ms. Hijazi for her passionate plea.

22-239999/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

26/01/2022

We have become so used to the violence and
suffering emanating from Syria that the harrowing
stalemate in which that ravaged country finds itself
today may strike some as somewhat positive. But as we
heard from the Special Envoy, the fighting and violence,
including activity by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, have not stopped. The current stalemate is not
something that the Council can build on to overcome the
situation. It worsens the suffering of the Syrian people,
the incessant violence against civilians, the hunger,
extreme poverty, fear, angst, terror and the shattering
of hopes for a brighter future for ordinary Syrians. The
perpetuation of this status quo is unsustainable and is
contrary to what the Council stands for. We must upend
it to ignite hopes for a better future for the Syrian
people. The Council has a responsibility to save Syria
from hell. It can and should prioritize the protection
of civilians and unimpeded humanitarian assistance to
all in need and remove the systematic threats to peace
and security.

institutions that adhere to the rule of law and uphold the
human rights of all.

Resolution 2254 (2015) provides the basis for a
real, inclusive political transition with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women. Its full
implementation should therefore be an absolute priority
for the Council, a priority that the Syrian regime has
disregarded in the past and continues to disregard
as we speak. The Constitutional Committee is the
only existing platform for envisaging and pursuing a
political transition, but so far it has mainly produced
disappointment. That is primarily due to a lack of
genuine involvement and investment on the part of the
regime. The Committee is preparing to convene for its
seventh session, as we heard, without having produced
any tangible progress. It keeps beating its own record
with not much to deliver. We wholeheartedly support
the tireless work of Special Envoy Pedersen, including
the initiative he communicated today to consult with
stakeholders to move the political process forward.
He also deserves the Council’s full backing in putting
the necessary pressure on all concerned, including
the regime, in order to advance the political process.
Given the Council’s inability to stand united, and in the
absence of any timetable or deadlines, the Constitutional
Committee risks becoming a smokescreen for inaction
and the perpetuation of the status quo. The constitutional
process will not change the grim reality overnight, but
it can serve as a catalyst for a new democratic Syria.
It can be the heart of a transformative process that
spreads in concentric circles, ultimately involving all
segments of Syrian society, and leading to democratic

(spoke in French)

10/20

I reiterate my delegation’s support for the Special
Envoy’s step-by-step approach. Incremental, concrete
and verifiable steps can serve to build the trust that is
necessary to advance the political process. A nationwide
ceasefire, the release of all political detainees, the
immediate and full halt of all attacks on civilian areas,
arbitrary arrests, disappearances, extrajudicial and
targeted killings, full cooperation with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and economic
support and early recovery are all basic but necessary
steps that must be taken. But they are only initial steps.
They represent the floor, not the ceiling. We would also
like to see a workplan with concrete and measurable
indicators to verify how bilateral consultations with
relevant stakeholders have contributed to advancing the
political process, where the obstacles lie and what the
Council should do to overcome them.
A viable political transition is hardly possible
without transitional justice. The massive and systematic
violations of international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law in Syria demand
redress for the Syrians affected and an overhaul of the
structures that have allowed evil to take root in Syria.
What has happened in Syria must never happen
again — there or anywhere else — and we can prevent
it by combating impunity.
Accountability and justice for the victims are
vital to a meaningful political transition that results
in a democratic Syria — a State that respects the
fundamental rights of its citizens and lives in peace
alongside its neighbours. We support all international
and national efforts to hold the perpetrators of the
heinous crimes committed in Syria to account,
including through the referral of the case in Syria to
the International Criminal Court and the application of
universal jurisdiction by national courts. Millions of
Syrians want answers. It is our duty to help them.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for the ongoing efforts by him and his
team to facilitate a sustainable resolution to the conflict.
I also thank Ms. Hijazi for her powerful briefing.
In 2022 the conflict and humanitarian crisis in
Syria will enter its twelfth year. As many as 13.4 million
people remain in need of humanitarian assistance and
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8955

more than half of Syria’s population has been displaced
by violence. Over the past 11 years, the Syrian regime
has perpetrated appalling violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, and the United
Kingdom strongly supports efforts to hold those
responsible to account. Without political progress,
significant reform and an end to attacks on civilians,
an unrepentant Syrian regime cannot be considered fit
to govern.

that supplies some 300,000 people. France condemns
those bombings. We also condemn in the strongest
possible terms the 20 January attack by Da’esh on a
detention centre in Hasakah, in north-eastern Syria.
We commend the Syrian Democratic Forces and the
Coalition for their action in response to that event.
France reiterates its call for an immediate nationwide
cessation of hostilities. The protection of civilians must
remain an absolute priority.

This year there have already been multiple incidents
across Syria that have resulted in damage to civilian
infrastructure, including water supplies, worsened the
humanitarian crisis and caused the death of civilians,
including children. An attack on 20 January in which
missiles targeted civilian infrastructure in Afrin
resulted in the deaths of at least eight civilians and
injuries to approximately 30 others, including women
and children, some of whom remain in critical condition.
We condemn the ongoing targeting and destruction of
civilian infrastructure in north-west Syria.

Only a political solution can serve as a lasting
solution to the conflict, and resolution 2254 (2015),
which the Security Council adopted unanimously,
remains our road map for that. There will be no lasting
peace in Syria until it is fully implemented. In Geneva
on 12 January, France and the Special Envoy engaged
in consultations within the framework of the step-forstep approach. I would like to reiterate our full support
to him. Every actor must shoulder its responsibilities,
and that applies first and foremost to the Syrian regime,
which is not currently willing to take any such action,
as the lack of any progress since 2018 on the fate of
disappeared persons shows. In that regard, France
supports the efforts of the Special Envoy to convene
a seventh session of the Constitutional Committee and
deplores the Syrian regime’s systematic obstruction of
the work of the sixth session.

The developments in north-east Syria over the
past week have also highlighted how Da’esh and its
poisonous ideology, even without territory, continue to
pose a threat in Syria, Iraq and the wider world. We
welcome the news today that the Syrian Democratic
Forces have retaken control of Ghweiran prison in
Hasakah. We look forward to further detailed and
constructive Security Council discussions tomorrow on
how best to address the threat posed by Da’esh.
The United Kingdom is grateful for Special Envoy
Pedersen’s recent efforts to stimulate discussion on
a step-for-step approach and for his update on those
efforts today. In resolution 2254 (2015), the Council
agreed that only a United Nations-led political process
could end the conflict and bring lasting peace to Syria.
Any step-for-step process should fully comply with
resolution 2254 (2015), be designed to benefit the
people of Syria and accompanied by a clear process
of verification. Assuming the Syrian regime and its
backers are willing to engage in good faith, we stand
ready to support that process.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Hijazi for their briefings.
The war in Syria is not over. The Syrian regime’s
resumption of bombings in Idlib at the end of
December, with the support of the Russian Air Force,
testified to that. The bombings targeted civilian
infrastructure, including two farms and a water station

In the absence of a solid political solution, there
is no reason to normalize relations with the Syrian
regime. Our positions on the lifting of sanctions and
reconstruction remain unchanged. That is the position
of the European Union and its 27 member States. Our
priority will continue to be to work in close cooperation
with our European partners for a political settlement
to the conflict. The European Union and France have
long stood by the Syrian people. The European Union
has contributed €25 billion to the Syrian crisis response
since 2011. As long as there is no political solution,
the needs will only continue to grow. Reconstruction
will be the end of this political process rather than the
start. I reiterate that the regime, and its backers, must
shoulder their responsibilities.
Furthermore, the Syrian regime’s systematic
violations of people’s right of return to Syria demonstrate
that the conditions for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees are not being met. Once again, the
regime must shoulder its responsibilities. France will
continue to work tirelessly to combat impunity for
crimes committed in Syria. The perpetrators of all such
crimes must be held accountable for their actions.

22-2399911/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing and commend his
tireless efforts to support the political process in Syria.
I also welcome Ms. Thuraya Hijazi, Director of the
Release Me project in northern Syria, and appreciate
the perspectives that she brought to the discussions
of the Security Council today. I also welcome the
participation in this meeting of the representatives of
Syria, Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Over the past week, we have been witnessing violent
clashes in the north-eastern city of Hasakah in the
aftermath of the attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant on the Ghweiran prison attempting to release
detained members of the armed group. More than 100
people have reportedly been killed, while some 50,000
have been displaced from their homes. Such attacks in
Syria continue to hinder the already difficult process
of seeking a peaceful resolution through dialogue and
consensus. We express our condolences to the families
of those who died and restate our firm condemnation of
all acts and manifestations of terrorism by whomever
and wherever they are committed. The international
community must be relentless in the fight against
terrorism and hold perpetrators accountable.
Against the backdrop of these worrisome but
familiar conditions in Syria, let me first of all reaffirm
Ghana’s support for a political solution to the ongoing
conflict and stress the importance of constructive
engagement by the parties in a spirit of good faith,
mutual respect and compromise. We urge the Council
to collectively support a nationwide ceasefire and
the recommitment of all sides to the political process
within the parameters of resolution 2254 (2015).
Secondly, notwithstanding the modest progress
made by the Constitutional Committee over its previous
six sessions, its work remains an important aspect of the
transitional process that should not be obstructed on the
pretext of procedural challenges. We know that the real
issue is a lack of trust. Enhanced confidence-building
measures will therefore be necessary if substantive
progress is to be made in subsequent sessions. We
support the early convening of the seventh session, with
a clear and mutually agreed strategy for the drafting
phase, at least in those areas of commonality identified
in previous sessions.
Thirdly, Ghana welcomes the approach to make
women part of the solution to the conflict in Syria,
noting that women account for nearly 30 per cent of
12/20

26/01/2022

the participants of the Constitutional Committee.
The Special Envoy’s consultations in Geneva with
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board must also be
sustained as part of the measures to involve women in
the wider political process. We equally advocate for the
participation of young people and civil society in order
to ensure an inclusive and durable solution.
Finally, we call for an end to the persistent human
rights violations and abuses and highlight the need to
address the issues of forced disappearances and the
arbitrary detention of persons, including children, in
violation of international law.
In conclusion, I would like to appeal for a united
front in the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
which embodies the Council’s collective objective of
supporting a just and lasting peace in Syria.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): We would like to thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Thuraya Hijazi for their briefings
this afternoon.
As we begin another year of monthly deliberations
on the political situation in Syria, the need for progress
that can deliver a long-desired peace to the Syrian
people is more compelling and urgent than ever. As
we have said before, there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria. I therefore reaffirm Kenya’s
solidarity with the people of Syria in their quest for
peace, which we believe can be achieved only through
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political dialogue, with
the support of the international community.
The Constitutional Committee’s achievement of
meaningful progress is a crucial key to unlocking the
political track. While we commend the Special Envoy’s
continued engagement in Damascus, we regret the
lack of agreement on the methodology for convening
a seventh round of consultations of the Constitutional
Committee. Kenya reiterates its plea to the parties to
agree to that undertaking and engage meaningfully
and constructively in the interests of the millions of
Syrians who are counting on their leadership to achieve
a brighter future.
We take particular note of the Special Envoy’s
transactional diplomacy approach, aimed at identifying
and agreeing on incremental, reciprocal, mutual,
precise and verifiable steps, in parallel with the efforts
of the Constitutional Committee. We think it can truly
build the trust and confidence that is needed to move
the political process forward. There is also a need for
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the relevant regional and international stakeholders to
do more within the context of resolution 2254 (2015),
with a special focus on the missing persons and
detainees file, early recovery activities, addressing
socioeconomic conditions and mitigating the effects
of sanctions.
All regional and global actors in Syria must also
engage in a coordinated manner so as to contribute
positively to the political process in their pursuit
of peace, stability and economic development. We
once again commend the Special Envoy’s continued
engagements with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board,
including in the meeting that is currently under way in
Norway. That demonstrates a commitment to ensuring
the equal representation of women in the political
process, as well as addressing the needs of the multitude
of Syrian women that the Advisory Board represents. In
that regard, we particularly encourage the inclusion of
economic and social empowerment programmes that
target women, refugees, internally displaced persons
and those in need of humanitarian assistance.
On the security front, the air strikes that continue
to be reported in north-western Syria, as well as the
attacks using improvised explosive devices in Afrin
and Dara’a, are endangering many people’s lives, which
is deeply concerning. We condemn those incidents,
including the recent attack on a prison, which has
claimed several lives and left many people injured. It
is imperative to have accountability for the crimes and
violations perpetrated against innocent people. As the
recent attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) have shown us, concerted and urgent action
against Security Council-listed terrorist groups such as
ISIL and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is more crucial than
ever. Kenya calls for robust collective action to combat
such groups. In conclusion, we call on all stakeholders
to focus on the interests of the Syrian people.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing today.
I also thank Ms. Thuraya Hijazi for bringing a civilsociety perspective to this meeting.
The Special Envoy briefed us in detail about
his recent efforts to engage proactively with all the
stakeholders, including Damascus. We welcome his
recent visits to Tehran and Doha, the participation of
his Office in the Astana process and his consultations
with France, Germany, Russia, Turkey, the United
States, the United Kingdom, the League of Arab States

S/PV. 8955

and the European Union. We support his step-for-step
approach and hope that his efforts will soon bear fruit
and culminate in a seventh round of Constitutional
Committee negotiations and further progress towards the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We continue
to underline the critical importance of building mutual
trust among all the parties, including external players.
The recent diplomatic engagement between Damascus
and other capitals in the region is reassuring. We
welcome the decisions by the United Arab Emirates and
Bahrain to move towards a normalization of diplomatic
ties by reopening their embassies in Damascus. We
also welcome the decision by the Organization of Arab
Petroleum Exporting Countries to designate Damascus
as the host of the 2024 Arab Energy Conference.
India has reiterated since the beginning of the
conflict in Syria that imposing external solutions
cannot help to resolve it. It is up to the Syrians to
decide what is best for Syria and for their future. The
involvement of external players in the conflict, which
has lasted for more than a decade, has adversely affected
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Regarding
confidence-building measures, we welcome the efforts
of the Syrian authorities to prioritize the return of
displaced Syrians to their respective areas of origin.
On the security front, we remain concerned about
the overall situation in Syria, including the increasing
number of ceasefire violations in north-west Syria.
We call on all sides to refrain from taking any action,
including military provocations such as missile strikes,
that could lead to violence and disturbances in Syria.
Furthermore, the growing influence of terrorist groups
in camps for internally displaced persons such as
Al-Rukban and Al-Hol should be urgently addressed.
Groups designated by the United Nations as
terrorists, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham have,
as mentioned in recent reports of the Secretary-General,
continued to gain in strength in Syria. Da’esh has also
intensified its activities, which is evident from attack
on the prison in Al-Hasakah last week. The attack by
Da’esh in Iraq also indicates the strengthening of this
terrorist group in the region. We strongly condemn
these attacks and reiterate that the global fight against
terrorism cannot and should not be compromised for
narrow political gains.
The re-emergence of ISIL/Da’esh in Syria and Iraq
calls for urgent action by the international community.

22-2399913/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

Terrorists cannot be defeated by forming alliances
with non-sovereign entities or groups. In fact, such
a skewed approach will be counterproductive to our
collective efforts.
As the Syrian conflict enters its twelfth year this
March, the sufferings of the Syrian people continue
to multiply many times over. The support of the
international community to address the humanitarian
challenges therefore remains integral to the success
of the political process. For our part, India stands
ready to support the friendly people of Syria by any
means possible, as we have continued to do since this
conflict first began. Let me conclude by reaffirming
India’s commitment to a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
United Nations-facilitated political process in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank
Mr. Geir Pedersen for his update and for his tireless
work, including his extensive engagement with
Damascus. We really appreciate that. I also wish to
thank Ms. Thuraya Hijazi for her eloquent and moving
briefing earlier, which reminded us of the terrible plight
of so many, especially women and children, who are
caught up in this awful conflict. She also reminded us
about the need for women to have a place at the table so
that politics works, and justice is achieved.
We also commend Mr. Pedersen for his ongoing
engagement with the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board. It is essential that the inclusion and meaningful
participation of women activists, peacebuilders and
human rights defenders, like Thuraya, be prioritized.
I want to note, of course, that an advisory role is not
really what we need. We want to make sure that there
are substantive and direct opportunities for women’s
participation. We want to see women at the table in the
room where the political negotiations are happening.
Ireland reiterates its call on the Syrian authorities
to engage meaningfully with the Constitutional
Committee. Such engagement is essential to ensuring
political progress in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
As Mr. Pedersen heard on Monday in Brussels, Ireland
and our European Union partners have taken positive
note of his ideas on “steps for steps”, and we are all
looking forward to further engagement. However, it is
also essential that Damascus engage with his efforts.
We strongly condemn the recent Da’esh attack in
Al-Hasakah city and are appalled at reports of civilians
14/20

26/01/2022

among the dead. The international community must
remain committed to ensuring Da’esh’s lasting defeat.
We are also gravely concerned about the continued
uptick in violent incidents in the north-west. The
targeting of civilians resulting in high civilian
casualties, including innocent children, is utterly
reprehensible. Let us be clear in this regard: intentional
attacks against civilians are war crimes. In the first four
days of January alone, UNICEF reported the killing of
two children and the injury of five others near Idlib. We
call on all parties to adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian law, to respect international
human rights law and to take definitive measures to
prevent child casualties.
Accountability for these attacks, and for all crimes
committed in Syria, is essential for peace. Justice is
the right of every victim and every survivor. Ireland
welcomes the conclusion of proceedings against a
former Syrian intelligence officer in the Koblenz
Higher Regional Court, which found him guilty
of crimes against humanity and sentenced him to
life imprisonment.
We commend Germany and other States that have
taken domestic action to prosecute war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Syria. Much
more remains to be done to help the Syrian people
realize the justice to which they are entitled. Ireland
strongly supports all efforts to this end, including the
work of the Commission of Inquiry on Syria and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
We call on the parties to end the abuse of returnees
and urge refugee-hosting countries to respect their
obligations under refugee law, including the principle
of non-refoulement. Syria does not yet offer a safe
environment for refugee returns, and I recall in
this regard that all returns must be safe, voluntary
and dignified.
We are gravely concerned about the tens of
thousands of people in Syria who have been unlawfully
detained and forcibly disappeared. The cruel suffering
endured by the families of the missing and forcibly
disappeared persons continues. Ireland recalls that
arbitrary detention was a key driver of the protests in
2011, and we once more call on all parties, particularly
the Syrian Government, to unilaterally release
the unlawfully detained and clarify the fate and
whereabouts of missing persons.
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

As we begin a new year, it is essential that the
Security Council redouble its efforts to support
Mr. Pedersen in his work as Special Envoy. We have
a collective responsibility in this regard to work to
ensure substantive and meaningful progress towards an
inclusive political solution in Syria. We will certainly
play our part in the Security Council to help in the
delivery of the long-awaited peace that the Syrian
people so desperately need.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing on the situation on the
ground. I also thank Ms. Hijazi for her briefing. The
delegation of Brazil welcomes the delegations of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the Islamic Republic
of Iran to today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8955

in Geneva should bring about long-awaited concrete
results.
Brazil reiterates the Secretary-General’s call for
a national ceasefire in order to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian population and condemns the use of
terrorism and all forms of violence against civilians.
We once again call on all parties to refrain from
harming civilians and to comply with international
humanitarian law.
The growing and continuous presence of terrorist
groups on Syrian territory is particularly worrisome.
Brazil echoes UNICEF’s call on all parties in Syria to
keep children out of harm’s way and protect them at
all times.

It is discouraging to hear from the briefers that there
still appears to be no signs of relief for the suffering of
the Syrian people, that there appears to be no light at the
end of the tunnel, that there is no political horizon after
so many years of conflict. Continuous violence, acute
economic crisis with escalating hunger, systematic
human rights violations and a stalled peace process
configures, in the words of Special Envoy Pedersen, an
unacceptable status quo.

As a bitter winter worsens the already terrible
situation of people living in camps and informal
settlements across Syria, the continuous flow of
life-saving international aid should continue. In
addition, humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions
must be observed so as to ensure that they do not
undermine access to food, shelter and essential health
supplies for those most in need during this particularly
harsh winter.

Brazil remains convinced that only a Syrianowned and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated
political process, with due regard for the preservation
of Syria`s territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace
and alleviate the suffering of the Syrian population.
We agree with the Special Envoy that the strategic
impasse on the ground strengthens the assumption that
a military solution remains elusive and deleterious for
Syria’s future.

In 2022, let us not only hope, but also work hard
towards a favourable political outcome to Syria in order
to bring about the peace, stability and reconciliation so
desired by the Syrian people.

Brazil congratulates the Special Envoy for his
wide-ranging outreach efforts aimed at re-engaging
key stakeholders in order to try to find a way out of the
current stalemate in the political process. Resolution
2254 (2015) provides a road map that could restore
Syria’s unity and sovereignty. We are closely following
the idea of new incremental, reciprocal, realistic
and verifiable steps of both a political and economic
character to try to build trust and confidence and help
to move the political process forward.
In that regard, Brazil urges the members of the
Constitutional Committee to bridge their differences
and engage seriously in drafting a new constitution
that is conducive to peace, stability and reconciliation.
The next meeting of the Constitutional Committee

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
Let me start by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen
for his briefing. We appreciate his and his team’s
tireless efforts to seek a political solution in Syria. I
also wish to thank Ms. Thuraya Hijazi for her important
words here today.
Let me express our sincere hope that 2022 will bring
with it advancement in the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), including a nationwide ceasefire. However,
for that to happen, it is necessary for both the Syrian
parties and us, the international community, to do more
to move past this strategic stalemate.
We already have the framework for a political
solution agreed by consensus in the Security Council.
Now more must be done to implement it. Norway
urges all actors involved in the conflict to contribute
constructively and in good faith and to take concrete
steps to move forward on the political track. Let me

22-2399915/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

also take this opportunity to reiterate Norway’s support
for Special Envoy Pedersen, including his recent efforts
to further the “step-for-step” approach and his efforts
to seek progress in the work of the Constitutional
Committee. We must all contribute to the process by
identifying steps that can lend the political process new
momentum and make genuine progress for the sake
of the Syrian people, their neighbours and the larger
international community.
A sustainable end to the conflict in Syria requires
including, and hearing from, all relevant parties. That
includes the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in all aspects of the peace and security agenda
and the prioritization of women’s direct participation in
formal mechanisms. We thank Ms. Hijazi for reminding
the Council of the importance of that today.
Let me also emphasize the important work and role
of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board in bringing a
diversity of Syrian women’s voices into the political
process and into the work of the Special Envoy. Norway
is pleased to support them.
The prison attack in Al-Hasakah on 20 January is
one of the largest coordinated actions by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) since the terrorist
group was declared territorially defeated in Syria in
2019. That shows all too clearly that ISIL is still active,
capable and a threat that we must continue to fight. We
are concerned that the lack of a political solution to the
Syria crisis gives further room for ISIL to grow.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned by the
situation for civilians in Al-Hasakah. It is highly
concerning that a large number of boys reportedly
have been exposed to — or even injured or
killed — fighting between ISIL and the Kurdish-led
Syrian Democratic Forces.
Let me conclude today by reiterating Norway’s
continued commitment to finding an inclusive, Syrianowned and -led, political solution, as well as addressing
the humanitarian, economic and security situation on
the ground. Issues like the release of detainees, the safe
and dignified return of refugees, combating terrorism
and ensuring inclusive political reform are central to
bringing the long tragedy and suffering of the Syrian
people to an end.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
16/20

26/01/2022

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Security Council is holding a meeting
today to discuss the political situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, and tomorrow the Council will hold
another meeting on the humanitarian situation. A few
days ago, the Council held a meeting on the situation
in the Middle East (see S/PV.8946) during which some
also tackled, in a selective and biased manner, the
situation in Syria. In addition, at the beginning of every
month, the Council holds a meeting on the so-called
“chemical dossier”.
That raises the question: does the Council really
discuss the situation in Syria during these monthly
meetings, or have they become just a platform for
some countries to repeat unfounded allegations and
accusations against the Syrian Government in an
attempt to tarnish its image?
What does it mean that the Council holds all of
these meetings and does not hold a single emergency
meeting to condemn the repeated Israeli acts of
aggression against Syria’s sovereignty, or to condemn
the practices of the occupation forces of the United
States and Turkey? Why does the Council not adopt a
presidential statement or a press statement to clearly
and unequivocally condemn all those violations of
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations? Do all of those repeated, gross
and continuing violations for years not warrant a
single Council meeting to prove to the Syrian people
and the world public opinion that it is shouldering its
responsibility, in line with the Charter, and that it is
taking seriously those grave threats to international and
regional peace and security?
What happened, and continues to happen, in the city
of Al-Hasakah requires the immediate attention of the
Security Council in order to look into the repercussions
of those dangerous incidents as a result of the crimes
committed by the Da’esh terrorist organization and the
separatist Kassad militia, as well as the United States
occupation forces. Those dangerous incidents are
also a result of the insistence of the Governments of
certain countries not to shoulder their responsibilities
to repatriate their own citizen foreign terrorist fighters
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and their families held in camps and detention centres in
north-east Syria, and then to prosecute and rehabilitate
them on their own territories in order to finally
remove them from Syrian territory and terminate the
illegitimate presence of United States occupation forces
on Syrian soil.
My delegation stresses that any discussion of my
country’s situation will be limited and a waste of time
and effort as long as the attempts of certain Western
countries continue to cover up the fundamental
challenges facing Syria and ignore the aggressive
practices that exacerbate the situation and lead to
catastrophic consequences for the lives of each Syrian.
We listened to the briefing delivered by Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and the statements delivered
by the representatives of the Member States of the
Council. We would like to stress that the Syrian Arab
Republic is committed to a political solution based on
an intra-Syrian national dialogue that is Syrian-led and
-owned and meets the aspirations of the Syrian people
and ensures full commitment to Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
The Syrian Government has therefore facilitated the
launching of the work of the Constitutional Committee,
and it follows it with great interest, although it is aware
of the obstructive role of the Turkish regime and its
representatives as well as certain Western countries that
have no interest in the success of the Committee’s work.
Syria stresses the need for the Special Envoy to abide
by his role as a facilitator and work on implementing
the provisions of the terms of reference agreed by the
parties, without interfering in the substantive dialogue
among the members of the Committee. He should
objectively and neutrally report on developments.
Syria looks forward to the seventh session of the
Constitutional Committee and commends the positive
and constructive engagement of the national delegation
during the previous six sessions, as well as its proposals,
which reflect the aspirations of the Syrian people. In
addition, we underscore that we reject all forms of
foreign interference in the work of the Committee,
or any attempt to obstruct it, or to impose artificial
timelines, or predetermined outcomes, or bypass the
provisions of the agreed terms of reference, under
any pretext.
The Syrian Arab Republic stresses that it is
unacceptable to continue to disregard the grave

S/PV. 8955

violations of its sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, which have been assured in all
relevant Security Council resolutions, or to turn a blind
eye to the major challenges related to the improvement
of the humanitarian situation of the Syrian people
caused by unilateral coercive measures imposed on
them, which are diametrically opposed to their interests,
for whom others assert they care.
Syria also emphasizes that the Security Council
must act firmly and swiftly to do the following.
First, it must ensure respect for its resolutions and
other United Nations resolutions on the occupied Syrian
Golan and ensure their implementation to end the Israeli
occupation of the Golan and counter Israeli plans to
build thousands of new settlement units therein and
double the number of settlers in the Golan. The Council
must compel Israel — the occupying Power — to end
its repetitive hysterical acts of aggression against the
territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and hold it
accountable for them.
Secondly, it must end the Turkish occupation of
Syrian territories in the north and north-west parts of
the country and stop the Turkish regime’s crimes and
practices, which are based on sponsoring terrorism,
spreading chaos and destruction, Turkinization, forced
migration, demographic alteration, looting economic
resources and property and the use of potable water as
a tool of war against millions of Syrians, for which they
must be held accountable.
Thirdly, it must end the illegitimate presence of
the United States forces in the north-east and southwest parts of Syria, condemn their sponsoring of the
separatist Kassad militia or other terrorist entities,
such as Maghawir Al-Thawra, in Al-Tanf and Rukban
camps. They must stop the looting and smuggling of
national treasures, especially given what we have seen
in Al-Hasakah governorate over the past few days,
namely, the attack by Da’esh terrorists, the Kassad
massacres of innocent victims and the massive barbaric
destruction of infrastructure by the occupying United
States Air Force, which resulted in many civilian
deaths. It also forced thousands of families to leave
their homes and seek safe haven. All of those actions
are United States attempts to recycle the terrorist
Da’esh organization and create a pretext for the United
States forces to remain in the region, especially given
the increase in domestic and international demands for
them to leave the Syrian territories.

22-2399917/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

Fourthly, it must end the economic terrorist policies
and collective punishment through the inhumane,
illegitimate and immoral unilateral measures imposed
by the United States and the European Union on the
Syrian people. They have had a catastrophic impact
on every aspect of Syrians’ daily lives, especially with
the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
extreme climate change, which has been compounded
by drought, the lack of rain and extreme cold weather
this winter
Fifthly, it must implement and ensure respect of
all its counter-terrorism resolutions and support the
efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to eradicate
the vestiges of terrorist groups in Syria, such as Da’esh
and the Al-Nusra Front/Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, and
hold countries that sponsor such terrorist organizations
accountable for the violations and for any drop of blood
that was shed by those terrorist organizations.
In conclusion, the responsibility of the Security
Council to maintain international peace and security
requires it to act swiftly to counter any violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and deter any violation
of its resolutions. It must address the issues that come
under its consideration objectively and with neutrality,
including preventing its use by some countries as a
platform to target other United Nations States Members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We speak often in this
Chamber of the need to tackle the root cause of a
conflict. The fact is that the root cause of the crisis
in Syria was political. The Syrian people have been
deprived of their basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms. They have known injustice for decades —
the injustice of not having the protection of a proper
constitution. The conflict emerged when the Syrian
people overcame fear and sought democratic rights,
freedoms and a democratic constitution. We cannot
pretend that, were hostilities to cease, the Syrian people
would be happy to return to the pre-conflict status quo.
The root cause of the conflict remains, which is the
restriction of fundamental rights and freedoms by the
Al-Assad regime.
We speak of accountability in this Chamber. We
therefore must remain accountable to the Syrian
people. Yet there are some who wish to normalize
relations with the regime, when instead we must
normalize the implementation of the universal human
18/20

26/01/2022

rights afforded to the people of Syria. We know that
the only way that that will happen is by advancing the
political process through the Constitutional Committee,
thereby achieving a political settlement in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015). In accordance with that
approach, we held the seventeenth international meeting
on Syria in the Astana format.
We support and appreciate efforts by Special Envoy
Pedersen, which we hope will lead to the success of
the Constitutional Committee. Yet, so far, we have not
seen any goodwill on the part of the regime. It is clear
that they intend to stall the process until they kill the
opposition on the ground. The regime’s attacks in Idlib
specifically target civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Strikes destroyed the Al-Arshani pumping station,
which serves as a water source for almost one quarter
of a million people. A recent targeted attack on a farm
is yet another example of violence perpetrated by the
regime. Those attacks have become commonplace, but
that does not make them any less heinous. They are
grave violations of international humanitarian law.
Some actors in the region have misguidedly tied
their hopes of eradicating Da’esh to another terrorist
organization — the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/ People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG). We have consistently
warned the international community about that
terrorist organization. On numerous occasions, we
have expressed our concerns that members of Da’esh
are being released in exchange for bribes, which will
only aid in its resurgence. The recent prison break
and subsequent clashes demonstrated once again
the impotence and unreliability of the PKK/YPGdominated Syrian Democratic Forces.
Let us also briefly address the acts of aggression
by the PKK/YPG for the sake of the Council. More
than 350 civilians died last year during terror attacks
by the PKK/YPG. They attacked Al-Shifa hospital in
Afrin. They recruited child soldiers. They prevented
civilians from returning to their homes, including
Kurds and Yazidis. They violently suppressed peaceful
civilian protests. They arrested Arabic teachers.
Those acts and atrocities are well documented
in the reports of international organizations and
non-governmental agencies.
Most recently, last Thursday, seven civilians, five
of whom were children, were killed, and 30 civilians
were injured by rocket fire from the terror group. We
assure the Council that all terrorist organizations, be
22-23999

26/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

they PKK/YPG or Da’esh, will pay for the atrocities
they commit. Turkey will never tolerate any terrorist
organization. No terrorist organization will find safe
haven along our borders.
In order to establish a lasting political solution in
Syria, there should be no support from the international
community to the regime or to the terror organizations.
The world entrusted the permanent members of the
Council to maintain world peace, to uphold the Charter
of the United Nations and to protect the people we have
pledged to serve. We have elected the non-permanent
members to do the same. Unfortunately, so far, the
Security Council has failed the Syrian people. We
implore all members of the Council to act now and save
the people of Syria and their future.
We will not honour the lies and baseless allegations
of the Syrian regime with a response. Their presence
here is an affront to the Syrians that lost their lives at
the hands of the regime.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
During 2021, Syria witnessed a relatively calm
military situation and a gradual return of refugees and
displaced persons. At the same time, Syria’s bilateral
relations with some countries have improved. Likewise,
the convening of the fifth and sixth meetings of the
Constitutional Committee, despite the challenges,
have raised hopes for the convergence of views among
the parties.
Despite such significant developments, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria continue
to be seriously violated, either through the occupation
or by the aggressions of the Israeli regime and terrorist
activities. As such, the sufferings of the Syrian
people resulting from occupation and aggression,
as well as the imposition of unlawful and inhumane
sanctions, continue.
The Syrian crisis has no military solution and
cannot come to an end without bringing its occupation
to an end, restoring its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and confronting the threat of terrorism. To that
end, all occupying and uninvited foreign forces must
leave Syria without any precondition or further delay.
Additionally, the Council must strongly condemn
the holding of the recent provocative meeting of the
Israeli Cabinet in the occupied Syrian Golan and its

S/PV. 8955

stated intent to build two new settlements there. The
Council must compel the Israeli regime to end the
occupation of the Syrian Golan. As has recently been
stated by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, any
actions aimed at changing the legal and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan are null and void
and have no legal effect.
Moreover, the guarantors of the Astana format, in
a joint statement following their meeting in December,
condemned continuing Israeli military attacks in
Syria, which violate international law, international
humanitarian law and the sovereignty of Syria and
neighbouring countries, as well as endangering stability
and security in the region, and called for their cessation.
They also considered the abuses of civil aircraft by
the Israeli regime as a cover for its aggressions on
Syrian territory to be a stark violation of international
regulations, endangering the lives of civilians.
On the political track, as was conveyed to
Mr. Pedersen during his recent visit to Tehran, Iran
supports his ongoing efforts aimed at holding the
Constitutional Committee’s next meeting soon. We
emphasize again that the Committee must work in
full accordance with its terms of reference and rules
of procedure, without any external interference or
pressure and without setting any artificial deadline for
its work or any other conditions of a similar nature.
Ultimately, it must be a truly Syrian-led and Syrianowned effort and the role of the United Nations must be
exclusively to facilitate that process.
Iran will continue to make its serious contribution
to the efforts related to the release of detainees and, in
that regard, urges all parties to cooperate towards the
realization of that noble humanitarian endeavour. The
unanimous adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) last year
was an important development. The resolution must
be implemented fully, effectively and in a balanced
manner, particularly with respect to the early recovery
projects and the removal of unilateral sanctions. We
once again reject separatist activities and illegitimate
self-rule initiatives in Syria, and condemn any effort to
support those illegal measures.
The Syrian crisis must be settled peacefully and
in accordance with the principles of international
law, particularly the principle of full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. The
Islamic Republic of Iran continues to support the

22-2399919/20

S/PV.8955

The situation in the Middle East

Government and people of Syria in their efforts to
restore the unity and territorial integrity of their country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting

20/20

26/01/2022

so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-23999
