asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6842

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6842nd meeting
Wednesday, 3 October 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Caballeros/Mr. Briz Gutiérrez/Mr. Rosenthal . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Sun Xiaobo
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Andrabi
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2012/678)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-52809 (E)

*1252809*

S/PV.6842

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first Council meeting for the month of October 2012,
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Peter Wittig, Permanent Representative of Germany, for
his work as President of the Council during September.
I am sure that I speak for all Council members in
expressing my thanks to Ambassador Wittig and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2012/678)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Ecuador, Haiti, Japan, Mexico,
Peru, Spain and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mariano
Fernández Amunátegui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/678, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fernández Amunátegui.
Mr. Fernández Amunátegui (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to convey my sincere thanks to you, Sir,

2

I would like to begin with a special thanks to all those
countries contributing troops and police to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and all the Member States that have collaborated in the
process of stabilization and reconstruction and provided
valuable support to peacebuilding in Haiti.
On 8 March, when I had the opportunity to review
the political situation in Haiti, I noted that MINUSTAH
had insisted on a governance pact, which is improving
the situation and facilitating consensus for Haiti’s
development. While progress has been slow, we can
confirm that clear steps forward have been taken in the
political stabilization process and progress has been
made with regard to rule of law institutions.

Adoption of the agenda

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

and the other members of the Security Council for
having organized this meeting, the purpose of which
is to present to the Council the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2012/678). I also take
this opportunity to welcome the presence of the Haitian
Ambassador.

On 19 June, President Martelly issued amendments
to the Political Constitution approved at the end of
President Préval’s term, providing for, among other
things, the establishment of a Constitutional Council;
a minimum quota of 30 per cent for women in public
institutions, especially public services; streamlining
of the appointment of the Prime Minister; and the
legalization of multiple citizenship as a positive gesture
towards the hundreds of thousands of Haitians currently
living in different parts of the world and contributing to
the present and future of Haiti, in particular through
remittances, which currently total approximately
$2 billion per year.
Moreover, the establishment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary, approved by law seven years
ago, which oversees the transparency and independence
of the judiciary, is another indication of the progress
currently being made in Haiti in terms of the rule of
law and of the political will of the Haitian authorities to
strengthen democracy and its institutions, given that the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
allows for the establishment of the Permanent Electoral
Council, an essential body for the holding of elections
in line with the provisions of the reformed Constitution.
Making the Office of the Ombudsman an official
body and the appointment of a Minister for Human
Rights and the Fight against Extreme Poverty are

12-52809

S/PV.6842

further proof of the hard work of the Government in
the areas of the rule of law and the protection of human
rights and the dividends that it is paying.
The confirmation by Parliament in May of
Prime Minster Laurent Lamothe and his programme
focused on the five priorities of President Martelly’s
Government — employment, the rule of law,
environment, energy and education — are evidence
of harmony and collaboration between the President
and the Prime Minister, which are crucial for Haiti
and its stability. The appointment of women to seven
ministerial posts in a Cabinet of 22 further reflects
the will of the President to apply the provisions of
the reformed Constitution. Such will has also been
reflected in various statements he has made, intended
to ensure that future elections are carried out as soon
as possible and with the greatest possible transparency.
Furthermore, commendable work has been done by the
Prime Minister to attract investment, fight corruption
and smuggling, and promote industrial job creation
projects, which are essential steps for Haiti’s economic
recovery.
An exceptional situation in Haitian political life is
currently being played out in that the Senate, which is
theoretically made up of 30 members, today has only
20 members as a result of the legal provision that terms
automatically expire after six years with or without
elections and that it is renewed by thirds every two years
; yet the quorum for its operation and voting continues
to assume a Senate of 30 members. That continues to
distort political life, with negative consequences for the
democratic stabilization process in Haiti
In addition, there is at present a serious impasse
in the formation of the Permanent Electoral Council.
According to constitutional provisions, this body, which
is responsible for organizing all elections in Haiti,
should be composed of nine persons, three appointed
by each of the powers of the State respectively. The
appointments by the Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the Executive did not comply with article 17.1 of
the Constitution, on positive discrimination in favour
of women, which mandates a representation of women
in all public services of at least 30 per cent, as I already
mentioned. Furthermore, the current situation in the
Senate I have just described makes it almost impossible
for the legislative power to reach agreement on its three
nominees to the Permanent Electoral Council.
The formation of an electoral body of nine members
in accordance with the stipulations of the Constitution
12-52809

is an unavoidable prerequisite for any elections; its
establishment will determine how soon the pending
elections can be held to renew a third of the Senate as
well as to elect all municipal mayors and councillors.
That is why MINUSTAH is currently working in
coordination with the international community to
promote dialogue and prepare the way for the soonest
possible establishment of a Permanent Electoral
Council that is legitimate and legal and that enjoys the
broadest possible support.
While we can describe the security situation in
Haiti as stable, it has the fragility inherent to a society
in the process of being stabilized, characterized by
precarious socioeconomic indicators and extreme
poverty affecting a large portion of the country.
In this respect, I would add that the information
I presented in March on issues including poverty,
illiteracy, education and the diaspora have practically
not changed. In practice, political violence has
disappeared. There has also been a considerable drop
in the number of kidnappings. Although murders are
on the rise, Haiti still has one of the lowest per capita
murder rates in the Caribbean and Central America, and
those murders are linked to gang activity and rivalries.
However, it has been very difficult to fight domestic
violence and the abuse of women.
In a positive development during the month of May,
Haitian authorities put an end to the illegal activities
of a group of individuals linked to former members
of the armed forces that were dissolved in 1995. They
had occupied for some weeks public buildings and
headquarters, calling for the re-establishment of the
army and the payment of pensions. The President
condemned the illegal occupations and called for public
order. He also reiterated the fact that his current priority
is to strengthen the Haitian National Police. The police,
with the support of MINUSTAH, was thus able to evict
the illegal occupiers from the 10 sites. Apparently, this
matter is no longer an issue of concern for the public,
and the Government has started, very practically, to
train border police, coast guards and military engineers
to work on infrastructure projects.
From the very beginning, MINUSTAH and the
international community recognized the sovereign
power of Haiti and its right to establish an army or
restore the armed forces dissolved in 1995. However,
with the same clarity, the Government and the public
have been told that any establishment of forces of that
kind should not be to the detriment of the development,
3

S/PV.6842

strengthening and professionalization of the police.
It has also been indicated that the international
community sees other important development priorities
for Haiti, which should be a priority over any potential
restoration of the armed forces.
The police force has continued to evolve. On
30 August, Godson Orelus was appointed Director
General ad interim of the police for a three-year period.
In the same fashion, the Superior Council of the Haitian
National Police endorsed a plan for 2012-2016 for the
police, which, among other goals, states that by 2016
there will be a police force made up of more than 15,000
police officers. That task will call for the training of
at least 5,000 new officials, or 1,200 a year until the
end of President Martelly’s term. That represents an
unprecedented and considerable training effort, and
consequently also a significant and unprecedented
budgetary effort for the Haitian Government.
In terms of the police, the good news is that, after
three months, the decision to dismiss 79 high officers
with a history of crime and corruption from the force
became effective. That serves to improve the credibility
of the main security body in Haiti.
The strengthening of the Haitian National Police
is the highest priority for MINUSTAH, both because
of what it means for consolidating the rule of law
and improving security and because it makes it
possible for a responsible conclusion of the Mission.
In that, in accordance with resolution 2012 (2011),
MINUSTAH has reduced its numbers. As mentioned
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 50 of his report,
given the progress in this area, he recommends that
the Security Council consider a reduction from 7,340
to 6,270 troops and from 3,241 to 2,601 police, with a
consequent drop in civilian personnel, in accordance
with the reduced scope of MINUSTAH’s activities.
Given the Secretary-General’s proposal, the
Mission, together with the United Nations country
team, has consulted the Government of Haiti on a
consolidation and reconfiguration plan for MINUSTAH
in accordance with the suggested reductions proposed
to the Security Council. The plan, which is in a working
phase at the moment, has as its primary goal making
it possible for the Mission to fully carry out its task,
thereby concluding its activities in Haiti. Among the
main consolidation measures are the reduction of
military personnel in five departments. They will be
replaced by police officers. In those departments, the
civilian representation of MINUSTAH will be decreased
4

to an operational minimum. We plan to progressively
apply this model in the coming period to facilitate the
concentration and reduction of MINUSTAH’s activities
in a rational fashion. Barring unforeseen contingencies,
we are heading towards a final state of the Mission at a
foreseeable point in time.
Furthermore, events linked with sporadic and
isolated protests by the sectors of the population that
are most threatened by the fragile socioeconomic
situation in the country highlight the fact that peace
and security will be very fragile without economic and
social development measures, which generate hope for
the future in the population. We are already seeing this
in different areas such as Cap-Haïtien and Les Cayes.
On human rights and humanitarian and correctional
affairs, the Government’s efforts and international
cooperation have made it possible to reduce the number
of inhabitants of internally displaced person camps to
390,000. That is a remarkable effort, since it has reduced
these numbers by 73 per cent. After the earthquake, the
figure was 1.5 million people. However, the situation
has deteriorated, as work by international organizations
and non-governmental organizations has been curtailed
due to the lack of financing. At the current pace, by
the end of 2012 there will still be over 250,000 people
living in camps for internally displaced persons. We
therefore encourage organizations and Governments
to cooperate in order to enable people to promptly and
satisfactorily return to their places of origin or relocate
to new areas that will welcome them on a permanent
basis.
Tropical storm Isaac, although it struck only in the
south of Haiti, showed the fragile day-to-day reality of
the Haitian people, as the loss of crops in that area and
the paradoxical drought in other regions have caused
a reappearance of hunger. Although hunger had not
completely disappeared from the Haitian landscape,
it had almost completely disappeared as a social and
humanitarian problem. I must note that the response
of the Haitian Government to this national emergency,
together with the United Nations, and its response to
the difficult food situation was appropriate and took the
longer view, as shown in its appropriate coordination
with humanitarian actors and the United Nations
system, which made it possible to mitigate the crisis
and prepare for new emergencies.
Haiti continues to face serious challenges, especially
with regard to the cholera epidemic, which is hanging
over thousands of people every time the weather or
12-52809

S/PV.6842

social conditions worsen. Although it is true that there
has not been a severe resurgence of the disease, there
are continuous cases with fatal consequences. Cholera
affects the entire island of Hispaniola, and we are
therefore working on a plan to intensify prevention,
fight the disease better and engage in all possible
efforts to mitigate its effects.
Among the many people living under difficult
conditions in Haiti are those in prolonged detention,
which are really illegal detentions. We have worked
together with the Ministry of Justice, and we will
quickly conduct concerted efforts in order to reduce
and, if possible, put an end to this phenomenon, which
is a serious violation of the human rights of hundreds of
Haitian citizens.
Most youth in Haiti do not have access to
professional training because of economic reasons.
That predisposes them to social exclusion and makes
them a vulnerable population. They do not have the
option of responding tomorrow to a State based on the
rule of law or of fulfilling their social responsibilities,
thereby fulfilling their own economic needs or those
of their families. In order to counteract this vicious
circle, strengthen the rule of law and promote peace and
coexistence, MINUSTAH is supporting and financing
violence reduction programmes in communities. For
example, the Mission has supported 36 high-density
manpower projects, which are focused on working on
watersheds and urban infrastructure and rehabilitating
canals. Those projects have made it possible to offer
temporary jobs to 51,000 at-risk young people, of whom
30 per cent are women. The implementation of those
projects has also helped to mitigate flood risk, improve
urban sanitation in the wider community and present
the world of work as a valid option.
MINUSTAH has also devoted funding to quickimpact projects for earthquake-affected communities
and to projects that focus on public lighting, road
rehabilitation, local infrastructure such as multi-purpose
municipal institutions, rule-of-law infrastructure,
including peace courts, as well as education, including
schools and municipal and departmental public
institutions.
Finally, peace missions are the concrete expression
of a moral value, which makes them respectable on
all continents. Participation therein is an honour for
their personnel and for the countries whose nationals
are working to carry out the lofty task of achieving
peace and defending it wherever necessary. The
12-52809

Secretary-General has recalled that the first priority
is the reputation of the United Nations. It is for that
reason, inter alia, that in Haiti we have intensified our
zero-tolerance measures against abuse of all kinds,
especially the sexual abuse of minors.
After eight years of work, the peacebuilding
achievements registered by MINUSTAH in Haiti are
clear. However, in order to continue to make progress,
we must pursue our efforts to strengthen the rule of
law, which will make it possible to harmonize the peace
dividends achieved to date.
In the quest to devise mechanisms that will
strengthen those efforts, appropriate solutions should
be found to the current challenges facing Haiti. Finding
paths that facilitate dialogue and consensus among
Haitians will be a key factor in building a country that
can stand on its own and is equipped with democratic
institutions that are capable of providing appropriate
responses to the numerous challenges facing it now and
in future.
However, crucial economic and social challenges
remain for Haiti. I wish to reiterate that security, the rule
of law and economic and social development are three
interdependent concepts that are essential to enabling
Haiti to launch a process of renewal and consolidate a
lasting peace in the country. In the absence of tangible
progress that benefits the people in the areas of food,
employment, health, housing and the environment,
it could be difficult to maintain the current level of
security in that Caribbean nation, which is due in great
part to the contributions made by the international
community since 2004.
The time has come for public, private, national and
foreign investment. The time has come for projects to
be carried out that demonstrate that the economy is
moving forward and that Haiti and its people have a
future.
Here I should like to pay tribute to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, former President
Bill Clinton, for his ongoing efforts and initiatives
aimed at encouraging investment in Haiti. Of course,
these issues go far beyond the tasks and mandate of
MINUSTAH, but I feel I must make mention of the
situation, as this aspect is essential to the fulfilment of
the objectives of the Mission and the completion of the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council, so that
there will be no need to return to Haiti once again.

5

S/PV.6842

If efforts in the areas of the economy and
employment bear fruit, I anticipate a reconfiguration of
this peace Mission into a political mission of the United
Nations, with emphasis on the rule of law and human
rights as well as an advisory and monitoring component
on police work, by means of a mission embedded within
the Haitian National Police itself. I believe that this
would be the best possible final stage of the work of
MINUSTAH in Haiti.
The President: I thank Mr. Fernández Amunátegui
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala.
Allow me to deviate from past practice by taking
the floor at the beginning of our debate instead of
at the end. I am doing this because I consider it an
honour for Guatemala, as well as a personal honour for
myself, to preside over this first substantive meeting
of the Security Council during the month of October.
This is for us a historic event; this is the first time that
Guatemala has assumed the presidency of the Security
Council since the founding of the United Nations.
I did not want to wait until the end of the debate to
make mention of that fact. We are all the more pleased
given the topic of today’s debate: the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), above all because of Guatemala’s
commitment to Haiti.
As the Council is aware, the countries of our region
feel a sense of ownership regarding MINUSTAH.
Twelve Latin American countries contribute troops
and police; and the Force Commander has always
hailed from our region, as has, most of the time, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
are pleased that a Guatemalan, Edmond Mulet, has
in the past occupied this important post. We are also
pleased that our troops have been present in Haiti since
the establishment of the first Mission in 1993, and
continuously since the establishment of MINUSTAH.

First, we believe that the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/678) paints a promising picture. It
combines the required caution with the hope necessary
to continue moving forward. We congratulate Haiti on
the swearing in of a new Government, the publication of
the correction version of the constitutional amendments
and the establishment of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary. All of those achievements represent
important milestones in Haiti’s efforts to strengthen its
democratic and rule-of-law institutions.
We are also pleased that the establishment of the
Permanent Electoral Council is back on track after
some setbacks, and we trust that the electoral process
in Haiti will resume after delays of almost one year.
Secondly, Guatemala will remain committed to
Haiti and to United Nations peacekeeping operations
for as long as necessary. We support the MINUSTAH
reconfiguration and consolidation process. We look
forward to more details on this new consolidation plan.
Carrying it out will require intensive coordination
among a wide range of national and international
stakeholders, and it will be subject to various
development and implementation timelines.
With regard to security, we note that the level of
operational effectiveness of the Haitian National Police
will constitute the main benchmark in setting the pace
for the drawdown of the Mission’s uniformed personnel.
We fully support the development of a transition
compact that will make it possible to measure the
progress made in the stabilization process, going
beyond the work of MINUSTAH into the realms of
development and institution-building. In that respect,
we welcome the recent launch of the aid coordination
mechanism presented by the Haitian authorities last
week in New York at the beginning of the general
debate.

A few weeks ago, I had the privilege of making
a brief visit to our contingent of 137 personnel in
Port-au-Prince; I also took that opportunity to visit
MINUSTAH headquarters. This debate therefore has a
strong personal resonance for me, for my country, for
my region, and, of course, for the United Nations.

Thirdly, I would like in particular to commend the
work done by Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of MINUSTAH during a period marked by
difficulties and challenges. He has carried his work
forward in an outstanding manner, as evidenced
this morning by his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General. Guatemala will continue to support
his work.

In that regard, I would like to make just three brief
points.

In conclusion, I should like to stress that Guatemala
fully supports the international community’s efforts

6

12-52809

S/PV.6842

to assist Haiti in the reconstruction and strengthening
of its institutions through a permanent and strategic
partnership aimed at creating a better future for Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Fernández Amunátegui for his
briefing. Before I begin, I would like to congratulate
Guatemala on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the first time.
In February, the United States led a Security
Council mission to Haiti. The mission witnessed at first
hand the great strides that the Haitian people are making
in rebuilding their country following the devastating
earthquake. However, we also came away with serious
concerns, which we expressed at our debate in March
(see S/PV.6732).
At that time, political gridlock threatened Haiti’s
stability and progress. The Prime Minister had resigned
after only four months in office. Relations between
the executive and legislative branches of Government
had deteriorated. The appointment of key officials
and important constitutional amendments were
stalled. Election planning lagged. Both in Haiti and
in the Chamber, the Security Council called on Haiti’s
political leaders to set aside their disparate interests
and to come together for the sake of the nation.
Seven months later, Haiti’s future looks more
promising. As Secretary Clinton noted at the
ministerial-level meeting of Haiti’s partners last week,
the country is starting to move forward. Haiti’s political
leaders are showing a willingness to cooperate and to
put the Haitian people first. It is imperative that they
continue to do so.
On 14 May, the Haitian Parliament ratified the
appointment of a new Prime Minister. On 19 June,
President Martelly published a series of constitutional
amendments that strengthen democracy and the rule of
law in Haiti. Those amendments pave the way towards
an independent judiciary under the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and mandate the formation of the
Permanent Electoral Council (CEP). We look forward
to providing support to the Superior Council and to the
final establishment of the CEP so that the long-overdue
elections can proceed.
The Government of Haiti is also tackling gender
inequality with a new constitutional requirement

12-52809

that women hold at least 30 per cent of Government
positions. We welcome the possibility that many more
Haitian women will now be able to shape the future of
the country.
On security, the Government of Haiti has assumed
greater responsibility for supporting the Haitian
National Police (HNP) with increased financial
resources and a deeper commitment to security and
justice sector reform. The Government hosted a summit
meeting on the police in June and endorsed a five-year
national development plan for the HNP that aims to
boost its size and quality. For the HNP to play its rightful
role in protecting the people of Haiti and in enabling
the country’s development, the sustained support of
the Government and the international community for
that development plan is essential. That must include
greater attention to police recruitment and training
and to combating sexual and gender-based violence.
Ensuring that the HNP has sufficient personnel and the
resources to do its critical work remains a top priority.
Improvements in security and the rule of law will
create more economic opportunities for the Haitian
people. The joint aid coordination mechanism, recently
launched by the Prime Minister, can help ensure the
alignment of donor assistance with Haitian priorities, as
well as the transparent and efficient use of international
aid. That mechanism is an important step and deserves
our support. We call on all countries that have pledged
assistance to fulfil their commitments through the joint
aid coordination mechanism.
As the Secretary-General’s report of 31 August
(S/2012/678) details, Haiti has made progress, since
the Security Council debate in March, in addressing
the international community’s concerns. We should
not forget that the presence and the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
have been central to the country’s recovery from the
earthquake and to its recent progress. The Mission has
helped to provide a more secure and stable environment
in Haiti; it has strengthened the country’s institutions,
protected civilians and safeguarded human rights.
The United States supports renewing the mandate
of MINUSTAH for another year, so that it can continue
assisting the Haitian Government and people in
meeting the challenges ahead and can hasten the day
when United Nations peacekeepers are no longer
needed. The reconfiguration and consolidation of the
MINUSTAH footprint in Haiti is a delicate balancing

7

S/PV.6842

act that we cannot afford to get wrong. So as not to
jeopardize overall security, the United States supports
the Secretary-General’s recommended consolidation
and partial drawdown of MINUSTAH forces from the
post-earthquake surge to nearly pre-earthquake levels.
Those changes will reflect the progress that Haiti has
made but will also enable MINUSTAH to continue
executing its mandate effectively.
Moving forward, we must remain mindful of the
risk that too quick a drawdown could undermine the
gains achieved thus far. The United Nations must also
ensure that MINUSTAH personnel consistently adhere
to the highest standards in performing their work, that
any allegations of sexual misconduct are thoroughly
investigated and that the perpetrators are held to
account.
With that adjustment, the United States will
consider future changes in the MINUSTAH force level
on the basis of the conditions on the ground. We look
forward to the time in the not-so-distant future when
that force will no longer be needed. However, much
work remains to be done in Haiti. For example, there
are far too few jobs and insufficient housing to meet the
needs of Haitian families.
The United States recognizes the importance
of socioeconomic development in cementing
stability and catalyzing long-term growth. We have
been working with the Haitian Government, the
Inter-American Development Bank and other partners
on a comprehensive development plan for Haiti’s
northern areas that can attract investment to create
jobs and spur economic development. We have just
signed a partnership agreement with Haiti that outlines
America’s contribution, under Haitian leadership, to
Haiti’s national health plan for the next five years. In
addition, the housing of internally displaced persons
remains a priority. Forthcoming United States housing
developments will shelter thousands.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I take this
opportunity to underscore the words of Ambassador
Rice with regard to the fact that international assistance
should ensure economic development and the creation
of jobs over the long term. That is indeed the only way
in which the Mission can succeed.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you and your country,
Mr. President, at this important time for the friendly
nation of Guatemala, on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council — as you said, for the first time
in its history — for the month of October. Half way
through Guatemala’s term on the Security Council, you
can already be proud of your country’s contribution to
the work of the Council.
Allow me also to thank Special Representative
Mariano Fernández Amunátegui for his briefing and
to convey to him and the entire team of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
our full appreciation for their efforts to assist Haiti in
its stabilization and development.
More than two years after the disaster that struck
the Republic of Haiti, significant and notable progress
has been made, following the delays already pointed out
in implementing certain key measures in the country’s
stabilization process. Morocco welcomes the efforts
of the Haitian authorities to conclude the institutional
reforms needed to strengthen the rule of law.
The Senate’s approval of the appointment of a new
prime minister, the publication of the amended 1987
Constitution, the appointment of judges to the appeals
court, the establishment of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary and the launching of the process to
implement an Electoral Council are all significant and
essential stages carried out to bolster State institutions
in accordance with the commitments undertaken by the
Government.

Haiti is gradually moving beyond crisis management
to a long-term recovery. Its democratic institutions
are becoming stronger. Security has improved in parts
of the country and the lives of the Haitian people are
brightening.

Also, the participation of women in the Government
has been raised to 30 per cent. We welcome that and
the allocation to women of the strategic portfolios of
finance and tourism. We also welcome the adoption
and promulgation of the law on the functions of the
Ombudsman.

The United States will remain a steadfast friend of
Haiti. We are hopeful that, with the continued support
of MINUSTAH, the contributions of international
partners and the hard work and determination of the
Haitian people, Haiti will indeed reach its full potential.

Turning to security, we welcome the peaceful
manner in which the authorities re-established order
following the incidents of 17 April incited by former
members of the army and young recruits. That

8

12-52809

S/PV.6842

incident demonstrates the urgent need for the Haitian
Government to accelerate the training of the 15,000
police officers stipulated by the five-year development
plan in order to cover the entire territory by 2016.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, while
significant progress has been made in removing rubble
and rehousing displaced persons, the needs remain
enormous. More than 400,000 people are still living
in more than 500 camps. The situation is all the more
worrisome because the gradual withdrawal of various
humanitarian groups due to the lack of resources, which
contributes to the deterioration of the situation.
Since its establishment, MINUSTAH has amply and
decisively contributed to the operations for the recovery
and stabilization of the country. We were able to see
that with our own eyes when the Council visited Haiti
at the beginning of the year. We must congratulate the
entire Mission staff for what they have accomplished
to date despite obstacles and hardships. While giving
full credit to the Haitian Government for taking charge
of the tasks indispensible to the safety and well-being
of the people, we believe that MINUSTAH should
continue to support the Government’s efforts and should
gradually reduce its presence as the situation improves
and stabilizes. In that regard, my country supports the
renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate as recommended
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2012/678).
The proposals in that report with respect to a reduction
in MINUSTAH staffing strike us as realistic for a
smooth transition and a progressive withdrawal, with
MINUSTAH concentrating its activity on the primary
tasks identified in the report.
More than two years after the terrible earthquake
that struck Haiti, the task before the Haitian authorities
remains difficult and filled with challenges. It is up to
them, of course, to redouble their efforts, demonstrate
their unshakeable commitment to reconstructing the
country, reinforce good governance and set in motion
the reforms needed to rebuild trust, consolidate stability
and encourage outside investment. Nonetheless, the
support and assistance of the international community,
the United Nations and international financial
institutions remains indispensable and critical to
enable the country to return to normalcy and meet the
aspirations of its people. Morocco, for its part, whose
Royal Armed Forces contributed to Haiti’s return to
peace and helped to mitigate the humanitarian impact
of the 2010 quake, remains committed alongside the
friendly people of Haiti to strengthening the gains

12-52809

made and to building a peaceful and prosperous future
for Haiti.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Please allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council. I am indeed very honoured
to be here when you are presiding over the Council,
especially since you mentioned that this is the first
time that your country is presiding over the Council.
By association we are very honoured. I also wish to
express our deep gratitude to your delegation for
having been our partner in the Council and for our
very close cooperation with your Ambassador and the
entire delegation. We wish to thank them for organizing
today’s debate.
I would like to join others in expressing our
sincere thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernández Amunátegui for
presenting the Secretary-General’s report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2012/678) and for his briefing on the recent
developments in Haiti.
We are encouraged by developments in Haiti over
the past few months, including the appointment of
Prime Minister Laurent Lamothe and its ratification by
the Parliament in May. Those developments have ended
the political uncertainty and underscored the collective
resolve of Haiti’s leadership to work in a constructive
manner to address various issues related to governance,
the economy, elections and reconstruction.
We commend the steps taken by the new Government
for improving the situation with regard to law and
order, attracting foreign investment, promoting new
industrial projects and combating smuggling. We also
commend the steps to resolve differences between the
executive and legislative branches of the Government
and hope that the newly established Constitutional
Court, the Electoral Council and the Superior Council
of the Judicary will satisfactorily settle the outstanding
issues.
For those steps to succeed, Haiti requires the
continued support of the international community.
In that connection, we commend MINUSTAH for
assisting the Haitian National Police in ensuring
a stable security situation across the country. We
think international support needs to be enhanced,
particularly in the implementation of the 2012-2016
Haitian national police development plan. We hope that
the local elections due since last year will be held soon

9

S/PV.6842

and will help in rebuilding democratic institutions at
the grass roots level.
While there has been substantial progress in
resettling the internally displaced persons and
addressing their humanitarian needs, recovery and
reconstruction efforts continue to face a number of
challenges. Nearly 400,000 persons remain dependent
on humanitarian assistance for their basic survival.
Assistance is also required to fight the cholera
epidemic. For long-term improvement in the situation,
the international community needs to align its efforts
with Haiti’s national development priorities. In that
regard, we welcome the creation of the Housing and
Public Buildings Construction Unit in the office
of the Prime Minister, which will contribute to the
improved coordination and effective implementation of
humanitarian programmes. We also welcome the new
integrated strategic framework for 2013-2016, drafted
by MINUSTAH in consultation with the authorities in
Haiti.
MINUSTAH and its leadership played an
important role in the positive developments in Haiti.
MINUSTAH has not only helped Haitian stakeholders
in resolving their differences; it has also lent its hand
in capacity-building and in the recovery efforts of
national institutions and in ensuring overall security
and stability in the country.
With Haitian national institutions assuming a
greater role, MINUSTAH should gradually hand over
its core functions to the Haitian National Police and
focus on long-term stabilization and development goals.
In that context, we support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to narrow MINUSTAH’s activities
to a core set of mandated tasks that are achievable within
a reasonable time frame. MINUSTAH’s drawdown
should, however, be based on the evolving situation in
the country rather than as a fixed timeline.
India has remained a major contributor to
MINUSTAH with three contingents of formed police
units (FPUs).
Our FPUs are playing an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in Haiti, including
the guarding of the Presidential Palace. In addition,
the Indian FPUs have arranged blood donation camps
for the benefit of the Haitian people and earned their
goodwill.
India remains committed to supporting Haiti in its
reconstruction activities. In September, India donated
10

$5 million for the construction of 500 low-cost housing
units for the victims of the January 2010 earthquake.
Earlier, India donated $5 million in cash as disaster
relief assistance. India has also been contributing
$500,000 annually since 2009 to the Central Emergency
Response Fund, which continues to play an important
role in recovery work in Haiti. India is also cooperating
with Haiti in capacity-building and human resource
development by offering scholarships under the Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme.
In conclusion, let me state that, while Haiti has
come a long way since the devastating earthquake,
the international community should continue its
engagement so that Haiti is able to achieve sustainable
peace, security, stability and development. As Haiti
assumes the chairmanship of the Caribbean Community
next year, we convey our best wishes to the Government
and people of Haiti and we assure them of our continued
partnership.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you and your country,
Mr. President, on you assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the first time, as well as to
thank you for having convened this important debate.
I wish you and my friend Ambassador Rosenthal and
your very able team every success this coming. There
is no need to underline the fact that your country can
count on Germany’s full support.
(spoke in English)
I would like to join others in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fernández
Amunátegui for his briefing.
I would like to focus my statement on three main
topics: the current political situation, the security
situation, including the need to further strengthen
the Haitian National Police, and the role of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
under its reconfiguration.
We welcome the fact that there are clear indications
that Haiti is moving towards a better future, albeit
slowly. We have seen some important milestones,
such as the swearing in of a new Government and
the publication of the corrected version of the
constitutional amendments that were pending when
the Security Council visited Haiti earlier this year.
At the same time, we are concerned about the refusal
by the Haitian Senate and Parliament to name their
representatives to the Permanent Electoral Council
12-52809

S/PV.6842

and about the recent withdrawal of the three members
nominated by the Superior Council of the Judiciary. A
functioning Electoral Council is indispensable for the
elections mandated by Haiti’s Constitution. All parties
need to make a renewed and speedy effort towards a
credible Permanent Electoral Council with all members
on board. Preparations for the elections must begin
without further delay.
We are encouraged by the progress reported on
the security front, including Government measures to
contain elements of the former armed forces who had
been illegally occupying sites throughout the country.
Security and stability should increasingly be provided
by an effective Haitian National Police. We welcome
President Martelly’s stated intention to focus on the
continued strengthening of that institution, so that it
can provide security throughout the entire territory of
Haiti. We are encouraged by recent steps undertaken
by the Government to increase the number of police
recruits, in particular female ones.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
should not be in charge of long-term reconstruction
efforts. The Mission needs to continue to draw down
its post-earthquake surge in activities. In that sense, I
welcome the suggestions contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2012/678) about MINUSTAH’s
reconfiguration and consolidation plan. The SecretaryGeneral’s proposal that MINUSTAH further concentrate
its efforts on mentoring and developing the Haitian
National Police, and gradually phase out operational
policing activities, goes in the right direction. A
corresponding reduction of MINUSTAH’s troops, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, seems feasible but
requires a further build-up of the Haitain police. That
is why clear benchmarks will be required as foreseen in
MINUSTAH’s reconfiguration and consolidation plan.
Finally, I would like once again to thank the
troop — and police-contributing countries for all their
efforts. We will continue to give our full support to the
Mission and to the Government and people of Haiti.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me, at the
outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you and the
delegation of Guatemala on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. I would
like to assure you of our full cooperation and support.
It is also my pleasure to congratulate Germany on its
successful presidency and on all its efforts in steering
us through the busy month of September. We are also

12-52809

grateful to the Secretary-General for his recent report
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2012/678), and to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernández Amunátegui for
his briefing.
I would like to commend the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
United Nations country team, which continue to play a
crucial role in supporting the recovery and stabilization
of Haiti. As the Secretary-General noted in his report,
during the reporting period a number of long-awaited
political milestones were achieved, indicating that the
process of stabilization continues to progress in Haiti.
The achievements include the swearing in of a new
Government, the publication of a corrected version of
the constitutional amendments that provided the basis
for the organization of the Permanent Electoral Council
and the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary.
We also commend the steps taken by the Government
to move forward with the country’s socioeconomic
development. At the same time, redoubled efforts are
needed to combat unemployment and poverty. In the
light of the progress achieved in recent months, it is
essential to continue consistent efforts in rebuilding
the country, strengthening institutions, attracting
investment, promoting sustainable development and
advancing the democratic agenda.
Political stability in the country is a key factor for
the stabilization and development of Haiti. It is therefore
important that all political leaders take a responsible
approach and engage in constructive political dialogue
to address their differences in a spirit of compromise.
Such dialogue is particularly important for the holding
of credible and long overdue elections.
We note with satisfaction that the overall security
situation has been relatively stable during the reporting
period. However, the high rate of criminality remains a
matter of serious concern. While the role of MINUSTAH
in the maintenance of overall security and stability
remains vital, we note that the Haitian National Police
(HNP) continue to gradually improve. We commend the
Government’s recent successful measures to dislodge
illegal armed groups. Close cooperation between
the HNP and MINUSTAH is critical to effectively
addressing security challenges and to ensuring that the
police move forward to reach the capacity necessary to
handle full responsibility for the provision of internal
security.
11

S/PV.6842

The protection of vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
should remain the priority. The humanitarian situation
in Haiti continues to show signs of improvement as
the number of internally displaced persons living in
camps has declined. However, significant humanitarian
challenges remain. Continued strong international
engagement and efforts by the Haitian authorities are
crucial to ensuring that all pressing humanitarian needs
are met.
Lastly, I would like to express our support for
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend
the mandate of MINUSTAH, taking into account the
proposed adjustments pertaining to a reconfiguration
and conditions-based consolidation of the Mission.
Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): I am privileged to
deliver this statement on behalf of my Permanent
Representative. We welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Council. We congratulate Guatemala on assuming the
presidency of the Council, and we commend Germany
for its able stewardship in September. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report contained in document
S/2012/678.
Pakistan fully supports peace and progress in
Haiti, which is a collective objective for the Haitian
people, the Council and the international community.
The brave and resilient people of Haiti have made
important strides towards stability and development.
The devastating earthquake of 2010 reversed the
gains achieved incrementally over many years. It is
heartening that a new and promising Haiti is emerging
from that tragedy.
In that regard, the Secretary-General has also
noted important milestones reached in Haiti recently.
Those include the formation of a new Government,
the publication of constitutional amendments and the
establishment of a Superior Council of the Judiciary. On
the road to political stability and economic prosperity,
such measures have far-reaching significance.
In parallel with reaching political milestones, the
Haitian Government is also taking important steps to
attract foreign investment, improve governance and
promote industrial projects. We hope that the new aid
coordination framework will strengthen the capacity of
the Haitian Government to manage external resources
with the support of the Haiti Reconstruction Fund.
We share the optimism that Haitian leaders have an
opportunity to make genuine progress in rebuilding the
12

nation and strengthening institutions. The initiatives
of the Haitian Government must be supplemented
by greater economic and trade cooperation from the
international community.
Besides the commitment of the Haitian Government,
progress and development in Haiti are also attributable
to the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The Mission is already
implementing a challenging mandate in the areas of
security, support for the political process, the protection
of vulnerable groups, justice and corrections, and
human rights monitoring.
The reconfiguration or drawdown of MINUSTAH
must therefore be planned carefully and be based on the
situation on the ground. It should not lead to a reversal
of gains painstakingly achieved in Haiti.
We look forward to the transition compact that
MINUSTAH will work out with its stakeholders with
a view to setting out precise benchmarks in the area
of security, the rule of law, accountability mechanisms
and legislative regulatory frameworks.
The political developments in Haiti need to be
consolidated by a strong security sector. Besides
providing safety and security to the Haitian people,
a self-sustaining national police institution is also
essential for the eventual withdrawal of MINUSTAH.
The objectives and benchmarks of the Haitian
National Police development plans, presented by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police, must
be forthrightly met. Recent steps taken by the Haitian
authorities to increase the number of police recruits,
in particular females, are encouraging and we welcome
such steps. The capactity-building and training of
the Haitian National Police, together with budgetary
support for its expenses, should remain a matter of high
priority.
Today’s debate should also underscore the challenge
of addressing the humanitarian situation in Haiti. The
ongoing cholera epidemic, food insecurity and the
extreme vulnerability to national disasters increase
the humanitarian challenge. We will urge greater
coordination and cohesion among different actors
engaged in humanitarian work. We will also caution
against donor fatigue, which can result from protracted
crises such as the one unfortunately faced by Haiti.
Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. As part of

12-52809

S/PV.6842

MINUSTAH, two formed police units from Pakistan
have deployed since the 2010 earthquake.
In 2005, the people of Pakistan suffered the worst
earthquake of their history. Five years later, when a
similar tragedy befell our brothers and sisters of Haiti,
the people of Pakistan felt their pain as our own. Our
solidarity with the Haitian people has not waned since
then. It is with that spirit that we will continue to
support the people of Haiti in their quest for stability
and progress, as well as to uphold the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of their
country.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate your country on
assuming the presidency of the Council. I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui, for his
briefing.
I would like to associate myself with the statement
to be made later by the observer of the European Union,
as well as that to be delivered by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends.
Since our last meeting in March (see S/PV.6732),
undeniable progress has been made in Haiti, on the
political and institutional fronts first and foremost.
I will not list the measures taken by the Haitian
Government, as others before me have already done so.
The political and institutional stability of the country
has been strengthened.
With regard to security, the Secretary-General has
recalled that the situation is calm but precarious. Crime
remains a problem, particularly in Port-au-Prince, but
no more so than it is in other countries of the region.
The Haitian National Police has demonstrated its
ability to undertake comprehensive operations with the
support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).
With regard to the humanitarian issues and
reconstruction, the decrease in the number of internally
displaced persons, the clearing up of the earthquake
damage and the progress with regard to health and
education should be noted. After a downturn in the
gross national product, Haiti has once again found the
path towards growth. However, the country continues
to face humanitarian challenges, with 390,000 people
living in refugee camps and a cholera epidemic that has
not yet been stemmed.

12-52809

Allow me to mention three of the challenges
that remain. The swift holding of local and partial
legislative elections is essential, as those elections
have been delayed for too long, as Mr. Fernández
Amunátegui noted. To that end, a Permanent Electoral
Council, based on consensus and in line with the spirit
of the Constitution, must be established. We call upon
all the political stakeholders concerned in Haiti to work
towards that objective. France stands ready to provide
its support, in particular through MINUSTAH, for the
holding of free, credible and transparent elections.
The Haitian National Police is not yet able to
independently guarantee security and stability in
Haiti. We noted the objectives presented by the Haitian
authorities for the period 2012 to 2016, including the
goal of increasing the number of police officers from
10,000 to 15,000. We stand ready to back those efforts,
which must not only be quantitative, but which must also
strengthen the administrative and training capacities,
as well as the integrity and the image of the police. The
State’s budget must reflect that priority.
Aid for rebuilding must continue. The eradication
of cholera deserves an appropriate response. France
stands ready to uphold its financial commitments
made by the President of the Republic, which amount
to €326 million. We welcome the new framework for
aid coordination that was announced by Prime Minister
Lamothe last week in New York. Haiti cannot depend
on international solidarity alone for its development,
which is why we support President Martelly’s efforts to
make Haiti more attractive to foreign investors.
The situation is changing and it is only natural
that the United Nations presence on the ground does
the same. We stand ready to extend MINUSTAH’s
mandate. We must continue the drawdown of troop
levels, because the levels present today are no longer in
line with the needs of the country two and a half years
after the earthquake. The priority, more than ever,
should be national ownership through the strengthening
of the rule of law and the principal tools, such as the
Haitian National Police and the judiciary.
We must also provide the Mission with a credible
time frame. We are not abandoning Haiti, but we must
be clear to Haitians with regard to what is achievable in
a reasonable period.
We therefore support the current discussions
between the Mission and the Secretariat on a five-year
consolidation plan.

13

S/PV.6842

I would like to end by commending the work of
the police, troops and civilians of MINUSTAH, who
have been contributing to the maintenance of stability
in Haiti for eight years. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
work at the Head of the Mission and his vision of what
must be achieved in Haiti.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Council and to congratulate Guatemala on presiding
over the Council for the month of October. I would also
like to wish our colleague, Mr. Rosenthal, and his team
every success and to assure them of our support.
(spoke in French)
I would like thank Mr. Mariano Fernández
Amunátegui for his introduction of the excellent report
(S/2012/678), which gives us a clear idea of the situation
in Haiti and the progress that has been made but,
above all, of the enormous scope of the work still to be
done. We also welcome the presence of our colleague
Ambassador Jean Cazeau.
We of course align ourselves with the statement to
be made later by the observer of the European Union.
Today, with significant support from the
international community in general and the United
Nations in particular, Haitians have embarked upon the
long and difficult process of rebuilding their country,
a process that has a wider and more coherent goal
that goes beyond repairing the terrible earthquake’s
material damage and aiding its victims, namely, to give
the country stable and democratic institutions founded
on the rule of law, ensure respect for human rights and
guarantee security for the people, as well as economic
and social development and prosperity for the country.
I will not dwell on the close interdependence of
those three elements, but it is clear that, without security
and good governance, founded on a solid democratic
base, and without stable, functioning institutions,
there can be no improvement in economic conditions
or reconstruction. Similarly, without an economic and
employment recovery it will be extremely difficult to
strengthen security in the country.
I would like to briefly discuss two of those issues.
First, concerning the area of politics and the rule of
law, there is no doubt that progress has been made. The
country has a new Government that has the support
of the people. It also appears that the instability that

14

characterized Haitian political life for several months
has been overcome. The new political situation
translates into growing demands on the Haitian
authorities to make progress with essential democratic
reforms. In that context, the entry into force of various
constitutional amendments, the establishment of the
Superior Council of the Judiciary and the creation of
the Permanent Electoral Council — even if the latter
is still incomplete — are all significant examples of
progress.
We encourage the Haitian authorities to continue
in that direction: consolidating democratic institutions
and practices, political transparency and credibility of
the rule of law and the administration of justice — above
all, ensuring, when Haitians are ultimately summoned
to the polls, the fairness, transparency and credibility
of those elections, and thus avoiding betrayal of the
Haitian people’s legitimate aspirations and damaging
the confidence of the international community.
The humanitarian situation and the protection of
human rights are also matters for serious concern. The
marginalization of especially vulnerable groups, the
still large numbers of displaced persons and incidents
of gender violence are a major worry and require an
effective response.
My second point is about security and the role
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). While we are pleased with the progress
made in improving the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, we are compelled to conclude that they have a
long way to go before they will be able to assume full
responsibility for providing security in the country,
fighting the criminal activity that is, sadly, growing,
and protecting their borders. As a result, for the time
being, MINUSTAH’s presence is essential. In that
regard, we support the Secretary-General’s proposal
for a renewal of the Mission’s mandate for a new term
of 12 months and for its reconfiguration and gradual
drawdown. That drawdown must of necessity go hand
in hand with the parallel strengthening of the capacity
of the national police, particularly aimed at enabling
it to gradually take on the responsibilities currently
assigned to MINUSTAH. We also believe that, in terms
of humanitarian and financial security, priority must
be given to strengthening the National police and not to
other structures that are draining limited resources and
could also become new sources of instability for Haiti.
We continue to fully support the Haitian people
on its difficult road to reconstruction, democracy and
12-52809

S/PV.6842

development. We are convinced that they can overcome
the current challenges with the solidarity and active
support of the international community.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
recognition of the extraordinary work under what are
often difficult conditions accomplished by the men and
women of MINUSTAH over the last eight years.
Mr. Sun Xiaobo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guatemala for presiding over today’s meeting. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Fernández Amunátegui, for his
briefing.
Haiti has made some progress in the areas of
stability and development recently. The swearing-in
of a new Government, the publication of constitutional
amendments and the establishment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary are positive achievements by
the Haitian Government in its efforts to strengthen
its democratic and rule-of-law institutions, and China
welcomes them. At the same time, we also note that
Haiti faces colossal challenges in its political, economic
and humanitarian situations. It has a long way to go
in its process of rebuilding and reestablishing peace,
and it needs the continuing support and advice of the
international community.
I would like to emphasize three points. First,
ensuring political stability is an important prerequisite
for maintaining Haiti’s security and development.
China welcomes the compromise reached through
political consultation by the relevant parties, and hopes
that the establishment of the new Government in Haiti
will help facilitate the democratic process and political
reconciliation there. We hope that all the relevant parties
will take the opportunity to unite in order to enhance
mutual trust and consolidate hard-won achievements.
Secondly, the chief issue that must be urgently
addressed is the speeding-up of the economic recovery
and reconstruction. Haiti’s slow progress in those areas
has meant that many refugees from the earthquake
are still surviving on assistance. The country faces
major difficulties in the areas of reconstruction,
attracting investment, creating jobs and promoting
sustainable development. The international community
must devote serious attention to those problems. The
Haitian Government should redouble its efforts to
deal with unemployment and poverty, strengthen
institution-building and improve its capacity to govern.

12-52809

We also hope that the international community will
honour its pledges to Haiti, increase the effectiveness
of its aid and provide constructive support for Haiti’s
rebuilding and development.
Thirdly, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) plays an indispensable role
there. China commends the Special Representative,
Mr. Fernández Amunátegui, and MINUSTAH as a
whole for its efforts and contribution to maintaining
peace and stability in Haiti. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for MINUSTAH’s consolidation
plan and the extension of its mandate for one year.
We hope that MINUSTAH will continue to implement
the Council’s mandate, help Haiti maintain peace and
stability, facilitate its political process and strengthen
capacity-building for its rule-of-law and Government
institutions.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on Guatemala’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
My delegation wishes your delegation every success
in carrying out its functions.
I would next like to thank Mr. Mariano Fernández
Amunátegui, not only for the briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2012/678), but
also for the praiseworthy work that the Mission has
accomplished in Haiti.
My delegation will address the issue before us from
three angles — the political, security and humanitarian.
Last March, during the consideration of the
previous report on the sociopolitical situation in Haiti
(S/2012/128), my country expressed its concern with
regard to the current political, security and humanitarian
problems in the country. Today, six months later, the
report presented to us allows us to assess the progress
made by policymakers and the Haitian people in
continuing the process of stabilization in their country
and in establishing the rule of law.
Following the resignation of the former Prime
Minister, Mr. Garry Conille, Haiti once again was
dragged into a political crisis that delayed political and
economic reforms that the country was to undertake. In
May, therefore, Togo gladly welcomed the confirmation
by the Parliament of the appointment of Prime Minister
Laurent Salvador Lamothe and his statement of general

15

S/PV.6842

policy, which was an important message regarding
the collective political commitment of policymakers
in Haiti to continue necessary reforms in order to
re-establish the rule of law and create and solidify
public institutions, as well as improve the well-being of
people. That message was followed by the publication
of a revised version of constitutional amendments,
which had been ready for adoption since June 2011. My
country welcomes the publication of those amendments,
which allow for, inter alia, the creation of a Permanent
Electoral Council and a Constitutional Council, a
30 per cent quota of women in the Government and the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
to strengthen the independence of that branch of
Government.
Nevertheless, it is unfortunate that the establishment
of the first Permanent Electoral Council in the country,
responsible for the organization of elections, is still
taking time owing to controversies surrounding the
moral fibre of its members and its ability to conduct
credible elections that are acceptable to everyone. That
is why my country calls upon all Haitian political actors
to continue along the path of consensus, which has
allowed for the significant progress just noted, in order
to ensure that legislative, local and partial elections,
set for the end of the year, will take place in proper
conditions. Those elections were supposed to happen in
November 2011 and, among other things, will allow for
a real assessment of the progress of democracy in Haiti
that has been made to date.
The security sector has always been one of the
largest challenges in Haiti. While the situation has
improved since the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH launched operations that allowed for the
disbanding of many criminal gangs, rates of homicide,
kidnapping and other violent crimes continue to be high
in the country. That situation has an adverse impact on
the well-being of people, economic activities and the
completion of donor projects.
In that regard, Togo would call upon the Haitian
authorities to continue to bolster the operational
capacity and modernization of the Haitian National
Police and fight criminal gangs, which are the main
source of insecurity in the country. We commend the
courageous decision made last June by the Haitian
authorities to put a stop to the illegal activities of
members of the former armed forces.
However, managing crime and violence cannot
be undertaken outside the bounds of the rule of law.
16

It is therefore important to strengthen the rule of law
by modernizing the legal and institutional framework
linked to the security sector, expanding the police forces
and the judiciary in the country as a whole, and making
the protection of human rights a cardinal principle.
My country continues to be concerned by the human
rights violations noted in the report, in particular of the
rights of children who are victims of rape, abduction,
trafficking and homicide. The Government must also
take a firm stance against cases of excessively long
preventive detention, inter alia, as well as prison living
conditions.
One of the priorities announced by the Haitian
Government is the recovery and reconstruction of
the country. In that respect, Togo is pleased with
achievements made in the last quarter in cleaning
up the wreckage from the 2010 earthquake and in
implementing return and relocation programmes,
which have led to the closing of more than 22 camps
and the rehousing of 5,000 families.
Nevertheless, we are concerned about the living
conditions in the camps, where a high number of
displaced persons live. Those conditions continue to
worsen with the progressive withdrawal of humanitarian
institutions due, inter alia, to the lack of funding. A full
withdrawal of those organizations before a definitive
solution is found for that humanitarian issue could
create more health problems, such as those experienced
by the country in the recent past. My country would
therefore call upon the international community to
help the Haitian authorities to resolve that issue by
continuing its aid.
It is crucial for the Government and the people of
Haiti themselves to tackle the challenges they are faced
with. We are pleased to note the progress Haiti has made
towards stabilization and development by bolstering its
political institutions and the entities that guarantee the
rule of law. We welcome those major advances, which
are clearly noted in the report of the Secretary-General.
Nevertheless, in spite of those steps forward, Haiti
continues to face significant challenges in its efforts to
improve governance, stimulate growth, reduce poverty,
manage crime and violence and address ever-growing
prices of products for basic survival. All those matters
are closely interlinked. It is clear that the current gaps
in governance and the inability of the State to provide
goods and services slow down economic development
and impede poverty reduction, while poverty itself

12-52809

S/PV.6842

fuels crime. In that context, interventions must be made
on many fronts in parallel. In addition, it is clear that,
to tackle the those challenges, Haiti needs sustainable
international aid, and the people and Government of the
country will have to do their utmost to tackle them. My
delegation would like to call upon the Government to
unremittingly continue what it has undertaken along
those lines.
Finally, given the many steps forward that have
been taken, Togo understands and supports the plan
to restructure and reorganize MINUSTAH’s activities
and its gradual withdrawal from the country.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I wish to welcome you, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council today. That is of special significance,
as you yourself said, Sir, because it is the first time
that Guatemala is presiding over the Council. To
you, Sir, and to Ambassador Rosenthal and to your
entire delegation, we express our warmest and most
affectionate greetings.
I wish to thank Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General,
which includes many positive points and which also
draws our attention, very objectively, to the situation
(S/2012/678). The work of Mr. Fernández Amunátegui
has been extraordinary. Those who have been able to
visit Haiti in his company and to follow his guidance
know just how difficult his task is and how much
dedication and energy he has devoted to it. He has our
full gratitude and support.
When we evaluate the progress made in Haiti, in
order to make recommendations for promoting the
well-being, development and strengthening of its
institutions, there is a series of important elements we
must consider. First, we must say that we are pleased
with the stabilization process experienced in Haiti
since the coming to power of President Martelly. That
transformation, as seen in the report, has had specific
effects. It was finally possible to confirm the Prime
Minister in the Parliament, approve laws on the budget
and on banking controls, reduce some types of crime,
such as kidnapping and political violence, reduce
the number of displacements, publish constitutional
amendments, establish the Superior Council of the
Judiciary, and comply with an important quota of 30 per
cent women’s representation in the Government. That
generates confidence, and it shows that recovery is
under way in Haiti.
12-52809

We also wish to highlight the important role of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in maintaining an environment of
security and stability. That has been an important
element in confronting the political, economic and
social challenges in the best way. Matters such as
the increase in murders, the carrying of firearms by
unauthorized persons and the proliferation of criminal
gangs require special attention in all sectors of the
national police, with the support of MINUSTAH.
We believe that the strengthening of Haiti still
calls for the presence of MINUSTAH, especially
the essential component of its mandate, which is to
provide conditions for security, well-being and the
strengthening of institutions. That is all the more
obvious when we note the conclusion of the SecretaryGeneral in his report, when he states: “Although the
performance of the national police has continued to
improve, the institution is not yet in a position to assume
full responsibility for the provision of internal security
throughout the country” (S/2012/678, para. 12).
My delegation will support a resolution responding
to those challenges and to the mandates that drive the
activities of MINUSTAH, in which human security
is perceived in comprehensive terms of promoting
development, respect for human rights, peaceful
coexistence and protection for individuals and their
environment. That mandate must be interpreted in
connection with the ongoing dialogue that should exist
among the Government, civil society and international
actors.
It is necessary to expand MINUSTAH’s work to
evaluate and strengthen the Haitian police. The plan
for 2012-2016 developed by the National Police and
MINUSTAH is an important tool to empower and
increase the number of police, which today consists of
10,106 officers, sub-officers and agents.
With regard to engineering, MINUSTAH is
conducting praiseworthy risk-management activities
including
building police stations, road repair,
removing earthquake rubble and clearing rivers and
canals of prefabricated structures. When it comes to
criteria for reducing the military and police components
proposed by the Secretary-General, we believe that
the engineering unit should maintain a presence that
matches the challenges in that area, in accordance with
its capabilities. We call on MINUSTAH to assign the
experts in that component as effectively as possible in

17

S/PV.6842

a manner consistent with their abilities and areas of
knowledge.
The presence of Colombian police in the field has
been extended, as discussed at a working meeting on
integral security for cooperation between Colombia
and Haiti held in August 2012. A delegation of the
Haitian National Police visited Colombia in order to
implement the plan on cooperation in comprehensive
security. The idea was to validate the proposal with
the police authorities of Haiti, as well as the on-site
presentation of the operative, administrative and human
resources abilities of the Colombian police to train the
beneficiaries of the programme. The goal is to train 221
police officers between now and 2014, as well as 50
female police officers, in order to strengthen strategic
development and planning, and the environmental,
anti-narcotics and anti-kidnapping police.
We consider that one of the fundamental aspects of
the future of Haiti is the development of the agricultural
sector, which, we believe, should be a priority. It is
necessary to approve certain competitive factors, which
this sector of national productivity offers in the context
of a plan for rural and agricultural development. It will
include the promotion of products of the earth such as
coffee, cocoa, fruit, sugar cane and others. That could
create an important source of exports.
I cannot fail to say that in accordance with our
coffee business in Colombia and in association with the
Inter-American Development Bank, we are promoting
a project to improve coffee production in Haiti. The
idea is to establish a sustainable, inclusive coffee
chain of value, which will increase revenues for small
producers, strengthen cooperative effort and increase
exports of quality coffee. That is a project to which I
devote particular attention.
Finally, it is important to mention projects for the
recovery of communes and barrios and dwellings within
an urbanization plan in Haiti, based on the experiences
of the city of Medellín in Colombia and through
strengthening the National Institute for Professional
Training through technical exchanges with the National
Training Service of Colombia, or SENA. Those entities
have broad success in those sectors.
The political forces in Haiti must build on the
progress achieved in order to open the path to take
responsibility for their own destiny. No contribution
makes any sense without such political will. Nobody
except Haitians themselves can create that will. The

18

efficient coordination of international cooperation
continues to be a priority. Thus the adoption of an
integrated strategic framework for help for 2013-2016, a
strategic development plan of the Haitian Government,
is a step in the right direction.
Responding to the cholera threat is a priority. The
statistics in the Secretary-General’s report call for
that. The figure of 580,947 people infected between
October 2010 and 15 July 2012 is not just worrisome.
What is much worse is that at least 7,440 people have
died because of this disease. A greater budget must be
invested in preventing cholera and in water treatment,
improving vigilance for and management of this
serious problem, and supporting the most vulnerable
communities.
International evidence shows that poverty and
unemployment are causes of evils such as cholera, but so
are institutional weaknesses that lead to malnutrition,
illiteracy and corruption. All those scourges must
be fought in a consistent fashion by developing the
policies that Haitians will adopt, giving to the creation
of local capacities and to institutional consolidation the
primary place they should have.
Another fundamental issue is that of the postponed
elections. We call on all local stakeholders to unite their
efforts so that through constructive dialogue they can
agree on prompt, transparent elections so that the 10
senators whose terms ended last 8 May can be replaced.
Financial and administrative support in this sector is
vital for strengthening the democratic process.
We are convinced that the United Nations has
an institutional duty to Haiti, and the international
community must support its management. MINUSTAH,
as the appropriate mechanism for coordination and
management, must maintain its presence in the field.
That is why we commit ourselves to supporting the
extension of itsr mandate to October 2013.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): Mr. President, South
Africa congratulates the delegation of Guatemala on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
very first time. We are particularly pleased to see you,
Mr. Caballeros, presiding over today’s meeting.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and report on the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) during the last six months
(S/2012/678).

12-52809

S/PV.6842

Haiti continues to make significant progress
since its emergence from conflict and the devastating
earthquake of January 2010. It is encouraging to note
that during the current reporting period a number
of significant political milestones were achieved.
Those developments bode well for the strengthening
of governance and the rule of law institutions. It is
particularly impressive that with seven of the 22 cabinet
positions filled by women, Haiti is setting an excellent
example, and in very practical terms, of giving effect to
resolution 1325 (2000) on the role of women in peace
and security.
Those achievements are significant in the context
of the many challenges that Haiti continues to face. It
is important that we support Haiti in consolidating the
gains made, especially in strengthening its institutions.
My delegation remains concerned over the challenges
preventing the formation of the Permanent Electoral
Council, especially as this problem has delayed the longawaited legislative, municipal and local elections. It is
therefore urgent that the stakeholders engage in genuine
dialogue in an effort to address the current challenges
in completing the appoinments to the Council and that
the elections be held as soon as possible.
We welcome the relatively stable security situation
that has prevailed in Haiti during the reporting period.
We note with satisfaction that the Haitian authorities,
supported by MINUSTAH through its Operation
Sunrise, have brought to an end the illicit activities of
former members of the Haitian armed forces and young
recruits, who had illegally occupied a number of sites
throughout the country.
The strengthening and capacity-building of the
Haitian National Police is critical in ensuring stability
in Haiti and in laying a firm basis for the drawdown
and larger withdrawal of MINUSTAH. My delegation
therefore supports the efforts of MINUSTAH and the
Government to increase the recruitment and training
of police and to strengthen the capacities of rule of law
institutions.
The Government of Haiti, like those of many
countries around the world, faces the challenge of
meeting the socioeconomic demands of its people.
Those demands place tremendous pressure on the
Government, which has to deal with the consequences
of frustration, which manifests itself in social unrest.
High levels of unemployment, the lack of service
delivery and the difficult socioeconomic conditions

12-52809

will remain a threat to the stability of the State, as
witnessed in recent incidents.
The link between security and development as two
important pillars for ensuring the long-term stability of
the country is clearly prevalent in Haiti. The Security
Council has previously recalled the contribution that
peacekeepers and peacekeeping missions have made to
early peacebuilding, including through the creation of
conducive environments that enable economic recovery
and the provision of basic services. We therefore fully
support the activities of MINUSTAH, and in particular
its engineering component, in assisting the Government
in constructing schools and hospitals and the installation
of prefabricated units for the judiciary and other State
institutions. Those aspects of MINUSTAH’s work are
conducive to the establishment of conditions for longterm reconstruction and recovery and support the
notion of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders.
We recognize that Haiti continues to face major
humanitarian challenges. The number of people who
have died or who have been infected by cholera this
year is alarming. We urge the Government of Haiti
to strengthen its health capacity and its capability to
effectively respond to the cholera and tuberculosis
epidemics. It is also incumbent upon the international
community to provide all the necessary assistance
required to respond to the cholera challenge.
We welcome the development by MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team of the 20132016 strategic framework aligning its priorities with
the Government’s strategic development plan. While
international support for Haiti remains crucial, we
emphasize the need for national ownership and
leadership. We note with concern, however, that less
than 10 per cent of aid disbursed by the international
community has been disbursed through the Government.
We must avoid inadvertently creating parallel structures
that could undermine the Government of Haiti.
National ownership is essential to ensuring that the
needs of the population are effectively addressed. South
Africa therefore welcomes the announcement by the
Government of the new aid coordination mechanism,
which is aimed at aligning international assistance with
national priorities.
South Africa pledges its support for the renewal
of MINUSTAH’s mandate and supports the proposal
by the Secretary-General regarding the drawdown
of MINUSTAH’s military and police capabilities.

19

S/PV.6842

Such a drawdown should be gradual and conducted
in consultation with the Haitian authorities, taking
into account their needs and institutional capacity. We
further urge MINUSTAH to calibrate the withdrawal
of its engineering component with the needs on the
ground.
In conclusion, Haiti has made significant strides
towards peace and stability, and it is a testament to this
progress that it has been entrusted by its region to take
over the chair of the Caribbean Community. Challenges
do remain, and it is imperative that Haitians, with the
sustained support of the international community, work
with MINUSTAH to overcome those obstacles.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): It is an honour
to have you lead this meeting, Mr. President; many
congratulations to you and to Guatemala on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the first time.
Many thanks to the German delegation for everything
it did during its presidency of the Council last month.
Many thanks, too, to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for everything
that he and everyone in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has been doing to
implement the mandate we have given them in support
of Haiti.
Seven
months
ago,
when
the
Council
debated MINUSTAH following our visit to Haiti
(see S/PV.6732), inertia in the political system was
blighting decision-making on all the issues central to
the nation’s development. Seven months on, several
political milestones have been achieved, including the
ratification of the Prime Minister and the installation of
the Superior Council of the Judiciary. Haiti now has the
opportunity to build on that progress.
Following our visit, we called for the Mission
to begin planning, so that, when conditions on the
ground allowed, it could begin drawdown. Now we
see signs that those conditions are improving. For
example, MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police
have brought to a peaceful conclusion a potentially
inflammatory demonstration by former members of the
Haitian army. There has been a handover of security
from MINUSTAH to the Haitian National Police in
camps for internally displaced persons. And in four of
ten regions, responsibility for security now rests with
MINUSTAH’s police units rather than with its troops.
It is important that we note those successes.

20

We support the Secretary-General’s proposals to
reduce the number of uniformed personnel deployed
with the Mission, but it is in no one’s interest that
MINUSTAH leave before the security it has established
can be maintained by the Haitian authorities. Now
more than ever, it is critical that the Mission undertake
the planning needed for it to draw down without
jeopardizing its hard-won security gains.
MINUSTAH’s activities must be carefully
prioritized. Building the capacity of the Haitian National
Police — both operational and institutional — should
be MINUSTAH’s highest priority. I underline that we
believe that that should not be a top but the top priority
for MINUSTAH.
The Haitian National Police must also meet
appropriate human rights standards, if it is to win the
confidence of the Haitian people. Effective oversight,
transparency and zero tolerance for corruption will
all be important. Officers should expect the support
of all political parties and a reasonable salary that is
paid on time. Capacity-building in the justice sector,
both regionally and at the institutional level, is also
important to complement that activity.
Neither of those tasks is solely for MINUSTAH.
Clarity is needed among all the actors involved as to
what capacity the Haitian National Police and the
justice system more broadly needs to build, and what
the benchmarks and timetable will be for achieving
those goals.
As long as political uncertainty remains the most
likely trigger of instability, activity to support political
stability must continue to be a priority. MINUSTAH
should support the elections planned for the end of the
year. The appointment of a Permanent Electoral Council
is a crucial step and needs to be achieved quickly, if
the partial Senate and local elections are to be held on
schedule. It is vital that the Electoral Council be able to
act independently and that it have the funding to do so.
However, that necessary prioritization inevitably
means cutting back on some activities. The report of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council focuses on the importance now of strong
and coherent development support and the mobilizing
of Haitian stakeholders, as well as the phased transfer
of tasks from MINUSTAH to other actors. We agree:
MINUSTAH should be handing over tasks where other
actors, including the United Nations country team, have
a comparative advantage in conducting them. Where

12-52809

S/PV.6842

possible, tasks should be handed over to national actors.
Where that is not yet possible, all elements of the United
Nations system need to work together to build national
capacity. MINUSTAH should be adopting the most
efficient configuration. It should be drawing on lessons
from other missions. Decisions in that context should
take into account the differences between geographic
areas and the varying progress among sectors.
The United Kingdom believes that it is essential
that peacekeepers conform to the highest standards of
conduct at all times. We firmly support the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse, and we urge a rigorous and transparent
approach to all allegations in that area.
In conclusion, MINUSTAH has achieved some
encouraging results over the past 12 months. Looking
forward, efforts now need to focus on utilizing the
more favourable environment in which it is operating
to deliver its core tasks.
It must engage other actors to share the burden
where appropriate. MINUSTAH should be stopping
activity which others are better able to conduct.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to join the other delegations
that have congratulated you, Sir, and the Guatemalan
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the first time, and to wish you every
success in your forthcoming tasks.
We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fernández Amunátegui,
for his briefing on the situation in Haiti. We read
with interest the recent report (S/2012/678) on the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and agree with the conclusions
contained therein.
Unfortunately, despite the progress made on the
political front, the situation in Haiti continues to be
most difficult. The political process remains fragile.
The Permanent Electoral Council does not have wide
support, and the legitimacy of the amendments made
to the Constitution by the President is not recognized
by all. That is the backdrop against which complex
elections will take place in the Parliament and in local
Government bodies.
The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, and there is some social unrest owing to
social and economic instability, increased criminal

12-52809

activity and the inability of the national police to take
on responsibility for providing internal security. The
humanitarian situation remains difficult.
MINUSTAH without a doubt plays an important
stabilizing role, and, along those lines, we believe
that the issue of its drawdown must be taken up
particularly carefully, taking into due account the
possible consequences. We support the proposal of
the Secretary-General that the reconfiguration of the
Mission should be carried out on the basis of objectives
agreed upon with the Government of Haiti, objectives
that are clear and achievable over the next four or five
years.
Moreover, we believe that the Mission should be
gradually relieved of the duties that were entrusted to
it after the earthquake, which include a wide variety
of social, economic and humanitarian activities. In that
connection, United Nations funds and programmes
should participate actively in rebuilding the country,
along with the United Nations peacebuilding machinery
and donor support.
The Haitian Government must lay a leading role
in resolving critical tasks in the country, first and
foremost on the economic and humanitarian fronts.
The Government bears particular responsibility for
the effective utilization of international aid and must
participate actively in its coordination.
One of most significant tasks facing the Government
at this stage is the bolstering of police capacity. If the
rule of law is not strengthened and national forces
cannot ensure security, it will be difficult to speak
of an authentic stabilization of the situation in Haiti.
In that connection, we note the contribution made by
MINUSTAH in attaining those ends.
The international aid provided to Haiti under the
auspices of the United Nations has been an unprecedented
demonstration of solidarity in its scale and scope.
Without a doubt, efforts to provide comprehensive aid,
including the strengthening of State institutions, should
be continued so as to ensure that the Haitian people
can independently resolve issues related to security,
reconstruction and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate

21

S/PV.6842

the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

spirit and the letter of the Constitution with respect to
the independence of the judiciary.

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

The Superior Council, as set out in the Haitian
Constitution, must be composed of nine members from
the executive, the legislative and the judiciary, in equal
numbers. However, given the very nature of democracy
and the absence of 10 senators whose terms concluded
on 12 May, the Parliament has not yet appointed its
three representatives. To resolve the situation, the
Government, the Parliament and other relevant actors
have engaged in an inter-Haitian dialogue aimed at
achieving consensus.

Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October and wishes you every success. We would
like also to express our gratitude for the presentation
of the report (S/2012/678) of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We would also like to thank all the
members of the Council and the Secretariat for their
contributions.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Envoy, Mr. Mariano Fernández
Amunátegui and Mr. William J. Clinton, respectively,
for their dedication, and the troop-contributing
countries for their continued support. Along those
lines, we would also like to commend the openness
and expertise demonstrated by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond
Mulet.
The report presented to the members of the Council
focuses on salient aspects of the Government’s activities
that are priorities for it, given that it views the economic
and social development process as indispensable to the
stabilization of the country. Indeed, the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly,
presented, in the framework of his 5 “E’s” formula,
the pillars of his five-year plan: environment, energy,
education, the rule of law and employment.
As is made clear in report, the past six months
have been characterized by noteworthy political, legal
and socio-economic achievements that have helped to
stabilize the country. In May, the Parliament approved
the appointment of Mr. Laurent Salvador Lamothe as
Prime Minister.
During that same period, the Government was
able to publish corrected constitutional amendments,
finalize arrangements for the Superior Court, establish
the Superior Council of the Judiciary and put forward
the names of six of the nine persons who will make
up the Permanent Electoral Council. It should be noted
that the Superior Council of the Judiciary was created
under laws adopted in 2007 that are in keeping with the

22

The initial actions taken by the Superior Council
will include the holding of partial legislative elections
so as to fill the Senate seats that have been vacant since
8 May. Preparations are moving ahead to ensure the
success and the credibility of the forthcoming elections.
The Government is grateful to the Secretary-General
for having promised in his report the support of the
United Nations for the electoral process.
The nomination on 15 August 2012 of Mr. Godson
Orelus as Director General ad interim of the Haitian
National Police (HNP), replacing Mario Andrésol,
whose mandate had ended, is clear evidence of the
Government’s intention to ensure that the national
police does not experience an institutional vacuum.
The selection of Mr. Orelus, the former Director of
the judicial police, was ratified by the Senate of the
Republic.
The cholera epidemic remains a primary concern
of the people and the Republic of Haiti. As noted by
the Secretary-General, the number of cholera deaths
is estimated by the Minister of Public Health and
Population, at more than 7,440. The number of people
affected by the epidemic is also worrisome. From the
time the epidemic began, in October 2010, through
July 2012, 580,947 cases were reported. During the
seven-month period from January 2012 to August 2012,
35,000 additional cases were reported.
Since the outbreak of the epidemic, the Government,
with the assistance of United Nations agencies working
in Haiti and many friendly countries, has taken measures
that include the establishment of 16 treatment centres,
149 treatment units and 1,270 oral rehydration points.
The Government has also ensured the distribution of
chlorinated products to more than 2.2 million people.

12-52809

S/PV.6842

In October, the Republic of Haiti and the Dominican
Republic will hold a meeting at the United Nations,
jointly with the Pan American Health Organization and
the World Health Organization, on the issue of cholera.
In spite of the progress made thanks to the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations country team in support of the Government,
much remains to be done at the humanitarian level to
improve the living conditions of the most vulnerable
segments of the population. For example, following
the earthquake of 2010, more than 1.5 million people
were living in tents; today, that number totals less than
400,000. However, while that number has decreased by
two thirds, many people, including children, women,
pregnant women, newborn infants and elderly persons,
are still living in tents.
The Government is also working tirelessly to create
employment throughout the country, in particular
through measures aimed at attracting foreign direct
investment and reinvigorating the tourism sector.
The Government is proud to announce the upcoming
inauguration of the Caracol industrial park, which
should create 60,000 jobs, and of the international
airport in Cap-Haïtien.
The Government thanks the Secretary-General for
having recognized the justified nature of its efforts
to accelerate the development process in Haiti. It is
grateful to him for having understood and clearly
stated that, with respect to the incident wherein the
Government expelled former members of the military,
and persons claiming to be such members, from the sites
that they were illegally occupying, the Government was
combating a threat to public order.
The Haitian authorities are encouraged by the
mention in the report of the National Police’s capacity
for intervention.
On another aspect, we would underscore that,
more and more each day, the Government is seeking
to impose respect for the country’s laws. It does not
claim to have achieved that to a satisfactory level yet,
but it can commend itself on the fact that the situation
is improving rather than sliding backwards. That is in
part due to Government measures to strengthen public
institutions and to promote a culture of the rule of
law. The Government is listening to the people and is
determined not to stop half way and to spare no effort in
achieving consensus with all the country’s stakeholders

12-52809

so as to support the stabilization and development
process.
While a number of society’s demands have still
not been met, it is not because of the lack of political
will but because the means are cruelly lacking. The
Government is nevertheless striving to respond
progressively to socioeconomic demands, including
those of former soldiers rightly calling for severance
pay, parents claiming a better life for their children
and people living in tents demanding safe and secure
housing.
Acknowledging that “Haiti is once again setting
its sights on longer-term stabilization and development
goals and has made important strides in strengthening
its political and rule of law institutions” (S/2012/678,
para. 47), the Secretary-General’s report is very
encouraging. It bolsters my Government’s resolve to
spare no effort to achieve the country’s reconstruction
and sustainable development goals.
The Government welcomes the consolidation plan
for MINUSTAH, by which the military component of
the United Nations structure gradually gives way to the
police component until the Haitian National Police can
replace it and can itself assume full responsibility for
security in the country. As the report shows, that plan
is already being implemented in four of the country’s
departments. The Government welcomes with
satisfaction the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to the Security Council to reduce the military and
police components of MUNISTAH from 7,340 to 6,270
troops and from 3,241 to 2,601 personnel, respectively,
between now and June 2013. That measure also seeks
to focus the police component more on the training of
National Police officers than on operational activities
and recognizes that the National Police have attained a
certain maturity in action and intervention.
Finally, the Haitian people and Government would
like to thank the Secretary-General for recognizing the
progress made to date in expressing his confidence in
the will and the ability of Haitian leaders to rebuild the
Haitian nation and to ensure progress and sustainable
socioeconomic development. That is possible only with
the assistance of Haiti’s partners, in the North and the
South, and of international, regional and subregional
bodies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.

23

S/PV.6842

Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate Guatemala on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the first
time, which is, as has been said, very auspicious.
I also thank Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his presentation and to reiterate my Government’s
appreciation of his leadership and consistent support of
political dialogue and the strengthening of democracy
in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
The very fact that we can now consider the
situation in Haiti with a more strategic and longer-term
perspective testifies to the progress so far achieved.
Two years ago, Haiti was grappling with the aftermath
of a devastating tragedy. Although the challenge
of alleviating the plight of the 400,000 people still
living in tents remains, we must not forget that there
were 1.5 million people on the streets just after the
earthquake. That shows that real progress has been
made. The removal of debris has progressed. Haiti and
its international partners showed preparedness when
tropical storm Isaac hit and lives were spared.
For the first time, a democratically elected
Government from the opposition succeeded another
democratically elected Government. The performance
of the Haitian National Police has improved. Some
key rule of law institutions have been established. We
know, however, that the consolidation of such security
and stability gains remains a challenge. Addressing
that will require a sustained and strong commitment
by Haitians themselves and our continued support. It
will also demand that Haitian political actors seize all
opportunities for dialogue and understanding.
Haiti is progressively consolidating a democratic
foundation for its society after so many hardships,
struggles and uncertainties. The active leadership of the
Government and the inclusive participation of Haitian
institutions are required. We encourage the earliest
establishment of the Permanent Electoral Council as a
result of a timely and negotiated solution that garners
wide political support.
The upcoming partial legislative, local and
municipal elections will constitute an important
landmark. Credible and timely elections will send
a powerful signal to the international community,
potential investors and, above all, the Haitian
population. We commend Haitian leaders for taking

24

the reforms forward and setting up key rule of law
institutions.
The improved conditions on the ground have
allowed for adjustments in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). A lighter
military presence should go hand in hand with the
assumption of ever greater responsibilities by national
institutions, especially the Haitian National Police.
Equally important, the consolidation plan for
MINUSTAH must be mindful of the Government’s
priorities and must be truly owned by Haitians
themselves. In addition, it must be coupled with a truly
integrated strategy of the whole United Nations family
in support of socioeconomic development and the
strengthening of the Haitian State. Such an integrated
strategy is essential for the sustainability of the
considerable efforts made by Haitians in the past and
their continuation in the years ahead, with the strong
support of the international community.
As Haitian institutions consolidate further, it is
essential that the Mission help the process by providing
the indispensable support for them to adequately
discharge their responsibilities. As we devise a strategy
for the gradual, carefully planned and conditionsbased military drawdown of MINUSTAH, we must
ensure that the Mission is provided with the adequate
tools, including quick-impact and community violence
reduction projects and engineering resources, in order
to continue to help secure a stable environment with
concrete benefits for the population.
In line with the Mission’s consolidation plan,
Brazil is taking steps, in close coordination with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the other
troop-contributing countries, towards the partial
withdrawal of one of our two battalions that were
deployed as part of the post-earthquake surge. We see
that as a measure of success of the efforts made by Haiti
and the international community. We also see it as an
expression of our shared confidence in the continued
strengthening of the Haitian National Police. We will
undertake the drawdown in constant dialogue with the
Secretariat.
Full stability in Haiti requires major economic
transformations. Job creation and income generation are
still greatly needed. The stabilization gains facilitated
by MINUSTAH will not be sustainable in the absence
of improvements in the situation of the poorer and most

12-52809

S/PV.6842

vulnerable people. They constitute the large majority of
the Haitian population.
Brazil has consistently underscored the importance
of a strong and well-coordinated strategy, under the
effective lead of the Haitian Government, so as to
generate economic growth and reduce poverty. We
welcome President Martelly’s designation of five
restructuring priorities for the country up to 2016,
and his push for universal basic education in Haiti.
We warmly welcome the development of a new aid
coordination structure and, above all, the enhanced role
of the Government in such a mechanism.
Brazil continues to rally behind the construction
of the Artibonite 4C hydroelectric plant. The Brazilian
army engineer corps has donated the construction
project to the Haitian Government. Its completion will
generate jobs and provide cheaper and cleaner energy,
and it will open avenues for further investment and
cooperation. In parallel, Brazil is proud to contribute
to Haiti’s health-care system through the construction
of four health-care units in Haiti in partnership with
Cuba.
Brazil’s solidarity towards our fellow Haitians is
long-standing, deep-rooted and unwavering. We will
continue to stand by Haiti as it redoubles its efforts
towards steady political stability, stronger institutions
and more effective development partnerships. We
see encouraging developments in all those areas. The
determination and strength of the Haitian people are
what make our optimism well founded.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by welcoming the presence of Mr. Harold
Caballeros, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala,
among us this morning.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the
United States of America and my country, Uruguay. I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of Guatemala, for organizing this debate
to discuss the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/678) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

12-52809

Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui, and thanks
him for his comprehensive briefing and for his efforts
as the highest representative of the United Nations in
Haiti.
The Group of Friends recognizes the important
political and institutional achievements in Haiti
since the previous report (S/2012/128), including
the ratification by the Parliament of a new Prime
Minister, the installation of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary and the publication of the constitutional
amendments, which includes, among other provisions,
the establishment of a Permanent Electoral Council,
of a Constitutional Council and a quota of 30 per cent
representation by women in Government.
The effective establishment of the country’s
Permanent Electoral Council will constitute another
major milestone in the process of consolidating
democracy in Haiti, which is necessary for the timely,
transparent, fair and credible holding of the overdue
partial legislative, municipal and local elections. Haitian
democracy will be strengthened by that achievement.
We call on all the relevant political stakeholders
in Haiti to continue to work cooperatively towards the
consolidation of democratic institutions and the rule of
law and, above all, to meet the needs and aspirations of
the Haitian people.
The Group of Friends notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti remained relatively stable since the
previous report. That has allowed MINUSTAH to
continue to draw down its post-earthquake surge and
to adapt its configuration without undermining the
security and stability of Haiti. The Group also takes
note of MINUSTAH’s development of a conditionsbased consolidation plan, and expresses its interest in
closely following the plan’s development and analyzing
its eventual recommendations.
The Group of Friends welcomes the continued
commitment by the Government of Haiti to strengthening
the rule of law and to make further progress in reforming
the security sector. In that regard, the Group would like
to emphasize the critical role that the Haitian National
Police (HNP) plays in Haiti’s security and stability, as
well as to underscore the importance of completing the
ongoing strengthening, professionalization and reform
of the Haitian National Police in order for it to assume
full responsibility for Haiti’s security. In that regard, the
Group expresses its satisfaction with the establishment

25

S/PV.6842

of the 2012-2016 Haitian National Police Development
Plan, presented by MINUSTAH and the HNP.
The Group of Friends of Haiti recognizes the critical
role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability and security
in Haiti and commends the Mission for continuing to
assist the Government of Haiti to ensure a secure and
stable environment.
The Group of Friends expresses its grave concern
regarding the allegations of cases of serious misconduct
by some MINUSTAH personnel, which have negatively
affected public support for the Mission and may be
undermining its work. The Group of Friends expects
all United Nations personnel to adhere to the highest
standards of conduct and urges all actors involved to
assume their responsibilities in order to prevent such
cases, investigate the allegations and hold accountable
those responsible.
The Group acknowledges with satisfaction the
important progress in the reduction of the number
of internally displaced persons in Haiti. However,
it would like to stress that Haiti continues to face
significant humanitarian challenges, particularly
with regard to women and children, including the
more than 390,000 internally displaced persons who
still depend on assistance for their basic survival, the
ongoing cholera epidemic and the country’s extreme
vulnerability to natural disasters. The Group of Friends
notes the continuing work by the Government of Haiti,
MINUSTAH and others to protect vulnerable groups,
but notes with equal concern the need to improve the
response of the criminal justice sector to claims of rape
and of serious crimes against children. We therefore
urgently call for increased efforts to prevent and
respond to violence against women and children.
Those challenges remind us of the importance
of sustaining cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Haiti to meet the
needs of the Haitian people. In that regard, the Group
of Friends acknowledges the efforts of the donor
community and calls upon them to fulfil without
delay the pledges made. The Group welcomes the
establishment of the aid coordination mechanism
developed by the Government of Haiti, which succeeds
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.
The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that security,
development and stability are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore stress the need to
significantly address unemployment and the delivery

26

of basic social services. At the same time, the Group
stresses that there can be no genuine stability or
sustainable development in Haiti without strengthening
democratic institutions and a credible democratic
process. In that context, the Group emphasizes the
importance of promoting the rule of law through the
strengthening of Haitian institutions and further
reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH to support
the Haitian State in the areas of good governance,
extending State authority and promoting and protecting
human rights, in accordance with its mandate.
Finally, owing to the significant challenges that
Haiti still faces and the critical support that MINUSTAH
is providing, the Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the
need to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH for one
year to enable the Mission to continue to discharge
its responsibilities according to the reconfiguration
presented by the Secretary-General. In that regard, the
Group has just submitted for the Council’s consideration
a new draft resolution regarding MINUSTAH’s mandate
and capacities.
The Group of Friends of Haiti would like to express
its support and recognition to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts
to support Haiti’s recovery and stability. We wish the
people of Haiti brighter days ahead. The Group of
Friends is committed to that cause and will certainly
continue its efforts to support their aspirations for
improved welfare, working with the Permanent Mission
of Haiti and the Haitian authorities to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the Guatemalan delegation for organizing today’s
debate on Haiti. I also congratulate you for presiding
over the Council for the first time in your country’s
history.
(spoke in Spanish)
We congratulate all Guatemalans.
(spoke in French)
We also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernánez Amunátegui and
our colleague, the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Ambassador Cazeau, for their statements.

12-52809

S/PV.6842

This debate comes at the end of a period marked by
a number of developments in Haiti that we see as clearly
positive beginnings. The adoption of constitutional
amendments, the creation of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary and the adoption of a new development
plan for the Haitian National Police are just a few
examples. Those are steps in the right direction by the
Government of Haiti. We hope that they will support
Haiti’s fledgling institutions while promoting their
strengthening and independence, two factors essential
to their effectiveness.
However, Canada remains concerned about the
uncertainty surrounding the holding of senatorial
and local elections. By encouraging a legitimate and
credible Permanent Electoral Council to organize the
elections, the Haitian Government has the opportunity
to reaffirm its commitment to and demonstrate its
respect for democratic principles.
(spoke in English)
Canada’s partnership with Haiti has lasted
decades. Today, that partnership is at the heart of our
engagement in the Americas, the purpose of which is to
increase economic opportunities, strengthen security
and institutions and establish long-term relationships.
One of the specific objectives of our engagement
is to effectively promote the rule of law, economic
opportunity and sustainable development initiatives in
Haiti, while at the same time tackling the underlying
causes of the country’s continuing insecurity.
Since 2006, Canada has provided Haiti with more
than $1 billion in support. We have contributed to
Haitian development priorities in a variety of areas,
such as economic growth, food security and maternal
and child health, as a result of Canada’s Muskoka
Initiative on Maternal, Newborn and Child Health.
Canada has also provided substantial humanitarian
assistance after natural disasters, to alleviate suffering
and meet the immediate needs of all Haitians. In fact,
individual Canadians generously donated $220 million
to relief efforts after the devastating 2010 earthquake
and our Government matched those donations.
In September, a Canadian trade mission to Haiti
generated a lot of interest and enthusiasm among the
investors who took part in it. We see that as a positive
development, because we firmly believe that the private
sector has an essential role to play in helping Haiti to
continue its reconstruction efforts. Good governance
being very important to investors, it is now up to the

12-52809

Haitian Government to continue its efforts to strengthen
the rule of law and eliminate corruption, thereby
creating the conditions that will enable Haiti’s private
sector and international investors to play their key role
in Haiti’s economic recovery.
(spoke in French)
Canada supports the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and looks forward
to the upcoming adoption of the draft resolution to
renew its mandate. We are pleased with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations, presented in his recent
report (S/2012/678), to renew the Mission’s mandate and
to focus on adapting it so that it reflects the changing
security environment in Haiti. The security situation
has improved in the past few years, despite a recent
increase in criminal activity and the occupation of
former army bases by paramilitary groups last spring.
We commend the successful intervention of the Haitian
National Police, which was able to dislodge those
groups with MINUSTAH’s support.
I would like to commend MINUSTAH on its
efforts to improve the security situation in Haiti, but
it is even more vital that Haiti’s security institutions
become equipped themselves to play a greater role
in defending the freedom and security of Haitians.
Canada believes that the Haitian National Police must
be the primary security force in Haiti. Along with
other international partners, we continue to provide
massive investments to strengthen the police against
countervailing forces. However, Haitian authorities are
the key actors in that effort. We are therefore pleased
that the current Government has adopted the new
police development plan for the 2012-2016 period. We
hope that the Haitian authorities will make all efforts
necessary for its implementation, and we will continue
to monitor their performance as Canada considers its
future investments.
In conclusion, steadfast political will is still needed
to establish genuine rule of law in Haiti. Beyond some
recent progress, Haiti’s leaders must commit to actually
delivering reforms that have been promised. Haitian
men and women expect a Government in which the
public interest is respected, the rule of law prevails,
human rights are protected and the economy grows
stronger through job creation across the country, and
through the prosperity that trade and investment bring.
Haiti’s partners in Canada expect no less.

27

S/PV.6842

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, please accept the congratulations of
my country, Chile, on Guatemala’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. The Chilean delegation endorses the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. The delegation
also thanks Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mariano Fernández Amunátegui for his
briefing, and we commend him on his able leadership
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), even as we thank the men and women
who staff the Mission for their work and dedication.
Chile reiterates its support for the Mission and for the
process of its consolidation.
We reiterate once again Chile’s strong and
continued commitment to the people of Haiti and their
development, a commitment consistently proven since
2004. We agree with the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH (S/2012/678).
We agree also that the time is ripe for the Haitian
authorities to make progress in rebuilding their country
and strengthening their institutions.
My delegation believes that full adherence to
the rule of law remains essential to Haiti’s security,
stability, governability and economic and social
progress. We hope that Haitians will be able to meet
the challenges in the areas of justice, human rights,
prison administration, gender-based violence and the
protection of children.
During the visit to Haiti in May by the Economic
and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti,
my delegation was able to witness on the ground the
improved conditions in the country. Nevertheless, the
Haitian people continue to face serious challenges
that must be tackled by Haitian national institutions,
with the support of the international community. The
reduction in the number of internally displaced persons
certainly represents progress, but we also note the
many humanitarian challenges that remain. In that
context, we are encouraged by the steps taken by the
Haitian authorities, such as implementing the strategic
development plan in order to connect local needs with
international donors, and developing a new coordination
framework, which will improve accountability between
donors and beneficiaries of such assistance.

28

My delegation notes and commends the
institutional progress made by the Haitian authorities
in strengthening the rule of law. In addition to the
swearing in of a new Government by the Parliament
and the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary, we note the publication of amendments to
Haiti’s Constitution, the institution of the Permanent
Electoral Council, which we hope will soon enjoy full
membership, and the call for partial parliamentary and
municipal elections before the end of 2012.
The holding of those elections would be a clear
reflection of the required positive interaction between
the three branches of Government. That interaction
is essential for maintaining political stability and
achieving development.
Chile is pleased with the progress made in the
area of security and values the important role that
MINUSTAH has played in stabilizing Haiti. Its work
to support the activities of the Haitian National Police
is crucial. It is to be expected that, in the medium term,
the Haitian National Police will gradually be able to
take over all security-related functions in accordance
with what was established by the authorities in the
development plan for the Haitian National Police for the
period 2012-2016. My delegation believes it is essential
for the Government of Haiti to strictly conform to that
plan and to comply with the process of recruiting and
training police officers stipulated for every year in
order to have the appropriate number of police officers
at the end of the period. For that purpose, we believe it
is essential that the international community continue
supporting the strengthening of the Haitian National
Police. In that sense, the Government of Chile will
continue with the bilateral cooperation plans for police
training.
Chile supports the proposal to strengthen
MINUSTAH presented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral and hopes it will take place gradually and on
the basis of conditions in the field. My delegation will
continue to watch that process.
As we have said on previous occasions in the Council,
security and development are two complementary
concepts, which cannot be dealt with separately. For
that reason, we believe that changes to the composition
and size of the Mission should be compensated for
by strengthening the presence of the development
component through United Nations agencies in Haiti.
In that regard, we support the implementation of the

12-52809

S/PV.6842

new integrated strategic framework for the period
2013-2016, as it strengthens the coordination between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
in Haiti and aligns its priorities on the basis of the
strategic plan for the development of Haiti drawn up by
the Government.
We also recognize MINUSTAH’s contribution to
development through the quick-impact projects and the
programmes to reduce community violence. For that
reason, we believe that maintaining those programmes
is essential. Those projects are crucial because they
make it possible to increase the confidence of the local
population in the Mission, especially in urban areas
where institutions are weak and there are socioeconomic
problems which can lead to social unrest. We also
believe it is important for MINUSTAH to contiue taking
measures to fight the cholera epidemic, together with
local authorities, and to strengthen its zero-tolerance
policy towards cases of sexual abuse and misconduct by
some members of its personnel.
The Government of Chile believes it is necessary
to continue cooperating with the development of
institutional capacity in Haiti, under the principle of
national ownership. Chile will continue to support that
process through multilateral and bilateral channels.
I conclude with an expression of my delegation’s
support for the extension of MINUSTAH’s mandate, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report.
We hope that the Security Council will accept those
recommendations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Georgia and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
Given that this is the first time that I am taking
the floor under the presidency of Guatemala, I would
like to first of all congratulate you, Mr. President, and
wish you every success over the course of this month.
I would also like to thank the German delegation and
Ambassador Wittig for the work accomplished under

12-52809

the German presidency of the Security Council last
month.
I shall take this opportunity to touch upon three
priority topics: the political situation, security and
MINUSTAH’s role and development aid. We are pleased
that since the appointment of a new Prime Minister,
Mr. Laurent Salvador Lamothe, in May 2012, and the
establishment of a new Government there has been a
relative stabilization of the political context in Haiti.
We are also pleased that important headway
has been made in moving forward democratic
reforms, particularly with the entry into force of
some amendments to the Constitution of 1987, the
establishment of a Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the establishment, even if it is still ongoing, of a
permanent electoral council.
We call upon the Haitian Government to continue
that path, in particular during the holding of the next
elections. It is important that the obstacles which so far
have impeded the full implementation of the permanent
electoral council be resolved as swiftly as possible. A
stable political context and a security situation that
is under control are preconditions for supporting the
reconstruction and economic recovery process. The
European Union, in promoting development, continues
its financial support and technical assistance to improve
administrative capacities, including the ability of the
State to promote and uphold human rights, as well as
to advance reforms related to governance, security
and strengthening the democratic system. Creating
conditions conducive to foreign investment is a priority
of the Haitian Government and would be another matter
to deal with.
In spite of progress achieved by the Haitian
authorities, among other things in enhancing the
capacity of the Haitian National Police, we note that
MINUSTAH’s presence continues to be crucial in
guaranteeing the security and stability in the country.
The European Union and its member States welcome
the proposals of the Secretary-General to extend
the mandate of the Mission and to reconfigure and
progressively withdraw on the basis of stabilization
benchmarks. That is a difficult and ambitious challenge
but one that, in our view, can be achieved.
The withdrawal must go hand in hand with
strengthening the Haitian National Police. It is also a
matter of strengthening Haiti’s State institutions, which
must fully undertake the civilian duties that were part

29

S/PV.6842

of MINUSTAH’s mandate up until now, in particular
the organizing and funding of the electoral process. The
European Union is currently envisaging the possibility
of implementing measures to support security sector
reform in Haiti, with particular reference to the Haitian
National Police. Moreover, establishing an integrated
border management system for internal and external
borders, recommended by the Haitian Administration,
is also an area in which the European Union could
provide assistance.
Over the past 12 months, the European Union
has supported Haiti in its long-term rebuilding and
development process. In that regard, 85 per cent of
the €522 million pledged at the International Donors’
Conference, held in New York in 2010, has already
been disbursed. With regard to the rate of disbursal,
we hope that over the next year the pace of expenditure
will accelerate, thereby enabling us to honour by the
end of 2013 the commitment we made in New York.
Finally, we hail the efforts of the Haitian Government
to implement a new mechanism for aid coordination,
and we reiterate our willingness to participate in that
endeavour. We hope that it will be an instrument
that contributes to improving the effectiveness and
transparency of aid management. We are also pleased
with the progress made in implementing the strategic
development framework for 2013-2015.
In
conclusion,
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations are part of a process of consolidating
and stabilizing security and democracy in Haiti. A
progressive handover of MINUSTAH’s duties should
contribute to that process.
The European Union and its member States remain
fully committed to providing Haitian authorities with
the support they need to achieve that goal. It also
goes without saying that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General can also count on our full
cooperation, and we thank him for the work he has
done.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Guatemala’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the first time in its history, as well
as for your initiative in convening this open debate on
the situation in Haiti. Guatemala’s presiding presence
at this debate reflects its unshakable commitment to

30

Haiti’s situation, the only issue in the region on the
Council’s agenda. We also welcome the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui.
Haiti’s security, stability, development and
consolidation are particularly important to Peru. For
that reason, my country has played an active part in
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) since 2004, with a military contingent
of 366 troops as well as officials at the Mission
headquarters. Peru is also a participant in the Group
of Friends of Haiti, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, the Group
of Friends of Haiti of the Organization of American
States and the Latin American Political Coordination
Mechanism for Haiti.
Peru is convinced that there can be no social and
economic development that is sustainable over time
without solid institutions that promote and sustain such
development. We reaffirm the validity of the principle of
national ownership, by which the Government of Haiti
will lead the process of rebuilding its infrastructure,
consolidating its national institutions, strengthening
the rule of law, consolidating democracy and creating
capacities. In that regard, we believe that the work of
MINUSTAH continues to be essential to providing
the Haitian authorities with the security and support
needed to facilitate that process, in accordance with its
established strategy and national priorities.
It is in that context that my delegation would like
to draw the Council’s attention to two aspects of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/678) that Peru
considers to be of primary importance: the first has to
do with the need for continued support for the Haitian
authorities in creating and strengthening solid public
institutions, which will enable the country to respond
effectively to the problems of security and development
facing it; the second has to do with formulating a plan
for reconfiguring and consolidating MINUSTAH,
based on the new conditions in Haiti and the current
needs of the Haitian people.
As was noted by previous speakers, the progress
that the Government of Haiti has made in strengthening
its democratic institutions and the rule of law is
encouraging. In that regard, some of the important
benchmarks are Parliament’s ratification of the
choice of Lauren Lamothe as Prime Minister, the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary

12-52809

S/PV.6842

and the publication of the constitutional amendments,
which, among other things, establish a quota of not
less than 30 per cent representation of women in the
Government. We welcome that development.
In recognition of the democratic desires of the
Haitian people, we call on all political forces in the
country to help in speedily establishing the Permanent
Electoral Council, the body responsible for ensuring
that the next electoral proceedings will be conducted
in a transparent, democratic and unhindered manner.
In that connection, I would like to highlight the
importance of the support of MINUSTAH and other
regional bodies in the area of electoral assistance.
The progress MINUSTAH has made in stabilizing
Haiti over the past few years makes it possible for us
to contemplate the future with optimism, by which
we believe that the time has come to begin a gradual,
orderly process of transition to a second phase in the
Organization’s cooperation with Haiti. In that regard,
we concur with the Secretary-General as to the
importance of formulating a plan for reconfiguring
and restructuring MINUSTAH so as to consolidate
the achievements made in the area of stabilization. To
that end, we believe that it is essential to have more
and better coordination between MINUSTAH and
the various agencies and programmes of the United
Nations that have a presence on the ground. We also
call on the various United Nations agencies and donors
to channel their cooperation with Haiti through the new
aid coordination mechanism recently approved by the
Cabinet.
I would like to acknowledge the progress that has
been made in organizing and strengthening the Haitian
National Police, allowing it to take on a major role
in the protection and security of its citizens, as was
demonstrated by the recent transfer to the police of
security functions in four regions of the country. We
welcome the five-year development plan for the Haitian
National Police for 2012-2016, which will enable the
Haitian police to hire the officers necessary for it to
maintain public order and security throughout the
country in the near future, and to establish a solid
institution based on promoting strengthening of the
rule of law and respect for human rights.
Peru appeals to the international community to
focus on the issue of the Haitian people’s food and
health problems. The improved stabilization must be
accompanied by improvements in health care and proper

12-52809

nutrition for the people of Haiti, and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations should devote special
attention to those needs.
The significant achievements to date should not
give us the false impression that the work in Haiti
is over or even close to it. Experience has taught us
the dire consequences for some countries when the
Organization decides to withdraw its presence on the
ground too early, and we trust that we will not make the
same error this time. That is why my delegation would
like to know what will become of the continuity of the
important work we are doing together when the mandate
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Fernández Amunátegui, who has done truly valuable
work, comes to an end. We are sure that SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon will respond in a timely and
effective manner to that important issue.
Finally, my delegation is of the view that the
work in Haiti of the United Nations in general, and of
MINUSTAH in particular, is far from over. For that
reason, we trust that the Security Council will renew
MINUSTAH’s mandate and will continue its permanent
support for building and strengthening solid national
institutions with the goal of achieving a robust rule of
law and a strengthening of Haiti’s weak institutional
capacities by first strengthening its human and material
resources. That would require a focus on the three areas
directly connected to the current process of recovery
and reconstruction, namely, governance, security and
development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Harold Caballeros,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Guatemala, for presiding over this debate. I would also
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui,
for his comprehensive briefing this morning. And
I would like to pay tribute to the men and women of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their commitment and the fortitude
they have demonstrated in difficult circumstances.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
MINUSTAH, issued on 31 August (S/2012/678). As the
report mentions, MINUSTAH’s personnel has shown
continued dedication and commitment in support of
Haiti’s recovery and stability, and we commend them

31

S/PV.6842

for that and for the concrete results they have achieved.
Based on the situation in Haiti, we welcome the fact
that MINUSTAH is refocusing its efforts on long-term
stabilization and development.
The international community acknowledges and
welcomes the progress that has been made in Haiti’s
recovery.
Since the earthquake in 2010, more than 10 million
cubic metres of debris have been removed and the
number of internally displaced persons has been reduced
by more than 75 per cent. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral points out, plans for the reconfiguration and
consolidation of MINUSTAH warrant consideration.
Now that more than two and a half years have
passed since the deadly earthquake, the necessity and
significance of the Mission remain high, but the needs
of the Haitian people have shifted. Haiti has made
remarkable progress since Japan pledged $100 million
for emergency relief and reconstruction for Haiti in
2010. In fact, Japan has already disbursed an amount
exceeding its original pledge.
In recognition of such progress on the ground, the
Government of Japan decided in July that it would start
a wind-up phase of the operations of the Japan Ground
Self-Defense Force’s engineering unit in Haiti, with a
view to its eventual departure from MINUSTAH. As
Haiti is now entering the reconstruction phase, we
believe that the country has reached a stage where our
Self-Defense Force unit is becoming less needed. The
number of personnel who have served in the Japanese
contingent since its beginning now totals approximately
2,200. The contingent has made contributions to the
recovery of Haiti through a variety of efforts, such
as the removal of rubble, dismantling of damaged
buildings, repair of facilities in camps for internally
displaced persons, road repair, construction of
orphanage facilities and water distribution in response
to the cholera outbreak.
In spite of the progress made on the road to recovery,
it is certain that Haiti will still be obliged to improve
its basic infrastructure services with respect to roads,
electricity and potable water, as well as social services,
including access to education and medicine. High
levels of unemployment and delinquency problems also
exist. Many challenges remain for Haiti with respect
to its recovery, reconstruction and development.
International support will still be needed.

32

However, we acknowledge the fact that Haiti has
been making serious efforts towards its reconstruction,
and we are convinced that Haiti will do its utmost
to achieve most of its recovery on its own. President
Martelly has said he is making the five “E”s — education,
employment, environment, establishment of the rule of
law and energy — a priority.
We welcome the Haitian efforts to strengthen the rule
of law and improve the security situation. Japan expects
Haiti to continue its efforts, not only in those areas, but
also in poverty reduction and in ensuring the welfare of
all Haitian people. We further welcome the publication
of a corrected version of the constitutional amendments
and the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary. We urge all relevant political actors in Haiti
to continue their dialogue and cooperation towards the
establishment of a permanent electoral council. Japan
expects the next election in Haiti to be carried out in a
peaceful and democratic manner. It is our hope that the
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts in Haiti will
be further accelerated under the leadership of President
Martelly and Prime Minister Lamothe, along with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, Mr. Harold
Caballeros López.
Even after the withdrawal of its engineering
unit, Japan intends to continue its support for Haiti.
The Japan Self-Defense Force’s engineering unit’s
contributions include human resource development
for Haitian citizens through the sharing of expertise in
the use of civil engineering equipment. In addition, we
are now considering the possibility of donating such
equipment to the Haitian Government.
The time has now come for us to shift from
emergency support to long-lasting contributions.
Through our efforts, including providing training the
delivery of basic social services such as health, hygiene
and education, we will continue to support Haiti’s
reconstruction and development.
As the Council is aware, more than one and a
half years have passed since 11 March 2011, when the
Great East Japan Earthquake struck our country. We
are most grateful for the solidarity expressed to the
Japanese people by the people of Haiti as we embark
on similar endeavours. I am confident that both Haiti
and Japan, in close collaboration with the international
community, will overcome their difficulties through
mutual encouragement and steadfast efforts to bring
about a brighter future.

12-52809

S/PV.6842

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Guatemala on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the first time since it joined the United Nations. We
would also like to express our pleasure at the fact that
today’s debate is taking place under the Guatemalan
presidency, given the role that Guatemala has played in
the stabilization of Haiti and in providing assistance to
it over the years. The issue before us is one that brings
all countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
together.
I also wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Fernández
Amunátegui, for his briefing and for the considerations
he expressed, to which we fully subscribe. I also wish
to note that Argentina fully supports the statement of
Ambassador José Luis Cancela of Uruguay, who spoke
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. For that
reason, I would like only to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
First of all, I wish to reiterate the firm commitment
of Argentina to the institutional stability and
development of Haiti, which has been ongoing for 18
years now and is expressed today in our continued
participation in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and our bilateral
technical cooperation with the Haitian Government.
Like the Secretary-General in his report (S/2012/678),
my delegation understands that MINUSTAH continues
to be a decisive factor in establishing an environment
of security and stability in Haiti on a permanent basis.
As the Secretary-General recognizes in his report, the
Haitian National Police is not yet in a position where
it can take full responsibility for the safeguarding of
internal security in the country. That is why my country
supports the extension of the Mission’s mandate for an
additional year, as its presence is still needed by the
Haitian Government.
Although we support the extension and although
Argentina is aware that the political and social situation
in Haiti continues to be complex, we wish to highlight
the progress made in strengthening political institutions
and the rule of law. We also salute the establishment
by the Haitian Government of an aid coordination
mechanism that will ensure its full participation in
decision-making when it comes to the use of the funds

12-52809

and other issues having to do with cooperation projects
in the country. We understand that the new mechanism
will provide consistency and organization with
respect to aid from the international community and
facilitate the development of the institutional capacity
of the Government itself to strengthen sustainable
development within the framework of the strategic
development plan.
In that sense, Argentina’s understanding is that
progress in stabilization must be accompanied by
growth and development in the country on the basis of
priorities established by the Haitian Government. For
that purpose, it is important to strengthen the publicsector institutions so that efforts for development
will be sustainable over time and so that the sector
can provide the basic services needed, even when the
United Nations is no longer present in the country.
Ambassador Fernández Amunátegui spoke
eloquently about the challenges for development,
particularly with regard to food security, that Haiti is
facing and will continue to face over the coming years.
We full share the views of the Special Representative,
and we believe that the international community must
give particular attention to those challenges in the
coming years.
Argentina considers that it is necessary to further
study the future of the Mission in order to prepare an
orderly drawdown strategy that will respond to the
interests of the authorities and the people of Haiti and
to the situation of the country when it comes to security
and its interrelationship with sustainable development.
We also understand that it is essential for Haiti
to participate in decision-making on issues having to
do with the peacekeeping operation deployed on its
territory. We believe it is important for the Secretariat
to periodically report to troop-contributing countries.
For Argentina, strengthening insitutional capacities
of the Haitian Government must be an essential
component for any drawdown strategy or any potential
transition pact. Furthermore, Argentina believes that
strengthening institutions, among other aspects in the
administration of justice, the promotion and protection
of human rights and economic and social development,
is key to carrying out MINUSTAH’s mandate.
Before concluding, my delegation has said on
previous occasions at the Council that the goal of our
work in Haiti is should be that the presence of the United

33

S/PV.6842

Nations and the international community is no longer be
needed because Haitian authorities will be able to take
responsibility for economic and social development
owing to the strength of their own political institutions.
Finally, I would like to pay special tribute to the work
accomplished by Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui
in his capacity as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH.
At the time of his appointment, Argentina warmly
welcomed the Secretary-General’s decision. As he
nears the end of his tenure, I wish to express, on behalf
the Government of Argentina, our recognition for
his work and that of his team, and especially for all
the efforts they made over the years. We believe that
Ambassador Fernández Amunátegui has represented us
in an exemplary fashion, and we are certain that he will
conclude his term with the great satisfaction of having
done his duty and reached the objectives set for him at
the beginning of his work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr.Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is a true
honour for me to have the opportunity to participate in
this meeting of the Security Council, presided over by
Guatemala for the first time in history.
I would like to associate myself with the statement
made by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union, and I wish to add the following considerations
on behalf of my delegation.
Spain continues to be firmly committed to
supporting the effort of the Government and the people
of Haiti in the work of rebuilding the country following
the 2010 earthquake. That is demonstrated by the fact
that Spain is the third largest bilateral donor to Haiti. To
date, we have disbursed $225 million, 65 per cent of the
$346 million committed at the New York Haiti Donors’
Conference of 2010. That amount was devoted, as a
priority among other commitments and in agreement
with the Government of Haiti, to projects in the water
and sanitation, education, rural development and food
production sectors, as well as in the fight against
hunger, of course.
I wish to highlight Spain’s contribution to the
cooperation fund for water and sanitation, with a total
investment of more than $150 million, which will
potentially benefit 6.5 million citizens, or 70 per cent
of the country’s population. In the business sector,

34

working with the Inter-American Development Bank,
Spain in finalizing the implementation of a specific fund
for promoting small — and medium-sized businesses.
In addition, the President of the Government of Spain,
Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey, proposed to President Michel
Joseph Martelly, here in New York last week, that Spain
would facilitate deploying to Haiti a mission of Spanish
businesspeople to explore new forms of cooperation
with the private sector. Spain has also participated
in the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the
Haiti Reconstruction Fund, donating$20 million to the
latter. Following the end of the Commission’s mandate,
in October 2011, Spain has supported the Haitian
Government’s proposal to designate the Ministry of
Planning and External Cooperation as the counterpart
of the Haiti Reconstruction Fund. We believe that is
the best way of directly encouraging ownership and
capacity-building in the Haitian administration.
We are pleased with the progress that has taken
place in the Haitian political situation since the previous
debate in the Chamber, in March (see S/PV.6732).
Signs of stability after the appointment of the new
Prime Minister, Mr. Laurent Salvador Lamothe, and
the formation of the bodies provided for in the 1987
Constitution are very good news. It is our hope that the
Haitian Government will also be able to make progress
in constituting the Permanent Electoral Council, such
that in the electoral processes to be held in 2013, the
Council will be able to take over the functions assigned
to it by the Constitution.
On the matter of security, Spain reiterates its
commitment to strengthening the Haitian National
Police. The objective is for the police to gradually take
over its responsibilities for public order, and for Haiti to
take over the responsibility for its own security. In the
meantime, Spain believes that the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti’ continues to be
essential. We therefore support the recommendation to
renew its mandate.
Finally, I wish to add my voice to those who welcomed
the new aid coordination mechanism presented by Prime
Minister Lamothe on 26 September here in New York
during the ministerial meeting held under the slogan
“Haiti Partners”. The motto for Spanish cooperation in
Haiti has always been “Everything for Haiti, but with
Haiti”. Spain is therefore prepared to participate in the
new mechanism, the objective of which is to increase
the effectiveness and transparency of assistance, reduce
overlaps and make it possible for Haitian authorities to

12-52809

S/PV.6842

take greater ownership of the process. We hope that the
mechanism, along with the progress made towards a
more stable political environment, will make it possible
to increase disbursements of development assistance.

of countries in the region in particular, continue with
its efforts to fight unemployment and poverty in Haiti,
which have a direct impact on the living conditions of
the Haitian people.

Finally, I wish to thank Ambassador Fernández
Amunátegui for the work he has done.

The international aid coordination mechanism
announced by the Haitian authorities during the
general debate of the General Assembly some days ago
will contribute to ensuring that such aid is channelled
towards meeting the priorities identified by the Haitian
Government.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I first
wish to thank the delegation of Guatemala for having
organized the debate on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Allow me to express
my thanks to Guatemala for presiding over the Security
Council this month.
I also wish to acknowledge the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernández Amunátegui, who
has given us a very comprehensive view of what
is happening on the ground. We also appreciate
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/678), which we are studying. We agaree that
the conditions for political stabilization in Haiti have
been making progress. That would not have taken
place without MINUSTAH’s valuable contribution to
improving the security situation in the country and to
promoting political dialogue.
We take note of the process of the peaceful
transition of power, as well as the recent publication
of constitutional reforms to establish the Permanent
Electoral Council. Those are significant steps towards
strengthening democratic life in Haiti. We also welcome
the launching of a development plan that is intended to
attact foreign investment, help combat corruption and
smuggling, and promote industrial projects as the basis
for the country’s sustainable development. However, we
acknowldege that there are still challenges to which we
should respond and that it is essential for MINUSTAH
to have the necessary resources to respond to them.
We must continue supporting the strengthening of
security institutions, especially the Haitian National
Police, which still does not have the ability to take full
responsibility for internal security in Haiti.
Therefore a MINUSTAH troop and police presence
continues to be necessary, in terms of both coverage
and training.
It is likewise important that the Haitian Government,
with the support of the international community and

12-52809

It is true that if those efforts fail, Haiti will continue
to suffer conditions which promote instability and
which could worsen due to its vulnerability to natural
disasters.
Mexico is firmly committed to efforts aimed at
promoting stability and sustainable development in
Haiti. We therefore support the renewal of the mandate
of MINUSTAH for another year and its reconfiguration.
We firmly believe that the men and women deployed in
Haiti will continue working in close cooperation with
the Haitian Government to lay the foundations of a
prosperous and peaceful Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see Guatemala assume the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank your country,
Sir, for having organized this meeting to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), a matter
of great importance in our region of Latin America and
the Caribbean.
My delegation welcomes the presence of
Ambassador Mariano Fernández Amunátegui and
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Secretary-General for his wise choice in appointing
him his Special Representative for Haiti and for the
efforts he has made to build a better future for this
sister nation.
Ecuador’s commitment to the stabilization process
in Haiti is well known. Therefore, since the beginning
of the Haitian crisis in 2004, we have been participating
actively in MINUSTAH, in keeping with the central
principle of our foreign relations to provide unwavering
support in humanitarian crisis situations and seek to
resolve conflicts.

35

S/PV.6842

It is worth underscoring that my country does not
merely contribute troops to peacekeeping operations;
we have implemented a series of measures and actions
which together form a comprehensive policy, including,
for example, Ecuador’s peacekeeping school, where
soldiers are trained to tackle problems faced by
internally displaced persons and refugees, and to
respond to humanitarian disasters, as well as prepared
to resolve conflicts with civilians.
I take this opportunity to recall that following
the earthquake of January 2010, my country, under
the auspices of the Union of South American Nations,
cooperated directly with the Government of Haiti
in rebuilding roads, bridges and access routes in the
Artibonite area, which allowed farmers to bring their
produce to cities, thus contributing to the development
of food security in the most important producing
area of Haiti and thereby to the country’s sustainable
development.
Ecuador welcomes the progress made, which
has improved conditions in Haiti. These include the
ratification by the Senate of the new Prime Minister
and the publication of the corrected constitutional
amendments which had been awaited since June 2011.
Likewise, the establishment of the Superior Council
of the Judiciary is another step forward in the work of
the Haitian Government in strengthening institutions
essential to the rule of law and thereby human rights.
However, Ecuador is concerned to see that the
process of the establishment of Haiti’s first Permanent
Electoral Commission is plagued by controversy
between political parties in Parliament and civil society,
who have questioned the integrity of the Council and its
ability to organize credible elections, which has led a
number of lawmakers to favour the establishment of a
provisional electoral council.
In this regard, my country hopes that all stakeholders
will participate in a constructive dialogue with a view
to holding credible elections without further delay and
thereby contribute to revitalizing Haitian institutions
and minimizing the institutional vacuum created by the
expiration on 8 May of the mandate of 10 senators.
Ecuador commends the progress made in extending
State authority, including over border control and
in strengthened security. However, we note that
violence continues to be concentrated in major urban
areas, signalling that the National Police continues to
face challenges when it comes to fully assuming its

36

responsibility for safety in the country. In this context,
MINUSTAH’s social and military components play an
essential role in maintaining security and stability in
general.
In
conclusion,
Ecuador
supports
the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2012/678) to extend the MINUSTAH
mandate for a further year. Haiti undeniably continues
to be threatened by food insecurity, growing poverty
and a fragile humanitarian situation. My Government
hopes that measures can be devised to optimize
coordination and joint efforts by the Group of Friends
of Haiti, donor countries, and the authorities and the
Government of Haiti in order to achieve the badly
needed social, political and economic stability that the
people of Haiti demand and deserve.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to Mr. Fernández Amunátegui to respond to
the comments made.
Mr. Fernández Amunátegui (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to express my most sincere thanks to
the Guatemalan presidency for having organized this
meeting, espeecially as this is the first time that that
country has assumed the presidency of the Security
Council since the United Nations was founded. I think
that this is a very important moment for us.
I would also like to express my gratitude for
the unanimous support for the recommendation of
the Secretary-General, his report (S/2012/678) and
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for a
further year. I would also like to express my deepest
thanks for the support expressed for the work of
MINUSTAH. I believe that the men and women of
the Mission richly deserve such support, and it was
delivered most eloquently.
Lastly, I wish to express my personal thanks to the
international community. In today’s debate, we have
noted how institutional and political progress is leading
to greater stability in Haiti. That progress has truly been
due to the unified voice and action of the international
community, especially the permanent diplomatic
presences in Haiti, but also the missions that have
visited and the diplomats and embassies represented
here. There has never been a single dissenting voice
in our efforts to politically stabilize Haiti. Quite the
contrary: we have always had very active agreement,
which has been felt by the Government, public

12-52809

S/PV.6842

opinion, the opposition, Parliament and civil society.
This concord has made an extraordinary contribution
to continued progress. I cannot say that no progress
would have been achieved without it, but I believe that
the difficulties would have been much greater and the
progress much more minimal. Therefore, I wish to
thank and congratulate the international community

on behalf of MINUSTAH for the outstanding work we
have been able to achieve.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

12-52809

37
