II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the urgent need for the Preparatory Commission to be assured of adequate resources to enable it to
discharge its functions efficiently and expeditiously,
Recalling also that in General Assembly resolution 35/
116 the Secretary-General was requested to prepare and
submit to the Conference, for such consideration as it deemed
appropriate, a study identifying his future functions under
the proposed Convention and that such a study was submitted on 18 August 1981 ,47
Noting that, in a letter dated 7 September 1982 to the
President of the General Assembly, 48 the President of the
Conference drew attention to the responsibilities which
the Secretary-General was called upon to carry out under
the Convention and the related resolutions and to the need
for the Assembly to take the appropriate action to approve
the assumption of these responsibilities by the SecretaryGeneral,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the third preambular
paragraph of the Convention, the problems of ocean space
are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole,
Recognizing the need for the Secretary-General to be authorized to assume his functions under the Convention and
the related resolutions, including in particular the provision
of the secretariat services required by the Preparatory Commission for its effective and expeditious functioning,
l. Welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the related resolutions;
2. Calls upon all States to consider signing and ratifying
the Convention at the earliest possible date to allow the
effective entry into force of the new legal regime for the
uses of the sea and its resources;
3. Appeals to the Governments of all States to refrain
from taking any action directed at undermining the Convention or defeating its object and purpose;
4. Accepts with appreciation the invitation extended by
the Government of Jamaica for the purpose of adopting and
signing the Final Act and opening the Convention for signature at Montego Bay from 6 to l O December 1982;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into the
necessary agreement in this regard with the Government of
Jamaica;
6. Reiterates its gratitude to the Government of Venezuela for the hospitality extended to the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea at its first substantive session, held at Caracas in 1974;
7. Approves the assumption by the Secretary-General
of the responsibilities entrusted to him under the Convention
and the related resolutions and also approves the stationing
of an adequate number of secretariat staff in Jamaica for
the purpose of servicing the Preparatory Commission for
the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, as required by its functions
and programme of work;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to convene the Preparatory Commission as provided in Conference resolution
I, of 30 April 1982, 45 by which the Commission was established, and to provide the Commission with the services
required to enable it to perform its functions efficiently and
expeditiously;
9. Approves the financing of the expenses of the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget of the United
Nations;

I0. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
91st plenary meeting
3 December /9H2
37 /6 7.

Ibid., vol. XVII. document A/CONF.62/L.76.

48

A/37/441.

•

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization

The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the continuing deterioration of international relations, the frequent recourse to the threat or
use of force, the further escalation of the arms race, particularly in its nuclear dimension, the aggravation of global
economic problems, widespread, mass and flagrant violations of human rights, all hindrances to the process of decolonization and the continued stalemate in the resolution
of various fundamental international crises and their
exacerbation,
Gravely concerned at the crisis in many multilateral negotiations and in co-operation, especially within the United
Nations.
Noting with concern that the United Nations system of
collective security has not been used effectively.
Gravely concerned at the frequent disregard shown for
the provisions of the Charter and the resolutions of the
United Nations,
Convinced that there is an urgent and imperative need for
strict respect for the provisions of the Charter and for
strengthening the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security and in solving
international problems in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 49
and the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes, 50
Bearing in mind the views expressed by Member States
during the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization; 51
2. Solemnly reaffirms that genuine and stable peace and
security in the world can be achieved by strict adherence to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to international law and that all States should
fulfil in good faith their obligations assumed in accordance
therewith;
3. Emphasizes the imperative need to strengthen the role
and effectiveness of the United Nations as indispensable for
the maintenance of international peace and security, for the
settlement of international disputes and crises by peaceful
means, for the strengthening of international co-operation
on the basis of sovereign equality and for the promotion of
economic and social development and of human rights;
4. Calls upon all organs of the United Nations to discharge fully and effectively their responsibilities in accordance with the Charter and upon all Member States to
contribute actively to that end;
5. Requests the Security Council to carry out the primary responsibility for the maintenance of intemat.ional peace
" Resolution 2625 ( XXV)
"' Resolution 37/10, annex.
" Official Records of the General As.,emhlr. Thirn'-.<el'enth St•.uio11.
Supplement No. I (A/37/1).
4

1

27

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

28

and security and to give due consideration to the report of
the Secretary-General;
6. Invites the Secretary-General, in discharging his
responsibilities under the Charter, to continue his efforts
towards strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
to fulfil the effective and decisive role envisaged for it in
the Charter;
7. Urges that efforts to this end continue, taking into
account the views expressed by Member States during the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly as well as
those which Member States may wish to offer, while views
of institutions and eminent persons may also be taken into
consideration as appropriate;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General
Assembly informed on the implementation of the present
resolution.
9 I st plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/68.

Further appeal for clemency in favour of South
African freedom fighters

The General Assembly,
Having been informed that the appeal against the death
sentences imposed on 19 August 1981 on Mr. Anthony
Tsotsobe, Mr. Johannes Shabangu and Mr. David Moise,
members of the African National Congress of South Africa,
has been rejected by the appellate division,
Recalling its resolution 36/172 J of 17 December 1981 ,
in particular its demand that the racist regime of South Africa
refrain from the execution of persons sentenced under arbitrary repressive laws for acts arising from opposition to
apartheid,
Deeply concerned that the South African authorities have
not yet heeded the General Assembly's appeal for clemency
contained in its resolution 37/1 of l October 1982 in favour
of three other South African freedom fighters, namely Mr.
Simon Mogoerane, Mr. Jerry Mosololi and Mr. Marcus
Motaung,
Considering that the continued repression against and
executions of opponents of apartheid are bound to have
grave repercussions,
l. Calls upon the South African authorities not to proceed with the execution of the six above-mentioned freedom
fighters and to commute the death sentences as soon as
possible:
2. Recommends that the Security Council should direct
an appeal for clemency to the South African authorities not
to proceed with the execution of the six above-mentioned
members of the African National Congress of South Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the South African authorities immediately
and to report on the matter to the General Assembly not
later than 15 December 1982.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1982

37/69.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of South
Africa52

Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 5 '
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity
and a threat to international peace and security,
Bearing in mind that it proclaimed 1982 International
Year of Mobilization for Sanctions against South Africa,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations and
the international community towards the oppressed people
of South Africa and their national liberation movement, as
proclaimed, in particular, in General Assembly resolution
3411 C (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
Convinced that it is incumbent on the 'international community to provide all necessary assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle for the establishment of a
democratic society pursuant to their inalienable rights, in
conformity with the principles contained in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 54
Commending the oppressed people of South Africa and
their liberation movements, particularly the African National Congress, for intensifying the armed struggle against
the racist regime,
Reaffirming that the apartheid regime is totally responsible for precipitating violent conflict through its policy of
apartheid and inhuman repression,
Gravely concerned at the intensification of repression in
South Africa, the growing number of deaths in detention
and the imposition of death sentences on freedom fighters
of the African National Congress,
Reaffirming that freedom fighters of South Africa should
be treated as prisoners of war in accordance with Additional
Protocol 15 5 to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,56
Commending the courageous struggle of the black workers of South Africa for their inalienable rights,
Condemning the policy of "bantustanization" designed
to dispossess further the African majority of its inalienable
rights and to deprive it of citizenship, as well as the continuing forced removals of black people, as an international
crime,
Gravely concerned at the growing number of displaced
and missing persons resulting from the criminal policies of
the racist regime of South Africa,
Reaffirming that apartheid cannot be reformed but must
be totally eliminated,
Denouncing the manoeuvres of the racist regime of South
Africa to divide the oppressed people through so-called constitutional dispensations and other means, and commending
the oppressed people of South Africa for rejecting those
manoeuvres,
Recognizing that comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations are essential to avert the grave threat
to international peace and security resulting from the policies
and actions of the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Considering that political, economic, military and any
other collaboration with the apartheid regime of South Africa encourages its persistent intransigence and defiance of
the international community and its escalating acts of repression and aggression,

A
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on this question,
particularly resolution 36/172 of 17 December I 981 ,
" See al~o sect. I. footnote 8, and sect. X 8.3, decision 371406.

" Official Records o( the General A.uemblv, Thirty-seventh Session,
Suppk!ment No. 22 (A/37/22) and Supplement No. 22A (A/37122/Add.l
and 2).
" Resolution 217 A (Ill)
"A/32/144, anna I.
6
'
United Nation,. Treat\ !oieries, vol. 75, Nns. 970-973.
