United Nations

S/PV.3989

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

3989th Meeting
Friday, 26 March 1999, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Qin Huasun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Petrella
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cordeiro
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rastam
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. van Walsum
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Eldon
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
Letter dated 24 March 1999 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1999/320)

99-85215 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 24 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1999/320)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance with
the decisions taken at its 3988th meeting, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Germany and India to take the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Sychou (Belarus), Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia
and Herzegovina), Mr. Kastrup (Germany) and Mr.
Sharma (India) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance with
the decision taken at the 3988th meeting, I invite Mr.
Vladislav Jovanović to take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanović took
a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cuba and Ukraine, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rodríguez
Parrilla (Cuba) and Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now resume its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

2

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
As was done at the 3988th meeting, I should like to
recall Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998).
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1999/328, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Belarus and the Russian Federation. India
has joined in sponsoring the draft resolution contained in
document S/1999/328.
Members of the Council also have before them
documents S/1999/327, letter dated 24 March 1999 from
the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/1999/331, letter dated
25 March 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Tajikistan addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1999/332,
letter dated 24 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Belarus to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; S/1999/335 and S/1999/336,
letters dated 25 March 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/1999/338, letter
dated 25 March 1999 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 23 March 1999 from the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): The draft
resolution before us today demands an immediate
cessation of the hostilities and urgent resumption of
negotiations. What has the entire international community
been doing since the beginning of the humanitarian crisis
in Kosovo if not negotiating urgently and actively in
order to avert this escalation? We dispatched many
diplomatic missions and special envoys to Belgrade, under
the auspices of the United Nations, of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. We also engaged on many
occasions in bilateral initiatives aimed at convincing
President Milosevic of the seriousness of our intentions.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We deployed an international monitoring force and
organized a major peace conference. The Security Council
adopted a number of resolutions and presidential statements
precisely asking President Milosevic to put an end to the
brutal repression perpetrated against his fellow-citizens.
During that process, President Milosevic took advantage of
the international community’s good intentions to continue
and even intensify his tactic of repression in Kosovo —
even while negotiations were under way — in obvious
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and of the commitments he undertook last October.

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
Kosovo to be one constituting a threat to peace and
security in the region.
Furthermore, the draft resolution ignores the fact that
the Security Council has already spelled out the
requirements for the removal of that threat and the fact
that those requirements were flagrantly violated by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
The most dangerous among those violations is the
ongoing massive military offensive by the military and
security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
affecting the civilian population in Kosovo.

(spoke in English)
Having done so only 36 hours ago, I do not need to
reiterate the extent of the humanitarian crisis in Kosovo. I
would, however, remind those members of the Council who
need reminding that thousands have died and many
hundreds of thousands remain homeless and at the mercy
of extremely harsh winter conditions. Hourly their numbers
increase; their homes and farms have been looted and
burned and their livestock slaughtered.
Those who would support this draft resolution place
themselves outside the international consensus, which holds
that the time has come to stop the continuing violence
perpetrated by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia against its own people. Rather than bringing
forward this unproductive draft resolution in an attempt to
divert attention from the fundamental humanitarian issue,
these countries might more usefully have directed their
energies towards convincing the leaders in Belgrade to stop
the violence against their people and to accept the
Rambouillet peace agreement.
As proposed, this draft resolution would serve only to
grant President Milosevic free rein to finish the brutal job
he started last year and has since continued to such deadly
effect, most prominently at Racak.
For these reasons, Canada will vote against this draft
resolution.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Slovenia will vote against the
draft resolution submitted for action by the Security Council
today. The text represents, in our opinion, an inadequate
attempt to address the situation concerning Kosovo. It takes
a selective political view of the situation and lacks the
objectivity necessary in a resolution of the Security
Council. The draft resolution ignores the fact that several
months ago the Security Council declared the situation in

All these and other obstacles to the implementation
of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter are ignored in
the draft resolution. It appears as if the draft resolution
were intended to redefine the assessment of the factual
situation contained in resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998). Proceeding from such a
fundamentally flawed factual assessment, the text tries to
invoke some of the basic norms of the United Nations
Charter. The draft resolution fails to address the relevant
circumstances and ignores the situation of necessity which
has led to the current international military action.
Furthermore, the draft resolution does not even address
the stated reasons for that military action, let alone
provide any argument against those reasons. Instead, in its
third preambular paragraph, it describes that action as a
“flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter”. The
political jargon of “flagrant violation” cannot conceal the
lack of convincing argument.
Furthermore, the draft resolution completely fails to
reflect the practice of the Security Council, which has
several times, including on recent occasions, chosen to
remain silent at a time of military action by a regional
organization aimed at the removal of a regional threat to
peace and security. It is true that each case is unique.
However, the requirement of consistency in the
interpretation and application of the principles and norms
of the United Nations Charter demands at least some
indication as to the specific justification for the approach
proposed by the draft resolution in the present case. Such
indication is sadly lacking and, as I mentioned before,
cannot be replaced by the strong words we see in the
draft resolution.
For these reasons, the delegation of Slovenia will
vote against the draft resolution proposed for action today.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Before concluding, I wish to make an additional,
general point. The use of force by the Belgrade
Government against the civilian population created a
situation that made the current military action inevitable.
We would have preferred such military action to be fully
authorized by the Security Council; however, that was not
possible for reasons that we explained during the
discussions of the Security Council two days ago. In the
present circumstances, it is important to be aware that,
according to the Charter, the Security Council has the
primary but not exclusive responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. At a moment like this,
all the Council members have to think hard about what
needs to be done to ensure the Council’s authority and to
make its primary responsibility as real as the Charter
requires.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Just over five months
ago, the adoption of Security Council resolution 1203
(1998) was greeted with relief in the Netherlands, because
it was felt that with all the pressure applied on Belgrade in
that resolution, it should at last be possible to make
President Milosevic see reason and accept a peaceful
solution to the problem of Kosovo.
The resolution clearly stated that the Security Council
was acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. In the resolution, the Security Council expressed
its deep alarm at the impending humanitarian catastrophe in
Kosovo, emphasizing the need to keep this from happening.
It endorsed and supported the agreements signed in
Belgrade between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) respectively,
and demanded the full and prompt implementation of these
agreements by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Being aware of its strong commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, we were grateful to Russia for having
contributed to this pressure being brought to bear on the
Yugoslav leadership.
Since then, however, at every critical juncture Russia
has somehow succeeded in making the pressure less
credible, so that in the end NATO had no choice but to
make good on its threat, which was initially meant to bring
about a peaceful solution to the Kosovo crisis. It is
legitimate to make a threat hoping that it need never be
carried out, but ultimately one must also be prepared to
bring a threat into effect. The alternative, which we could

4

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
not seriously contemplate, would have been to sit back
and simply let the humanitarian catastrophe occur.
The NATO action, in which we are participating,
follows directly from resolution 1203 (1998), in
conjunction with the flagrant non-compliance on the part
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Given its complex
background, we cannot allow it to be described as
unilateral use of force. If the Security Council should now
demand an immediate cessation of the NATO action, it
would once again — and once again at the initiative of
Russia — give the wrong signal to President Milosevic,
leading to a further prolongation of the bloodshed in
Kosovo.
It is for this reason that the Netherlands will vote
against the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
United States greatly appreciates the broad support for the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) shown in the
Security Council this past Wednesday and around the
world in the past several days. We emphasize that we and
our allies began military action only with the greatest
reluctance, after all peaceful options had been thoroughly
exhausted. By rejecting a peace settlement and escalating
its assault on the people of Kosovo — in violation of
numerous Security Council resolutions — Belgrade chose
the path of war.
Belgrade continues to attack innocent Kosovars. We
have received disturbing reports that Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia forces are using human shields, that noncombatants are being rounded up in large groups and that
some are being summarily executed. Attempts to verify
these reports have been obstructed by the Belgrade
Government, which has cracked down on independent
journalists in Yugoslavia, harassed and expelled
international media, and clamped down on independent
human rights groups.
Even today Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces
are pressing their offensive against civilians, burning and
looting, and attacking Kosovar Albanian political leaders.
Some 60,000 people have been forced to flee their homes
since the last round of peace talks began in France, and
that number is increasing daily. It stands now at more
than 250,000 displaced persons — one in 10 of Kosovo’s
population. This is a humanitarian catastrophe.
Large refugee flows out of Kosovo into
neighbouring countries could have a serious and

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
destabilizing effect. The stability of Albania, of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and of the rest of the region is at stake.
These developments justify sustained military action
to limit Belgrade’s ability to threaten and harm innocent
civilians in Kosovo.
I want to be very clear about the following. We
appreciate very much the enormous contribution the
Russian Federation has made to advance the cause of peace
in Kosovo and in the Balkans, in particular in the context
of the Contact Group. The Group’s efforts to uphold human
rights and to negotiate an equitable settlement to the crisis
have been endorsed on several occasions by this Council.
The avenue to peace is clear. In resolutions 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998) the Security Council laid out the
steps Belgrade must take to resolve this crisis. Belgrade,
however, has chosen to defy repeatedly the will of the
international community.
The draft resolution before us today alleges that
NATO is acting in violation of the United Nations Charter.
This turns the truth on its head. The United Nations Charter
does not sanction armed assaults upon ethnic groups, or
imply that the international community should turn a blind
eye to a growing humanitarian disaster.
NATO’s actions are completely justified. They are
necessary to stop the violence and to prevent a further
deterioration of peace and stability in the region. The
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could
quickly bring NATO’s actions to a halt by ceasing their
brutal attacks against the people of Kosovo and moving to
a peace agreement.
This draft resolution should be defeated. If adopted, it
could only encourage President Milosevic to continue or
even to intensify military repression of the civilian
population of Kosovo. Furthermore, if adopted, it would
damage prospects for a negotiated settlement and make
further bloodshed more likely. In short, the draft resolution
does nothing to advance the cause of peace in the Balkans,
a cause that the international community and the Security
Council have worked long and hard to achieve.

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
Mr. Lavrov (spoke in Russian): At the 24 March
Security Council meeting the Russian delegation set forth
its principled assessment of the unilateral use of force
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the
member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). The continuing military action,
undertaken under the pretext of preventing a humanitarian
catastrophe, has already caused severe humanitarian
consequences and done serious damage to the efforts to
find a political settlement in Kosovo. This again confirms
how justified we were in stating the absolute need for
scrupulous compliance by all States with international
law.
The attempts, repeated today, to justify this
lawlessness cannot be taken seriously, just as one cannot
take seriously the statements, bordering on blackmail, that
those who vote in favour of the draft resolution will place
themselves outside of the consensus. To the contrary:
those who vote against it will place themselves in a
situation of lawlessness.
With regard to attempts to distort Russia’s position,
I would like to recall here that today it was precisely
Russia that was in favour of convening an urgent meeting
of the ministers of the Contact Group if the military
action were to cease.
The aggressive military action unleashed by NATO
against a sovereign State without the authorization and in
circumvention of the Security Council is a real threat to
international peace and security and a gross violation of
the United Nations Charter and other basic norms of
international law. Key provisions of the Charter are being
violated, in particular Article 2, paragraph 4, which
requires all Members of the United Nations to refrain
from the threat or use of force in their international
relations, including against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State; Article 24, which
entrusts the Security Council with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security; Article 53, on the inadmissibility of any
enforcement action under regional arrangements or by
regional agencies without the authorization of the Security
Council; as well as others.
The illegal use of force by NATO not only
destabilizes significantly the situation in the Balkans and
in Europe as a whole, but it also directly undermines the
fundamental bases of the entire modern system of
international relations, which is based on the primacy of
the United Nations Charter. One’s worst fears are now

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
being fulfilled. The virus of lawlessness is spreading to ever
more spheres of international relations. The latest example
was the ban declared by NATO on any civil aviation flights
in the airspace of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Croatia. In
undertaking this ban, NATO decided to control the fate of
other States. That is a gross violation of the principle of the
exclusive sovereignty of a State over the airspace above its
territory, which is enshrined in the article 1 of the Chicago
Convention.
The Security Council cannot and should not remain
passive in this situation, which, we are profoundly
convinced, runs counter to the fundamental interests of the
overwhelming majority of States. Accordingly, the Russian
Federation submitted, together with the Republic of Belarus
and India, a draft resolution for the consideration of the
Security Council that contains a demand for the immediate
cessation of the use of force against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and that calls for an urgent resumption of
talks. A solution of precisely this kind should be urgently
sought by the international community if it is really
interested in preventing unilateral approaches and the
prevalence of force in world affairs.
We know that many members of the Security Council
are racked with doubts over this vote. What is in the
balance now is the question of law and lawlessness. It is a
question of either reaffirming the commitment of one’s
country and people to the basic principles and values of the
United Nations Charter, or of tolerating a situation in which
gross force dictates realpolitik. Doubts can also been seen
on the part of NATO countries. In an editorial dated 25
March, the Financial Times says,
“So far, Governments of NATO countries are
apparently united on bombing, but their publics and
parliaments are not.” (“NATO politics”, p. 15)
We do not want to moralize here, but we cannot forget
the fact that members of the Security Council bear a special
responsibility not only to their peoples but to all Members
of the United Nations, upon which decisions of the Council
are binding under the Charter. Today’s vote is not just on
the problem of Kosovo. It goes directly to the authority of
the Security Council in the eyes of the world community.
Members of the Council cannot ignore the demands that we
are now hearing in various parts of the world — made by,
among others, the Rio Group, the Council of Defence
Ministers of the member countries of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and members of the Non-Aligned

6

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
Movement — to stop the military aggression and to
respect international legality.
The capacity of the Security Council to defend the
United Nations Charter is key for the future of the United
Nations. If the Council cannot do this, then no
negotiations or talks about reforming the Council will
help.
I will not be asking for the floor after the voting. As
I have said, law and lawlessness are in the balance today.
It is up to the members of the Security Council to make
their choice, which they will do at this public meeting,
before the eyes of all the members of the international
community, in conditions of full transparency.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in S/1999/328.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Namibia, Russian Federation
Against:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Malaysia, Netherlands, Slovenia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (spoke in Chinese) The result of the
voting is as follows: 3 votes in favour and 12 against.
The draft resolution has not been adopted because it did
not obtain the required majority.
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): As Sir Jeremy
Greenstock set out in detail in the Security Council debate
on 24 March, the international community has over the
past year made exhaustive efforts to resolve the crisis in
Kosovo through negotiation. Every means short of force
was used to try to avert the current situation. These
efforts have failed because President Milosevic has
flouted the demands of the international community,
including successive Security Council resolutions, allowed
his forces to continue their violent oppression of civilians
in Kosovo and ignored all appeals to negotiate a political

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
settlement. He has acted in defiance of the expressed will
of the Security Council.
As recognized in Security Council resolutions 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998), it is Belgrade’s policies with
regard to Kosovo that have caused the threat to peace and
security in the region, not the actions of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). In the current circumstances,
military intervention is justified as an exceptional measure
to prevent an overwhelming humanitarian catastrophe.
Adoption of the draft resolution before us today would
simply have signalled to President Milosevic that there was
no check on his repressive action in Kosovo. It would have
done nothing to avert an imminent humanitarian
catastrophe. That is why the United Kingdom voted against
it.
As I said earlier, our position was explained in great
detail in the Council’s debate on 24 March. I do not,
therefore, want to go too far into the substance of the draft
resolution on which we have just voted in my statement
now. But I should refer to the suggestion in the Security
Council draft resolution, repeated today by the
representative of the Russian Federation, that NATO has
banned civil flights over a number of countries in the
Balkan region. This is incorrect; NATO has no power to do
this. What has actually happened is that NATO advised
Croatia, Albania, Macedonia and Bosnia that the NATO air
strikes could make their airspace unsafe for civil flights. In
the light of that advice, these countries decided to close
their airspace to such flights. There has therefore been no
breach either of the United Nations Charter or of the
Chicago Convention.

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
In its resolution 1203 (1998), the Security Council
endorsed and supported the agreements concluded
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, on
the one hand, and between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
on the other. The Security Council demanded the full and
prompt implementation of these agreements by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. These agreements
involved specific obligations and commitments on the part
of the Yugoslav Government.
These obligations have not been respected by
Belgrade. Meanwhile, tension, confrontation and the threat
of violent repression have increased. The actions decided
upon respond to Belgrade’s violation of its international
obligations under the resolutions which the Security
Council has adopted under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.
The draft resolution that was submitted to us runs
directly counter to our judgement. That is why France
voted against it.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Argentina wishes to explain its position in
the voting that has just taken place on the draft resolution
in document S/1999/328, submitted by the delegations of
Belarus and the Russian Federation and co-sponsored by
the delegation of India.

Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): During
the formal meeting held by the Security Council on 24
March 1999, my delegation laid out the reasons for
France’s involvement in the actions under way in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

In this connection, we wish to state that Argentina’s
negative vote was based on the vital need to contribute to
putting an end to the extremely grave violations of human
rights that are taking place in the province of Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. These violations are
clearly documented in many reports of the SecretaryGeneral and inspire the many principles that lie at the
core of Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998).

The Security Council adopted resolutions 1160 (1998),
1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998) under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter. In resolutions 1199 (1998) and
1203 (1998), the Security Council affirmed that the
deterioration of the situation in Kosovo constituted a threat
to peace and security in the region. In resolution 1199
(1998), the Security Council made a certain number of
demands addressed, in particular, to the Belgrade
authorities.

Argentina also wishes to stress that the fulfilment of
the legal norms of international humanitarian law and
human rights is a response to universally recognized and
accepted values and commitments. The obligation to
protect and ensure respect for these rights falls to
everyone and cannot and must not be debated. That
obligation is all the more urgent given that it has been
alleged, witnessed and proven that, in that region,
extremely serious international crimes have been

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
committed, including acts of genocide, some of which are
being tried in a special tribune established by this Council.
Since 1992, Argentina has been and remains involved
in the Balkans through peacekeeping operations. The
position we are taking here is based on our own direct
experience, acquired in the field. Ultimately, this position,
based on fundamental legal principles and on practical
experience, cannot come as a surprise. We cannot accept a
draft resolution that fails to mention earlier resolutions of
the Security Council on the question of Kosovo, disregards
the extremely grave humanitarian context and does not take
into account the background and precedents of that region.
Any document, statement or — as in this case — draft
resolution that does not recognize reality lacks balance. It
cannot contribute to a peaceful settlement of the problem
and encourages the most negative elements at work in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
For all these reasons, we once again respectfully urge
all of those with the capacity to exert influence in the
region, in particular the Russian Federation, to pursue their
valuable and recognized efforts to put an end to this
extremely grave crisis and to arrive at a comprehensive and
definitive agreement to restore lasting peace.
We sincerely sympathize with the victims of this
situation and we are prepared to do all within our capacity
to alleviate their suffering, particularly that of the refugees
and displaced persons, many of whom have forever lost
their homes.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): Malaysia fully subscribes to
the fundamental principle of the paramount need to
preserve the sanctity of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Charter confers upon the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Malaysia underlined clearly, when the Council met
on Wednesday, that any conflict should be resolved through
dialogue and political negotiations and not by the use of
force. Force, if at all necessary, should be a recourse of last
resort and it should be sanctioned by the Security Council.
It is to our great disappointment that serious efforts at
finding a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Kosovo have
failed. The Yugoslav leadership bears full responsibility for
the failure of those efforts, since it continues to reject the
Rambouillet accords and chooses to carry out massive
military offensives against the people of Kosovo, even at
this very hour. We take serious note of the information
provided through the letter of the Secretary-General, dated
25 March 1999 in document S/1999/338, in which the

8

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
Secretary-General of the North
Organization (NATO) states that

Atlantic

Treaty

“Following the withdrawal of the Kosovo
Verification Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on 20 March,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has increased its
military activities and is using excessive and wholly
disproportionate force, thereby creating a further
humanitarian catastrophe”. (S/1999/338, p. 2)
The draft resolution has completely ignored this reality.
Malaysia remains gravely concerned at the
worsening situation on the ground in Kosovo. The violent
repression by the Serbian and Yugoslav security forces
against the population in Kosovo has increased
dramatically in the past few days. The current Serbian
military offensive has resulted in further deaths and
destruction. Large numbers of civilians, especially women
and children, have been forcibly displaced from their
homes and villages. The present action by Serb forces
against the Kosovar Albanians is certainly creating an
immense humanitarian catastrophe. Such a tragic situation
calls for appropriate and prompt action by the
international community.
Security Council resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203
(1998) both invoke Chapter VII of the Charter and
recognize that the situation in Kosovo constitutes a threat
to international peace and security in the region. In
resolution 1199 (1998), the Council had demanded that
the Yugoslav authorities take immediate steps to improve
the humanitarian situation and avert the impending
humanitarian catastrophe. The Council had also, in
resolution 1203 (1998), demanded that the same
authorities implement fully and promptly the ceasefire
agreements signed with NATO on 15 October 1998 and
with the OSCE on 16 October 1998.
In its presidential statement of 29 January 1999, the
Council welcomed and supported the peace process
initiated by the Contact Group, culminating in the
Rambouillet accords, which the Kosovar Albanians signed
on 18 March 1999. Unfortunately, the Yugoslav
leadership not only has failed to comply with the
resolutions of the Council, but also continues to reject the
Rambouillet accords and rebuff all efforts at finding a
political solution to the conflict.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
In light of the foregoing, Malaysia had no other option
but to vote against the draft resolution, as we have just done.
As we also stated during the meeting last Wednesday,
Malaysia would have wished that the crisis in Kosovo could
have been dealt with directly and in an effective manner by
the Security Council. The outcome of the action that the
Council has just taken today, however, demonstrates clearly
the serious and irreconcilable differences in the Council.
Malaysia therefore regrets that in the absence of Council
action on the issue it has been necessary for measures to be
taken outside of the Council.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): This
meeting has been convened by the Security Council in
conditions of extreme urgency. The Belgrade authorities
have been given one opportunity after another to reach a
peaceful settlement to the problem of Kosovo. The party
representing the Kosovar Albanians had agreed to a
peaceful settlement at Rambouillet and had signed the
agreement. The Serb side, however, refused to sign and has
continued to use extreme force in the Kosovo region,
causing thousands of casualties and displacing thousands of
persons. The result is a humanitarian crisis of tremendous
proportions that cannot be resolved without the cooperation
of neighbouring States.
In view of this situation, we were not able to vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council today,
because it would have encouraged the Belgrade authorities
to continue with their current policy of “ethnic cleansing”
and led to more massacres and displacements for the
Kosovar Albanians.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of China.
The continued military strikes against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, with the United States at the lead, has already
resulted in severe casualties and damage, and the situation
in the Balkan region has seriously deteriorated. The Chinese
Government strongly opposes such an act, which constitutes
a blatant violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law, as well as a
challenge to the authority of the Security Council. We
would like to reiterate our strong call for an immediate
cessation of this military action, so as to facilitate the
restoration of peace in the Balkan region at an early date.

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
threat of use of force in international affairs. We oppose
the power politics of the strong bullying the weak. We
oppose interference in the internal affairs of other States,
under whatever pretext, in whatever form. The Chinese
delegation would like to reiterate that the question of
Kosovo, being an internal matter of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, should be resolved by the parties
concerned in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia among
themselves.
The Kosovo issue should be settled on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of a guarantee of the
legitimate rights and interests of all the ethnic groups in
the Kosovo area.
It was based on the above principles that the Chinese
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution before
us. We deeply regret that the Council has failed to adopt
this draft, which is in conformity with the basic principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded its voting
procedure.
The next speaker is the representative of Ukraine. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for your invitation to participate in this
discussion and to express my gratitude to all other
members of the Council for their concurrence with that
invitation.
At the outset, I would like to read the statement
issued by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine on
24 March 1999, since it expresses the position of my
Government with regard to the subject currently under
consideration by the Security Council in a most
comprehensive and condensed manner. That statement
reads as follows:

China has always stood for the peaceful settlement of
disputes through negotiations. We oppose the use or the

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
“It is with deep concern that Ukraine has
received the news about the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) air strikes against the targets on
the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
“Adhering to the norms and principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter, Ukraine considers as
inadmissible the use of military force against a
sovereign State without the authorization of the United
Nations Security Council — the only body entrusted
to take such decisions in order to maintain
international peace and security.
“At the same time, Belgrade’s refusal to sign the
agreements elaborated through the mediation of the
Contact Group resulted in the breakdown of the
negotiating process. Therefore, the provisions of
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199
(1998) have not been fully implemented, and that led
to the use of force.
“Ukraine urges the parties to the conflict, as well
as the international community, to urgently exert
additional efforts in order to stop the further escalation
of the conflict. It is necessary to return as soon as
possible to a peaceful political settlement on the basis
of the preservation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the granting of a wide autonomy to Kosovo.
“Ukraine reaffirms its readiness to contribute to
the efforts aimed at restoring peace and ensuring
stability and respect for human rights, including the
rights of national minorities, on the territory of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.”
That was the statement of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine of 24 March. Even though it was issued
as far back as two days ago, all of its provisions remain
topical with regard to the current crisis in the centre of
Europe. My country has good grounds to be seriously
concerned about this crisis, because it is fraught with the
danger of unpredictable consequences. We are ready to do
everything possible in order to avert such consequences.
That is why Ukraine has already become actively
involved in the efforts to stop the crisis and to achieve a
peaceful solution of the Kosovo problem. I would like to
inform this body, which we still believe bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, about the current visit to Belgrade by the Foreign
Minister of Ukraine, Mr. Tarasyuk, which is under way as

10

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
we speak. This peacemaking mission, undertaken by the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine, is further proof of the
sincere aspiration of my country to contribute
constructively to the cause of finding a solution to the
conflict and to the restoration of peace and stability in the
entire Balkan region.
In the course of negotiations with the leadership of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Ukrainian
Foreign Minister will put forward a number of concrete
proposals which could lead to the suspension of NATO
air strikes against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
resumption of the negotiating process between the parties
to the conflict in Kosovo, the return of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Verification
Mission, the settlement of the refugee problem, the
preservation of the territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the granting of wide
autonomy to Kosovo.
One of the specific proposals to be made by the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine is to reconsider the question
of the guarantees to secure the political settlement in
Kosovo through the deployment there of a multinational
peacekeeping force with a composition acceptable to all
parties. As soon as I receive information about the results
of negotiations in Belgrade, I will immediately make
them known to the members of the Security Council.
In the meantime, I would like to emphasize that the
sine qua non of any peaceful solution must be full
implementation by both the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the leaders of the Kosovo
Albanian community of all the relevant provisions of
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998)
and 1203 (1998), first of all with regard to the
maintenance of an effective ceasefire and withdrawal of
Serbian security forces involved in the repressive actions
against the population in Kosovo.
I do not want to comment on the results of the vote
that has just been taken. I just want to say, on a personal
note, that the discussion we have heard reminded me very
much of the grim times of the cold war. I sincerely
believe that it is not the wish of anyone in this room that
those grim times come back.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the decision taken at the 3988th meeting, I now
invite Mr. Jovanović to make a statement.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Mr. Jovanović: My country has been a victim of the
brutal unlawful aggression of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), led by the United States of America,
for the third straight day. The most powerful war machine
in the world has made a sovereign and peaceful country
and its proud people into a killing field and a testing
ground for its most sophisticated weaponry and military
games.
Tramping upon each and every principle of
international relations, defying the authority of the Security
Council of the United Nations and its resolutions and outperforming even the Nazis in its animosity towards and
hatred of the Serbian and Montenegrin people, NATO, led
by the United States of America, has engaged in a mad
orgy of destruction and havoc against one small and peaceloving country. They disgracefully distort the truth about
the events in Kosovo and Metohija, openly supporting and
assisting separatists and terrorists and demonizing the
Serbian people and my country in a shameless attempt to
manipulate the world public and provide a cover for their
aggression.
By attacking Yugoslavia, NATO aircraft have become
the air force and the ally of the terrorist Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). The NATO aggression has stepped up the
KLA terrorist activities, not only against the Yugoslav
security forces, but also against civilians, including
Albanians. A victim of this aggression, we have no choice
but to defend ourselves and preserve our sacred land of
Kosovo and Metohija, which is the soul of the Serbian
national being. Opposing the aggression, we also uphold the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The aggression and the massive and reckless bombing
campaign is not limited to the so-called military targets
alone, but brings death to hundreds of civilians and destroys
property. In a callous act, the aggressors did not spare the
memorial park in the martyr city of Kragujevac, in which
tens of thousands of victims of Nazi genocide from the
Second World War are buried, or the museum town of
Cetinje, which have no military significance at all. Two
camps of Serbian refugees from Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and two student hostels were hit, as well.
For the third time in this century, the Serbian people
have been presented with an ultimatum. In 1914, the
Habsburgs issued an ultimatum, demanding the Kingdom of
Serbia so as to throw its sovereignty underfoot, but the
Serbian people rejected it. In 1941, the Axis Powers gave
the Kingdom of Yugoslavia an ultimatum to join them or

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
be destroyed. The Serbs refused to capitulate and rejected
the ultimatum once again.
Now Yugoslavia is faced with another ultimatum,
this time from NATO — from so-called democratic
countries. It has been offered two alternatives: either
voluntarily to give up a part of its territory or to have it
taken away by force. This is the essence of the “solution”
for Kosovo and Metohija that was offered by way of an
ultimatum at the “negotiations” in France.
The flagrant aggression by NATO countries, led by
the United States, cannot be justified on any grounds
whatsoever. The fact that they change position and
objectives every day is telling proof that they do not
believe in what they are saying themselves. If the
aggression goes on, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will continue to protect its sovereignty and territorial
integrity on the basis of Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter. However, once the aggression is stopped, we will
be ready to resume negotiations about political solutions
of the problem in Kosovo and Metohija on the basis of
the 10 principles adopted by the Contact Group on 29
January 1999 and the document signed in Paris by the
members of our delegation.
By attacking Yugoslavia, NATO has not solved the
alleged humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo and Metohija,
which they so maliciously presented as a casus belli; on
the contrary, they themselves are creating a catastrophe of
enormous proportions for all citizens of Yugoslavia and
for peace and stability in the region and beyond.
Their aggression is unjust, illegal, indecent and
unscrupulous. The aggressor displays arrogant contempt
for the United Nations and its Charter and arrogates the
prerogatives of the Security Council as the only organ in
charge of maintaining international peace and security.
The United Nations should not allow them to rob it of its
rights and duties. The Security Council is in a position to
prevent this if it strongly condemns the aggression today
and requests NATO to stop it immediately and
unconditionally.
If the Security Council fails to do so it will be
responsible for the breakdown of the present system of
international relations. Today the Security Council is not
taking only a decision on the fate of my country, but a
historic decision on its own future as well. It is up to the
Council to decide whether it will retain the responsibility
that it bears under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, or whether it will cede

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
that responsibility to NATO. Today, the Council has made
its choice. The right of might will be enthroned instead of
the might of right.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of Belarus. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Sychou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): As before,
the Republic of Belarus is extremely concerned at the
illegal aggressive military action that the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) is carrying out against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It was because of the
primary responsibility that the Security Council bears for
the maintenance of international peace and security that the
Republic of Belarus was among the States that called for
the convening of an emergency meeting of the Council and
that joined in sponsoring the draft resolution that was
before the Council at this meeting.
The President and the Government of the Republic of
Belarus have repeatedly declared their commitment to a
peaceful settlement of this conflict. We are convinced that
even today opportunities for continuing dialogue can and
should be found. It is there that we see the key role of the
Security Council pursuant to its powers under the United
Nations Charter.
In that connection, we express our profound concern
and disappointment at the fact that the draft resolution was
not adopted. The Republic of Belarus considers that
decision by the Council to be utterly counterproductive. In
view of the continuing massive military strikes against a
sovereign State, in view of the civilian casualties and in
view of all the destruction, it is scarcely possible to accept
the arguments put forward by representatives of NATO
about the alliance resolving the humanitarian crisis in
Kosovo through the use of force. We are firmly convinced
that the use of force will not promote stability or put an
end to the confrontation between the parties. The decision
to use force, which is an extreme measure, may be made
only by the Security Council taking into account the views
of the States Members of the Organization.
Today, we are witnessing a negative turn of events:
the violation of basic principles of international law that
make no provision for military intervention for
humanitarian purposes. The consequences of these actions
cannot be predicted. They threaten to undermine the United
Nations system and, indeed, international relations as a
whole. The Republic of Belarus again calls on the Security
Council to take all necessary steps to put a halt to these

12

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
NATO military actions and to stop the bloodshed. We
also call for the resumption of the work of the Contact
Group on the former Yugoslavia, in the interest of the
resumption of dialogue between the parties to the conflict
and of advancing the peace process in the region. We
believe that the present events give the Organization a
historic opportunity to demonstrate to the entire world the
supremacy of the principles and ideals that are enshrined
in the United Nations Charter.
The Republic of Belarus reaffirms its position on the
settlement of the Kosovo conflict: it should be based on
unconditional respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia and on the non-use of force, in
keeping with the rights of all ethnic groups. Scrupulous
adherence to those principles alone will guarantee the
establishment of a solid, lasting peace in Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
With this shameful vote, the Security Council has just
missed a historic opportunity. By their vote, Council
members have assumed an enormous responsibility.
I wish at the outset to read out a statement issued by
the Republic of Cuba on the aggression by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). That statement
reads as follows:
“Following a series of distressing and highly
manipulative political events, prolonged armed
clashes, and complex — and hardly transparent —
negotiations on the question of Kosovo, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) finally
launched its heralded brutal air attacks against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose peoples were
the most heroic of those who fought the Nazi hordes
in Europe during the Second World War.
“This action, intended to punish the Yugoslav
Government', is being conducted outside the context
of the Security Council, where the main promoter of
the aggression, the United States, would have had to
face opposition by other members which from the
outset have vigorously opposed any action that could
undermine the prerogatives of that organ under the
United Nations Charter with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security. This

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
has thus led to a violation of the norms and principles
of international law.
“The war launched by NATO revives mankind’s
justified fears concerning the emergence of a
contemptuous uni-polar system governed by a warlike
empire that has declared itself to be the world’s
policeman and that is capable of dragging its political
and military allies into the most foolish of actions.
This is similar to what took place early and during the
first half of this century with the creation of military
blocs that enshrouded Europe in destruction, death and
misery, dividing it and weakening it as the United
States built up its own economic, political and military
might.
“We may well ask whether the use and abuse of
force will solve the world’s problems and protect the
human rights of the innocent people who are dying
today because of the missiles and bombs that are
falling upon a small country of cultured, civilized
Europe.
“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cuba vigorously condemns this aggression against
Yugoslavia by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), under the leadership of the United States,
and it denounces the dishonest manoeuvring that has
led to the continued imposition of such uncivilized
practices on the international political scene in order
to satisfy the interests of those seeking to impose their
designs on all the States of the globe in the name of
a new and unworthy world order, created in their
image and likeness.
“During this time of suffering and pain for the
peoples of Yugoslavia, Cuba urges the international
community to rally its forces in order to put an
immediate end to this unjustifiable aggression, to
avoid further and even more regrettable losses of
innocent life and to allow that nation to resume the
peaceful course of negotiations so as to solve its
internal problems — matters that depend solely and
exclusively on the sovereign will and
self-determination of the Yugoslav peoples.
“Cuba expresses its concern that the aggression
could, in an unpredictable manner, spread to the other
States of the region, either because of the violence
itself or because of its unsettling social and human
effects.

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
“The ridiculous attempt to impose solutions by
force is incompatible with any civilized reasoning
and with the essential principles of international law.
The firmness of the positions that are being used to
try to justify this new crime only reflects the moral
impossibility of sustaining ideas and policies that run
counter to the interests of the peoples involved in
the conflict and of imposing on them an imperial
will. If this course were to be continued, there could
be unforeseeable consequences for Europe and for
all of humankind.”
We are living in a shameful time in which
international legality is being violated. Never before has
the unipolar order imposed by the United States been so
obvious and so disturbing. When the Security Council
serves as its docile instrument, then the United Nations
seems to be working, and its foundations — the Charter
and international law — seem to be in force, although
they are always subject to capricious interpretations and
gross manipulation.
Some days ago we were surprised to witness an
occasion on which the Security Council refused to
authorize an international criminal act by the United
States and its accomplices. Today we have witnessed the
capitulation of the Security Council. When the Security
Council plucks up its courage and refuses to yield to
unipolar might, and tries to fulfil the responsibilities that
the Charter and the community of nations have entrusted
to it, then the super-Power, which does not accept lack of
discipline on the part of its subjects, takes matters into its
own hands.
The no-flight zones, the missiles striking Kabul,
Khartoum, Tripoli, Baghdad and Benghazi, and now
Pristina, Pancevo and other cities, remind us of the harsh
realities of global disorder. What is going to become of
the Security Council, or at least of its remains, after
today’s vote? What will become of the United Nations?
While on the ground floor of this building there is
talk of reform, democracy and transparency, in this high
command — the Security Council — everyone’s real
position becomes painfully clear: the positions of those
who play with words in order to conceal hegemonic
interests, and of those of us who make up the great
majority that is always ignored and always subject to the
political pressure of the powerful, because the majority
often forgets the weight of our countries when we unite
to reclaim our place. If we do not take our rightful place,
the United Nations, instead of developing as the emerging

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
government of a global democracy in a globalized and
united world, will merely be a crude, repressive instrument
of the powerful, as this meeting has made clear.
No one can forget in these tragic circumstances, in
which the destiny of us all is at stake, the historic
contribution made by the Serbs during the Second World
War, when they fought more heroically than any other
people against fascism and against the Nazi hordes in
occupied Europe. Humankind cannot be stripped of its
memory, however intoxicated it may be by technology used
to disseminate lies or by television used to promote war. It
must be recalled here and now — because it is a fact —
that these are the bitter fruits of a conspiracy to destroy
Yugoslavia. That is what is at the root of this conflict and
of the grave events we are now experiencing.
Some of those who today are brutally bombing in the
past conspired and fought to dismember that noble and
multi-ethnic country. Today they are punishing some of
those they previously promoted. Bombs are not the path to
peace. War is no humanitarian solution. History teaches us
that only negotiations can build peace. Cuba hopes that —
without delay, because every minute costs lives — an end
will be put to the armed aggression, and there will be a
resumption of negotiations in order to reach a just and
lasting peace, as a condition for full respect for the rights
and the dignity of all the ethnic groups, peoples and
religions of the former Yugoslavia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
on my list is the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The last time
we spoke before the Security Council we emphasized in our
statement that resorting to the military alternative is never
welcome. We would only wish to further proclaim that
view. Unfortunately, though, on the basis of events in
Kosovo over the last couple of days, we can only come
even more surely to the conclusion that military force
sometimes is the only alternative left.
We want to join all who believe that the most prompt
cessation of all military action is desirable. But have any of
the demands made by the Security Council in past
resolutions, or the demands of the Contact Group, been
accepted? Has Belgrade accepted the peace plan?
Unfortunately the Serbian defence against the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has primarily

14

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
consisted of an intensified campaign against its own
civilian population, particularly the Kosovar Albanians.
But this goes beyond the issue of courage and morality.
It goes to the heart of the only two visible strategies
pursued by Belgrade: “Let NATO bomb; we will hurry up
to create faits accomplis on the ground by completing the
tactic of ethnic cleansing. If some Serbs are hurt, if they
have to die, and if more Kosovars are killed, so be it, so
much the better.”
Does anyone remember the ethnic cleansing and
genocide committed against Bosnians? I must say that I
feel deeply disturbed, even insulted, when after the
experience in Bosnia some rush to condemn military
measures to confront Belgrade’s continuing resistance to
peace and escalated ethnic cleansing campaign. Who are
the real victims and who are the victimizers?
Should those rushing to complete ethnic cleansing
hope to garner sympathy while the civilian victims of
such cleansing wonder if they are being forgotten, or even
ignored? Did we learn something from the Bosnia
experience, at least gain sensitivity to the victims of
genocide?
Let me set aside my moral outrage. Let me turn to
the alternatives of realpolitik. Do the supporters of this
draft resolution believe that a unilateral end to NATO’s
action would produce anything positive for Kosovo, for
Bosnia and Herzegovina or for the region as a whole?
The Belgrade authorities would only then claim a victory,
the victory of a brave fighter standing up to the mightiest
military force on earth. The new mythology of the Battle
of Kosovo, 1999, would be written and the current
Belgrade authorities would use this as a revitalized tool,
a weapon of war, against the Kosovars, Bosnia and our
other neighbours; indeed, as a tool to further enslave the
emotions and minds of the Serb people themselves.
If this draft resolution had been adopted or even
succeeded in garnering significant support, this would
have been a defeat for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me emphasize: that would have been a defeat for
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are not here to
preach morality, but we are here to plead for the cause of
peace in our country and the region as a whole.
Let me take note of one final point — and I am very
happy to see that the Secretary-General has been here
throughout this entire debate. Like many other Members
of the United Nations, we are concerned by the
implications of this matter: the NATO military action

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
being undertaken without the sanction of the United Nations
Security Council. However, we would be even more
concerned and dismayed if the Security Council were
blocked and there were no response to the humanitarian
crisis and to the legal obligation to confront ethnic
cleansing and war crime abuses.
The Security Council has on numerous occasions
called for Belgrade to refrain from its disastrous policies in
Kosovo. Belgrade has refused to heed the Security Council.
Then the Contact Group was given the mandate of bringing
peace. The Contact Group made several fair and
progressive proposals for peace. The Kosovar Albanians
accepted a proposal. Belgrade rejected the peace proposal
and actually responded by intensifying its resort to military
force against the Albanian Kosovars. Finally, all the
Contact Group members except one resorted to the only
step available, the step that had been threatened for quite
some time against Belgrade’s obstinacy.
Is the Security Council now to be used as a
marginalized institution to actually block or criticize the
only viable response in order to bring peace and to stop
vast human rights abuses? Remember, these abuses are
themselves the most serious violations of the United
Nations Charter. I do not need to cite the Ambassador of
Slovenia, Danilo Türk, on this point.
When the war against Bosnia and Herzegovina was
being waged, the United Nations was too frequently
criticized, even savaged, for its ineffectiveness in stopping
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina — the human rights
violations, genocide and aggression that we suffered.
Unfortunately, even we were too frequently a part of
pointing the finger at the United Nations. For this we would
like to apologize to all those who may have misunderstood
us in our time of deep need.
Now, in hindsight, it is clear that responsibility in the
failures and successes of Bosnia lay with the United
Nations Members themselves, particularly the most
powerful: the members of the Security Council. The same
responsibility now exists with respect to Kosovo. Let us not
once again allow the Security Council and the United
Nations to be seen as ineffective in, or even as an obstacle
to, the necessary steps for peace or, even more so, for
stopping the vast human rights abuses.
In the alternative, should we debate here in the
Security Council the necessary response to what is going on
in Kosovo, to what Belgrade is doing in Kosovo, as we did
for Bosnia and Herzegovina for three and a half years? Do

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
we have the luxury of that time? Are we to set aside daily
the lives that are being wrecked and lost?
Why does Bosnia and Herzegovina speak before the
Security Council today? Well, first of all, let me mention
that there is the issue of self-interest. And I would like to
correct one point: Bosnia and Herzegovina’s airspace is
closed on the basis of our own decision. I believe the
case with Croatia is the same.
There is also an issue of history. Just before my
statement, I heard the representative of Cuba speak of the
fight of the Serbs against Nazism. The Bosnians were part
of that fight. My uncles died in that fight. The greatest
resistance to the Nazis was found in Bosnia. I do not with
to see history once again rewritten here on another point.
There is also a moral obligation. We in Bosnia came
and pleaded before the Security Council, and then pleaded
outside the Security Council to the Contact Group and
others, for any salvation, any response. Thanks to many
of the countries around this table — France, the United
Kingdom, the United States and many others — that
response finally came. We say it was late, but it was
welcome. We do not wish to see now a response come
too late for the Kosovars. We do not wish to see once
again a response come late once again for Bosnia, if once
again injustice, nationalism and ethnic cleansing are
allowed to go undisturbed in our region.
I would be here before the Council if the issue were
Sierra Leone or any other situation that deserved its
urgent attention.
Unfortunately, in today’s world it seems that we
cannot hope for the United Nations and the Security
Council to always be effective and prompt in bringing
peace. That is unfortunately the reality that we deal with.
But at least we should not allow the Security Council and
the United Nations to be seen as an obstacle.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next speaker
is the representative of India. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (India): It is a matter of very great
concern to us that the attacks of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia continue, with the Security Council reduced
to helplessness. As we said in the Council when it met on
24 March, we expected it to exert its authority to bring
about an early return of the peace that was broken by the

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
bombing. The draft resolution prepared by the Russian
Federation has aims to which we completely subscribe. It
calls for an immediate end to this senseless violence and it
seeks to re-establish the authority of the Security Council,
which has been one of the early victims of NATO’s
bombing campaign. We therefore joined as a co-sponsor.
We deeply regret that the Council has not adopted this
draft. The effect will be to prevent a return of the peace
that the international community so dearly wants and which
permanent members, three of whom cast vetoes in pursuit
of national interests, have a special responsibility to uphold.
It is clear that NATO will not listen to the Security
Council. It would appear that it believes itself to be above
the law. We find this deeply uncomfortable. In New Delhi
earlier today, the External Affairs Minister said that India
cannot accept any country’s taking on the garb of a world
policeman. NATO argues that the Serb police in Kosovo
act violently and without any respect for law.
Unfortunately, NATO seems to have taken on the persona
and the methods of operation of those whose activities it
wants to curb.
It is natural to be revolted by violence and to want to
put an end to human suffering. However, between nations
as within them, populations can be protected, the law
upheld and those who break it punished only through legal
means. The cure otherwise is as bad as the disease. It is
also very rarely effective and often makes things worse.
Those who take the law into their hands have never
improved civic peace within nations; neither will they help
in international relations.

16

3989th meeting
26 March 1999
Those who continue to attack the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia profess to do so on behalf of the
international community and on pressing humanitarian
grounds. They say that they are acting in the name of
humanity. Very few members of the international
community have spoken in this debate, but even among
those who have, NATO would have noted that China,
Russia and India have all opposed the violence which it
has unleashed. The international community can hardly be
said to have endorsed their actions when already
representatives of half of humanity have said that they do
not agree with what they have done.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): The representative of India
made reference to the fact that three vetoes had been cast
in this morning’s voting. I would simply like to point out,
as the representative of a country that is rather sensitive
about the issue of the veto, that my understanding is that
the rules are very clear. There were no vetoes cast this
morning. A veto is cast only when it overrides nine
positive votes, and that was not the case this morning.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I
entirely associate myself with the statement just made by
the representative of Canada.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
