UNITER NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

16 DECEMBER

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

, . ,. . . . . , , , . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., ,

1

Adoption of the agenda , . , , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . -,. . , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . ,

I

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the PresidentoftheSecurityCouncil(S/15515)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2408)

SiPV.2408

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Secllrity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information
about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Secwity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2408th MEETING
eld in New York
Pwsicfcwt:

Mr. Wlodzimierz

NATORF

on Thursday,

16 December 1982, at 10.30 a.m.

(Poland).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Benin. Grenada. Kenya and
Nicaragua in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite t;lose representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote. in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Prevent: The representatives of the following States:
China.
France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan. Jordan,
Panama,
Poland. Spain. Togo. Uganda. Union of
Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2408)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Chargl
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council CS/ I55 15)

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
Council members have before
them document S/1552.5, containing the text of a note
verbale dated I.5 December from the representative of
Guinea addressed to the President of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda

4. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): I congratulate you,
Sir. on your accession to the presidency for the month
of December. My delegation is confident that with
your mature wisdom and diplomatic skill you will guide
the work of this Council successfully in the course of
this month.

Complaint

by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the ChargC
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho
to the United Nations addressedto the President of
the Security Council (S/15515)

5. I must pay a special tribute to my Latin American colleague, the representative of Panama. Mr. Car10s Ozores Typaldos, for the very competent mannel
in which he conducted the affairs of the Council during
Ihe month of November.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [240&h and
2407th /nettings], I invite rhe representative of Lesotho
to take a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Angola, Botswana,
Egypt,
Guinea,
India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Swaziland,
Yugoslavia,
Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. I should also like to extend a hearty welcome to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, Mr.
Charles Dube Molapo.
7, South Africa’s deadly hand has been extended
once again, this time against Lesotho, yet again a small
non-aligned country, a country which has consistently
expressed its opposition to the inhuman policy of
apartheid practised by the Pretoria regime and accordingly has been giving care and succour to refugees
fleeing from South Africa’s oppression.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Molapo
(iksotho)
took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr.
Legwaih
(Botswana), Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt),
Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr, Krishrlan (India), Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jatnahiriya), Mr. Gonthier (Seyclzelles),
Mr. Koroma
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Steward (South
Africa),
Mr. Malinga (Swaziland), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia), Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) and Mr. Mashingaidze
(ZinTbabwe)
took the places reserved for the/n at the
side of the Council chamber.

8. The appearance before the Council of King
Moshoeshoe II in person [240&h meeting] testifies to
the serious nature of the situation produced by South
Africa’s recent aggression. Guyana maintains cordial
relations with Lesotho, and in a spirit of solidarity
I

with the Government and people of that country, has
issued a public statement condemning South Africa’s
recent aggression and expressing condolences
at
the loss of life suffered in that premeditated and savage
attack.

security, strengthening
freedom and harmonizing
relations between States, a conviction reiterated at
the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana in
September 1979-j

9. This aggression by the apartheid regime against
Lesotho is characteristic of South Africa’s relations
with its neighbours, as Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia all remind us. It forms part of a
pattern of behaviour designed to frighten neighbouring
States into submission. It is also merely an external
expression of the policies of fear by which the regime
seeks to ensure its survival. Intimidation
and aggression are chosen tools of the apartheid regime for the
maintenance
of white minority
domination.
It is
these policies for which the shame of Sharpeville and
Soweto are remembered.

14. Within the larger international
community,
a
special responsibility of course devolves on the Council. Lesotho’s approach to the Council demonstrates
a faith in the ability of this body to act in support and
in defence of small States threatened with, or victims
of, aggression. It is important for LE. its members,
and for the permanent members in particular, to ensure
that that faith is sustained.
15. But we should not as members of the Council
consider our duty done simply with the adoption of
a resolution condemning South Africa’s aggression.
In taking that action, laudable and correct as it was,
we were addressing ourselves to only one manifestation of that malady afflicting southern Africa--crpcr/?hrid. a system which has been declared by the General
Assembly to be a crime against humanity.

10. My delegation considered it its minimum duty
to support resolution 527 (1982), which the Council
adopted yesterday, condemning South Africa’s aggression and demanding from South Africa payment of full
and adequate compensation to Lesotho for the loss of
life and damage to property suffered in the attack.

16. The policies and practices of the racist Pretoria
regime. both at home and abroad, constitute a grave
threat to the peace and security of the area and to
international peace and security in general. The Council must deal with that situation. The Pretoria regime
has been consistently challenging the will and ability of
the Council to do so. Unfortunately,
there are some in
our midst-and
we know who they are-who
have
been bolstering this attitude of defiance and, while
uttering the rhetoric of condemnation,
have been
providing South Africa with a shield against the action
which the overwhelming majority of the international
community have been consistently demanding. I cannot imagine what else South Africa must do. I do not
know how many more Basotho, Angolans, Mozambicans, Zambians or South Africans must die before
these protectors of South Africa change their policies
and demonstrate to the Pretoria regime that they are
no longer prepared to permit the evil and indignity of
lrparthcid to continue, But I do sincerely hope that
after this recent aggression against Lesotho, it will not
be necessary for any more to die before those policies
change-or at least, begin to change.

1 I. The case before us involves the violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member
State, a non-aligned country, in blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and in disregard of
numerous instruments
adopted by the General Assembly, including the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security,’ the Declaration on
Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations’ and the
Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention and
Interference in the Internal Affairs of States:*
12. It was just one week ago that the General Assembly adopted a number of resolutions concerning the
various aspects of South Africa’s apartheid policies,
including the Pretoria rkgime’s relations with its neighbours [resolutions 37169 A to J]. In fact, by a strange
coincidence, it was even while these resolutions were
being considered that the news of the South African
aggression broke.

17. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): My delegation wishes initially to join in expressing
warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council. We wish you suecess, because we wish success to ourselves and to
the Council as an institution.

13. South Africa’s policies of aggression and its
contempt for the rule of law and for the Charter have
made the situation in southern Africa one of the dangerous flash-points facing the international
community
today. This recent aggression against Lesotho has
underscored the urgency of the responsibility
which
this community bears to contribute effectively to the
creation of a rkgime of peace, freedom, justice and
stability in southern Africa. Many States, like Lesotho, continue to look to the Organization to discharge
that responsibility
fully and faithfully.
Non-aligned
countries have consistently held the conviction that
the United Nations provides the ost effective means
peace and
of maintaining and promoting

18. We join also in extending congratulations
to
the representative of Panama, who provided effective
and judicious leadership to the Council in the month
of November and to our esteemed and valued colleague, the newly appointed Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zaire. We are encouraged to note that there
is life and accomplishment,
and even promotion, after
the United Nations. That is a good thing to know.
2

19. The Government
and the people of the United
States deeply deplore the South African attack into
the neighbouring
country of Lesotho launched in the
early morning hours of 9 December. We deeply
regret the tragic loss of innocent life that resulted
from that attack. All concerned, including
South
Africa,
must realize that violence cannot and will not
solve the grave problems that confront the peoples of
southern Africa.
20. Among the principles that animate the foreign
policies of my country and govern our relations with
all other nations, none is more fundamental, none more
steadfastly held. that the non-use of force in conflict
resolution.
The only appropriate means for solving
the problems
of this and all other regions of the world
are peaceful negotiation and conciliation.
21. We have made this position eminently clear to
the Government
of South Africa. It is at the core of
the negotiations
that we. in concert with many other
States.
African and non-African. are pursuing with
regard to Namibia.
22. The requirement
for peaceful coexistence and
co-operation
is nowhere more evident than in the
relationship
between Lesotho and South Africa.
Lesotho
is uniquely vulnerable. It must have the
assurance that its sovereignty
will be respected.

and territorial

integrity

23.
We have listened to the judicious
statement
of King Moshoeshoe II [24061/7 mc~cJtin,q]. We welcome
in particular
his assurance that Lesotho is committed
to the principles of co-operation and peaceful coexistence.
We believe this assurance offers a firm and
positive basis for establishing the necessary diplomatic
channels through which Lesotho and South Africa
can and must work together to allay their concerns
and to solve their common problems.
24.
Violence.
from whatever quarter,
must be
coridemned.
Those who would promote or resort to
violence
must know that the consequence can only
be more violence, an escalating cycle that presents
only
obstacles to solving real problems. More than
most
countries. South Africa surely must appreciate
the
consequences
of further eroding international
restraints against the use of violence. Whatever South
Africa’s
concerns may have been. however legitimate
they
may have seemed, we cannot believe that they
couJd not be resolved through diplomacy, or that they
could in any way justify this violation of Lesotho’s
sovereignty
and the resulting loss of innocent life.
25.
The resolution that has been adopted by the
Council
embodies principles to which my Government.
as I have said, attaches the highest importance.
It reaffirms
the solemn obligation of all States to
refrain
from the threat or use of force against the
territorial
integrity and political independence of any
State.
It reaffirms the right of all States, including

Lesotho, to receive and provide humanitarian assistance to those seeking &yJum, in accordance with
humanitarian
principles and with obligations clearly
estabtished in international
conventions.
It firmly
reiterates the importance of seeking to resolve international problems through peaceful means.
26. Those are principles
which my Government
wholly and unequivocally endorses. They are indeed
consistent with the strenuous efforts of my Government to promote practical, negotiated solutions to the
problems of southern Africa, solutions that also would
contribute to lasting peace and stability in the region.
Thus, we voted in favour of resolution 527 (1982).
27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Angola. I invite him to take B place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. de FIGUEIREDG
(Angola): Allow me to
extend to you. Sir, the best wishes of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
The people and Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola enjoy the most fraternal relations of solidarity and co-operation with the people and Government of Poland.
29. The recent massacre of civilian refugees in
Maseru was nothing but brutal premeditated murder
by t-acist terrorists sent by the Pretoria regime. These
murders have no political or military justification,
and those who seek to absolve the racist Pretoria
regime of the responsibility for this massacre should
be considered accessories after the f&t.
30. Such massacres are Pretoria’s stock-in-trade.
Thousands of unarmed civilian refugees in Angola
and thousands of unarmed Angolan men, women and
children have fallen to Pretoria’s bloodthirsty military
adventurism since 1975. The racist armed forces of the
Pretoria rCgime have carried out acts of armed aggression across the borders, rape, plunder, torture and
destruction,
not only in the People’s
Republic of
Angola but in other neighbouring sovereign States as
well. This massacre in Maseru is only the latest in a
long series and, from what all of us know of Pretoria’s
designs and actions, it will certainly not be the last.
3 1. My cynicism is not aimed at the deed. but rather
at the doers and their supporters. As long as Pretoria
feels that it has the support, tacit or otherwise, of its
Western allies, it will feel free to do as it likes in southern Africa, Certainly the bland statements issued
after such massacres offer no comfort to the families
of the victims and no assurance to the Governments
and peoples that daily face South Africa’s adventurism
and State terrorism.
32, Respect for human life and human ideals should
not be based on colour, continent or creed. Yet the
response, or Jack thereof, of Pretoria’s Western friends
to Pretoria’s brutality and homicide reinforces Africa’s

,

suspicion that African lives and African issues are
worth less than others and are to be sacrificed to
Western interests.

murderous rdgimes. As long as South Africa’s imperialism continues, peace and security in southern Africa
will be threatened.

33. The Pretoria regime is guilty of the cold-blooded
murder of Lesotho nationals and South Africans
who had sought refuge in Lesotho after the Soweto
urprisinp of 1976. It is tragic that they fled theil
country to escape racist State terrorism at home, only
to be victimized
by it. years later. in the country
where they had exiled themselves.

38. The Council must make its abhorrence of the
massacre known in no uncertain terms and must take
concrete steps to punish the murderers.
39.

A luta cwntinclo;

II \Vtorio

6 c~rtrr.

40. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Algeria. 1 invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.

34. The Pretoria rt5gime has been guilty of every
transgression of law: it has violated the civil, human.
political and social rights of the majority inhabitants of
South Africa: it is guilty of the illegal occupation of
Namibia and a denial of the rights of the people of
Namibia: it is guilty of acts of armed aggression against
neighbouring sovereign States; and it is guilty of genocide and homicide inside and outside the borders of
South Africa. This guilt has been determined by the
United Nations, and yet the guilty party goes free and
unpunished white the victims continue to suffer.

41. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) (intop,‘ctotir,,l
.ficm
F/~nc#?,l: Permit me first of all, Sir. to express to you
my heartfelt congratulations on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am all
the more pleased to see you presiding over the Council inasmuch as you represent a country with which
Algeria has long-standing relations offriendship and cooperation. I wish also to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor for the outstanding qualities he exhibited
in conducting the proceedings of the Council last
month.

32. We appeal to the world public to express in more
concrete terms the outrage that each of us feels. and
must feel, at the massacre in Mnseru. If South Africa
is allowed to escape with nothing more than a mild
censure. then all of us will be guilty of making a mockery of the Charter of the United Nations. international
law and of basic respect for human life.

42. We are meeting at an extremely serious moment. A sovereign country. a State Member of the
United Nations. member of the Organization of African
Unity and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries,
has just been the victim of savage aggression by the
South African rCgime.

36. The tragedy in Maseru is Africa’s tragedy and
typifies the entire range of the historical relationships
Africa has had: the imperialism,
colonialism
and
racism, the exploitation
and plunder and the denial of
our inalienable rights--, ,111of which are embodied in the
politics and practices of the Pretoria regime.

43. Unfortunately,
this is not the first time that
that regime has committed such acts, strengthened as
it is by the impunity it enjoys, thereby outrageously
violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
independent African States of the region. Namibia,
whose territory continues to be illegally occupied
despite the many injunctions
of the international
community,
Angola, Zambia, Botswana, Seychelles,
Mozambique and Lesotho regularly pay their tribute
in human lives and destruction of all kinds to that
political monstrosity, the Pretoria rCgime.

37. Mr. President, my delegation appeals through
you to the Council, and also appeals to the SecretaryGeneral and through him to the international community. to secure for southern Africans redress andjustice
from the South African rigime. It is now 16 months
since the South African troops invaded Angola, and
since then they have been in illegal occupation of parts
of southern Angola. That illegal occupation is linked
to the South African illegal occupation of Namibia:
it is linked to the racist attacks on Mozambique
and
Botswana: it is linked to the violent suppression inside
South Africa of the ma.jority of South Africans: and it
is linked to the recent massacre in Maseru. All these
actions are part of South Africa’s plans for permanent
hegemony over Africa south of the Equator. The
attractive bait the racist Pretoria rCgime offers to its
Western friends is to keep southern Africa and its vast
natural resources. including the shipping lanes, available to Western exploitation
and control under the
aegis of South Africa, courtesy member of the North
Atlantic
Treaty Organization
(NATO).
Southern
Africa has no room for either N AT0 or a South Atlantic
treaty organization,
and no room for murderers 01

44. On 9 December, while Africa was still counting
its dead in Namibia and Mozambique,
the racist
hordes of the South African regime were invading
Lesotho. This fresh act of aggression, like those
which preceded it, cost the lives of dozens of innocent
victims, including women and children, and caused
enormous material losses to a country courageously
struggling against economic difficulties to ensure its
development.
Once again, the racist regime of Pretoria has shown unbounded, deadly rage.
45. King Moshoeshoe described in the Council
the circumstances in which that act of aggression took
place [ihid.]. I should like, on behalf of my delegation,
to pay a well-deserved tribute to the King of Lesotho
for having himself given solemn and particularly
moving testimony on all the aspects of that serious
4

aggression. The dignity and resolve which charachis statement
also exemplified
the moral
force of a people and a continent which reject the
blackmail
and diktat of a rigime abhorred by all
mankind.

recalled in this connection the Security Council’s
special responsibility. In a resolution on the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the work of the Organization
[/~~so/lradopted
unanimously
on 3 December
tie/? 37/67], the General Assembly emphasized the
urgent and imperative need to adhere strictly to the
provisions of the Charter and to strengthen the role
of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Assembly also
requested the Security Council to carry out its primary
responsibility
for the maintenance
of international
peace and security and to give due consideration to
the report of the Secretary-General.

terized

46.

For many years now, a policy of aggression and
methodically
programmed
and strictly
implemented
has kept the entire region in a state of
instability and insecurity. That policy, which takes
the form of increasingly
bold acts of aggression. continues to pose a challenge to the international community and. first and foremost. to the United Nations.
dangerously undermining
its foundations and flouting
its authority.
Need we recall that after every crime.
debates in both the General Assembly and the Security Council have assigned responsibility.
ascertained
that aggression has taken place and identified the
aggressor?
subversion

52. In our view, therefore, the Council, in addition
to condemning this fresh act of aggression and its
perpetrator and demanding compensation for the losses
suffered by Lesotho as provided for in resolution 527
(1982) which the Council adopted yesterday. must
seriously consider strengthening the arms embargo
which has already been imposed and also conside)
what other sanctions could be imposed in the neal
future against the rrpwthcid rCgime.

47. However,
the United Nations has quite often
laboriously prepared meaningless responses when the
Pretoria regime has presented it with another ,filit
trt~*o~pli.
The process of deterioration of the situation can only accelerate.
In this connection,
the
impressive number of Security Council and General
Assembly
resolutions devoted to the repeated acts of
aggression of the Pretoria regime, while fully reflecting
the perception
of the growing threat to international
peace zlnd security represented by South Africa.
show no less clearly the hopeless limitations
of theil
action.
this new act merely reveals once
nature of the Pretoria r&gime,
it nevertheless
indicates a new and exceptionally
dangerous dimension
to the situation in southern
Africa.
4x.

While

53. For our part, we cannot imagine in what circumstances it might one day be necessary to apply the
comprehensive mandatory sanctions provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter if not in response to the
repeated criminal acts of an intolerable rCgime which
practises a policy of discrimination
that has been
declared a crime against humanity and which the entire
world has denounced and condemned.

today

54. Furthermore.
it is obvious that a programme
of emergency assistance should be established to
express our solidarity with Lesotho and all other
countries of southern Africa which are the victims of
such deadly acts of aggression simply because their
territories at times offer asylum and refuge to victims
of upcwthrid and South African oppression. We welcome the initiatives already taken in this connection
by the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

again the aggressive

49. After having for years resorted to appeals and
injunctions which have remained dead letters, the international community
today must envisage the necessary
adaptation of its responses to the escalation and intensity of the challenges.

55, In conclusion, 1 wish to stress that the Governmerit of Algeria strongly condemned that criminal
aggression against an independent
sovereign State
Member of the TJnitcd Nations the very day it was
committed, as an act which illustrates-if
illustration
total disregard of the
were necessary- Pretoria’s
elementary norms of international
law. While paying
homage to the innocent victims of that barbarous
raid, Algeria reaffirms its unfailing support for and
solidarity with the brother peoples of Lesotho and the
other front-line States which continue to make an
invaluable
contribution
to the emancipation
of
Africa.

50.

The international
community expects the Council to shoulder fully its responsibilities
under the
Charter of the United Nations and to respond to that
aggression by urgent, concrete measures, in order
to put an end once and for all to the Pretoria rlgime’s
defiant policy.
51. At this point I should like to say how much we
whome
the Secretary-General’s
appeal in his report
on the work of the 0rganization.s
Following
an
excellent diagnosis of the serious shortcomings of the
United
Nations,
the Secretary-General
echoed the
views of those Member States that have expressed
their concern over the continuous deterioration
in
international
relations and the frequent recourse to the
use of force, especially by expansionist rtgimes such
as that of Pretoria.
The Secretary-General
also

56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
c

57. Mr. GOLOB
(Yugoslavia):
I would like first
of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of December. Your experience and the high esteem your colleagues have for you make us certain that you are going
to discharge your duties successfully, contributing
to the observance of the principles and purposes of
the Chnrtcr of the United Nations.

and perpetuate its inhuman r&ime. It seeks to annihilate the liberation movements and strengthen its
hold on Namibia and its economic potential.
65. In its aggression against Lesotho, South Africa
has again applied the means of State terrorism. It has
tried once again-as has been said earlier-to
assume
the role of policeman, of judge and of executioner.
sowing suffering, destruction and death.

5x. We would also like to express our appreciation
to Mr. Carlos Azores Typaldos of Panama. for the
performance of his duties as President for the month
of November.

66. The people of Lesotho
sustained
heavy
losses owing to the fact that they stood up to theil
international
obligations.
to their high sense of
solidarity and to their dedication to the standards of
humanity. There is no doubt in our mind that Lesotho
is fully entitled to complete and adequate compensation by Sol!th Africa for the damage sustained. We
are fully aware that the loss of human life cannot ever
be compensated for. Life has been taken away from
people who aspired to live in freedom and who had
fled from oppression and domination.
There should
be no hesitation on the part of the United Nations and
the international community to render Lesotho effective assistance in order to help it repair the damages
and enable it to carry out its high duty and exercise
the right to give further humanitarian and other assistance to South African refugees.

59. 1 would like to express my gratitude to the membcrs of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
present the views of Yugoslavia regarding the aggression by South Africa against sovereign. independent
and non-aligned Lesotho.
60. The Government
of Yugoslavia issued a statement in Belgrade strongly condemning the invasion by
South Africa of Lesotho and its continuous aggression
against neighbouring States and liberation movements
in the region.
61.

WC remain deeply impressed by the couradignified and inspiring statement by the King of
Lesotho [_1406rll nlccting].
Coming from an island
of independence that is surviving under the shadow of
the imperialist and expansionist (/pr~/*rh~id I-Cgime. he
prcscntcd to the Council and to all of us a telling
example of the dctcrminntion
of the people of Lesotho
to maintain the sovereignty and territorial
integrity
of their country and of their resolve to provide a haven
for the unfortunate people fleeing from the terror and
discrimination
of the racist rt!gimc of South Africa.
gcous.

67. The non-aligned
countries have repeatedly
condemned the racist rCgime of South Africa for its
wanton use of force and its defiance of the United
Nations. At the meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau
of Non-Aligned Countries held on I4 December 1982,
those countries expressed solidarity with and support
to Lesotho and to the front-line States in their defence
of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
68. The non-aligned countries have time and again
clearly spelt out the threat that South Africa represents
to international peace and security. We welcome the
statement made by the Secretary-General
and the
appeal that he made [ihid.]. He expressed our feelings
and our understanding of the situation, as well as the
dangers it contains for peace and security.

62. Yugoslavia considers that this resolve of the
people of Lesotho to remain independent
and to
cxtcnd help to refugees makes it incumbent upon the
United Nations to rise in defence of this proud land.
63. South Africa has once again flagrantly violated
the norms of civilized international behaviour. and the
principles and purposes of the Charter in particular,
violating the sovereignty and territorial
of an independent and non-aligned State. South Africa should,
in our view. be unequivocally
condemned and restrained in its designs.

69. Together
will other non-aligned
countries.
Yugoslavia supported the adoption of the General
Assembly resolution on the invasion of Lesotho by
South Africa [resolution 37/101 of 14 December
1983. The people of Yugoslavia hold freedom, independence. sovereignty and territorial integrity to be
values of paramount importance. All those, be they
States or liberation movements. that fight for these
values are invincible, and they are to be supported if
we are to bring about a world of peace, co-operation
and security for all. The defence of these values is
one of the fundamental principles of the policy of
non-alignment.

64. The abhorrent system of nptrl*t/~rid is a feature
of the internal situation in South Africa. but here we
are faced once again with the trprrrrltciu rlgime as an
international menace attacking the basic principles of
international
relations and endangering peace and
security in the whole region. By its repeated aggression against the neighbouring
non-aligned States of
Angola.
Botswana,
Lesotho.
Mozambique.
Seychelles and Zambia. all peace-loving States, South
Africa seeks to destabilize the whole region in order
to advance its expansionist designs and to strengthen

70. The determination
expressed by the King of
Lesotho strengthens our belief that no matter how
small and how weak a country may appear. it is its
6

to remain free and independent that is the
cause that is of supreme value for all of us to support.

RSOfVO

II. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Sierra Leone. I invite him to take a
pke at the Council table and to make his statement.
72. Mr. KOROMA
(Sierra Leone): Mr. President,
: mydelegation is pleased To see you preside over the
: affairs of the Council for this month. We are imbued
with confidence
that under
your leadership
the ~a[[
of the people of Lesotho which King Moshoeshoe II
launched here with such dignity and so movingly on
a Tuesday
[24&3/z m~~rting]---the
call to vindicate the
: faith which his people have placed in the Organizati!m and not to abandon his country, which South
Africa has historically coveted-will
be heard.
j 73. In the aftermath of the armed aggression perpetrated by South Africa against sovereign and independent Lesotho and the cruel and cold-blooded
immolation of innocent men, women and children, the
Council. as the custodian of international peace and
security. is now being asked to assume its responsibility and to protect and defend one of the weakest
but most peaceful Members of the United Nations.
14. The case against South Africa is that in the
early hours of 9 December. it launched an armed and
[Inprovoked
aggression against the sovereign and
independent State of Lesotho. In carrying out that
hideous crime, South African forces used military
nircraft and helicopters against the citizens of Lesotho. South African refugees, and Government apartments and dwellings leased to South African refugees.
In this dastardly, cowardly and barbaric act, some
42 innocent fives were lost. including women and
children.
through the indiscriminate
bombing of
dwellings. In some cases, we are informed, the victims were awakened and callously shot in cold blood.

throughout the world. As members are aware, the
Council has taken the stand that armed reprisals of
a punitive or retributive nature are illegal and unacceptable, for no State should be entitled to act on its own
judgement of whether the circumstances justify what
it is doing, South Africa can therefore find no excuse
for the aggression by pleading self-defence either, as
it has not demonstrated by an iota of evidence that any
attack has been launched against it from Lesotho.
Nor can it avail itself of the excuse of the necessity
for instant, overwhelming action. with no other choice
of means and no moment for deliberation, which are
the prerequisites for the invocation of the self-defence
plea.
78. It therefore follows thal since South Africa has
no justification for its illegal use of force against Lesothe. South Africa must be judged under Article 39 of
the Charter of the United Nations and measures taken
against it in accordance with the provisions of Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter. In this particular case,
the offence committed by South Africa is of such
gravity that an appropriate
response reflecting the
abhorrence with which the international community
views the action must be taken against South Africa,
not only to help Lesotho maintain its security but also
in order to restore confidence in the international security system and to ensure that aggression, particularly
when flagrant and unprovoked,
as is the act at present
under discussion, does not go unpunished.
79. Urgent and pressing
though this particular
question before the Council is, the problem itself is a
much wider one than that of the launching of armed
aggression against the territory
of Lesotho. It should
be viewed as a continuation of the rapidly deteriorating
international situation in southern Africa brought about
by the policy and practice of the rrparthid Government of South Africa. As a distinguished United
States citizen recently predicted,
southern Africa
could become the Middle
East of the 1990s. South
Africa’s armed invasion of Lesotho not only violated
the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that country, but also poses a clear and manifest threat to international peace and security in the whole of southern
Africa, and in several instances, for South Africa’s
conduct has constituted distinct breaches of the peace
and acts of aggression. It also further escalates the
potential for military conflict
in the entire region of
southern Africa.

75. South Africa thus stands accused of the illegal
use of force against the territorial integrity and political independence
of a Member State of the United
Nations. Furthermore,
by its action against Lesotho,
South Africa stands accused of committing a deliberate
and calculated act of aggression--the
gravest of all
crimes against international
peace and securityagainst the sovereign State of Lesotho.
76. With a view to justifying its naked act of awession, South Africa saw fit to construct the theory of
anticipatory
or preventive aggression, that is, that its
aggressive operations were intended to pre-empt oPerntions planned by refugees of the African National
Congress of South Africa (ANC) resident in Lesotho
against targets in South Africa.

go. When in the 196Os, before Basutoland

became
Lesotho, African States warned that the situation in
South Africa was one that would lead to international
conflict and, if it continued,
might endanger international peace and security, South Africa denied that
proposition, and together with its friends, maintained
that its ~~pnrthcidpolicy was an internal matter which
posed no threat to international
peace and security.
Today, no one can deny the prescience of those few
African States of the 1960s. for it is now apparent
that the inhuman pOliCy
of the Pretoria racists con-

77. However, not only is the theory of anticipatory
or preventive
aggression fallacious and untenable, it is
also dangerous-indeed,
very dangerous--to
fhe
maintenance
of international
peace and securltY
7

stitutcs ;I vcritablc
security.

threat to international

peace and

87. It was with a great sense of shock and indignation that Zambia heard about the barbaric invasion of
Lesotho by the South African military forces. My
Government was quick to condemn the invasion in the
strongest terms. The entire international community
was outraged and horrified. and has roundly condemned the dastardly South African aggression against
Lesotho. It is needless to omphasize the fact that the
Council was duty-bound to pronounce itself unequivocally on the violation of the sovereignty. independence and territorial integrity of Lesotho and to take
measures aimed at preventing the repetition of such
barbaric attacks against Lesotho by South Africa.

81. The Council, which is charged with the maintcnancc of international pence and security. cannot
ullow such international brigandngc nnd lawlessness
to go on unchecked, particularly when they lead to
cvnscquences which arc now all too glaringly obvious
and which are fraught with danger to international
pcacc and security. It is for this body to put :I stop
to such international lawlcssncss. The adoption of a
resolution
which merely confirms South Africa’s
misconduct is not an appropriate response to the
nnkcd nggrcssion committed by that country. Nor is it
an ;Ippropriate response to its unilnterill denunciation
of the Charter and its principles or to the blatant
challenpc to the international community,

88. Lesotho reposes great faith in the Council, as
has been amply demonstrated by the presence of the
King of Lesotho himself. who has come to New York
to seek redress through the Council for South Africa’s
wanton aggression against his people and country.
The King of Lesotho has. with dignity. convincingly
argued the case of his people and country. His most
eloquent statement [ihid. ] leaves no room for doubt
as to the guilt of the Pretoria regime.

82. The Council should not succumb to the temptntion of collective capitulation when confronted by
such hrazcn and arrogant challcngcs as that of South
#Africa in Lesotho. We again rciterntc OUI’ call to the
Council to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions apninsl South Africa under the terms of Chapter VlI of the Chnrtor. We cannot accept that collective action for the maintenance of international
peace
and security does not apply to southern Africa. where
the racist Pretoria rCgime has not only intensified its
rcprcssivc measures internally to maintain the abomination thnt is ~//~//.tll~~ill. but has pcrsistcntly conducted
i\cts of aggression against neighbouring States of the
region with ;I view to dostabilizing them. The United
Nations must help Lesotho maintain its security by
dispatching substantial forces if it again falls victim
tc) South Africa’s attack.

89. We note that the Council has responded to the
complaint
by Lesotho by unanimously
adopting
resolution 527 (1982) yesterday afternoon. We are
pleased that the Council has been able to act with
speed and complete unanimity. The verdict is quite
clear. and South Africa has. accordingly. been censured by the Council. We hope that South Africa
will take heed and henceforth demonstrate full respect
for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lesotho.
90. But beyond the political action taken yesterday
by the Council, it is necessary, in our view, that nppropriatc measures be taken as a matter of urgency to
redress the economic devastation Lesotho has suffered
as a result of the South African aggression against it.
We are naturally encouraged in this regard by the fact
that the Secretary-General.
through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, has already
initiated concrete action for relief assistance to the
victims of the South African attacks against Lesotho.
Neither must South Africa escape its responsibility
to pay reparations to Lesotho immediately.

83. In conclusion, we salute King Moshoeshoe and
the people of L,csotho for their heroic resistance and
sacrifice in the cause of Africa’s freedom. We bow
before the martyrs who were slain last Thursday in the
cause of the glorious struggle against the evil and
oppressive system of ripci/.t/r~Jid.
84. Finally. I wish to thank all the members of the
Council most sincerely for according me this opportunity to address the Council.
85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

91. As a representative of Zambia, a country which
has on many occasions been subjected to South
Africa’s acts of invasion and other wanton acts of
violence, I am only too aware of the need for support
and sympathy for Lesotho in this difficult moment.
Lesotho has been an innocent victim of South Africa’s
aggression because of the principled stand it has taken
towards the monstrous institution of trpwthcid.
It is
a remarkable feat that Lesotho. although small and
completely surrounded by South Africa and almost
defenceless against the might of South Africa’s military arsenal, has not been daunted by these odds and
remains a forthright opponent of the insidious system
of nprrrthc4d.

84. Mr. LUSAKA
(Zambia): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your well deserved accession to the presidency for the month of December,
I have no doubt that with your well-known diplomatic
skills and competence, you will steer the work of the
Council to a successful conclusion. I should like
furthermore to thank all the members of the Council
for allowing my delegation to speak on the serious
question of the invasion of Lesotho by South Africa
on 9 December.
8

92. Today, Lesotho is acting as host to South
African refugees in large numbers. These refugees are
fleeing from South Africa in search of peace, which
they cannot find in their own country. Buf Lesotho
is doing this at a tremendous cost to itself, as is evidenced by South Africa’s barbaric invasion, in which
innocent refugees and other innocent Lesotho subjects were killed and property was destroyed. Lesotho
therefore
deserves international
admiration
for
standing up for what is in the best interests of the
struggling masses of South Africa and for the cause
of peace and security in the region.
93. Lesotho is making a monumental contribution
to the effort by the international community to eliminate the system of rrprrtheicf. That is the reason why
South Africa invaded Lesotho. No one can believe
South Africa’s lie that its forces killed terrbrists of the
ANC who were purported to have been preparing to
overthrow
the Pretoria rCgime. We consider the
question of the so-called ANC terrorists to be a callous
fabrication,
because the ANC has had no terrorists in
its ranks in the first place.
94. Besides, it is a well-established fact that Lesotho
is merely acting as host to refugees from South Africa:
the refugees undertake never to engage in any military
activities against South Africa as a condition of their
stay in that peace-loving country, Lesotho. These
people could not therefore be accused of planning
to overthrow the Pretoria rCgime.

bours to a series of unprovoked
sion and destabilization.

acts of military

aggres-

98. In this regard. we wish to reiterate Zambia’s
view that all those who oppose the system of trpcrrthc~id do so on principle,
since that system has been
condemned by the international community as a crime
against humanity. As long as South Africa clings to
this crime against humanity,
it must necessarity
remain an international pariah.
99. Peace and security can come to southern Africa
only if South Africa takes three important
steps.
First. South Africa must forthwith stop its policy of
aggression and destabilization
of the neighbouring
independent African States. Secondly, South Africa
must as a matter of urgency cease its illegal occupation of Namibia so that freedom and independence
can finally come to the people of Namibia. Thirdly,
South Africa must with courage and determination
face the realities of the contradictions of the system
of q-mrtIwid inside the country and recognize the
imperative
need to eliminate
the scourge of that
system,
100. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Zambia’s
firm solidarity with the Government and people of
Lesotho in the face of South African aggression. The
principled position and courage of the Government
and people of Lesotho should inspire the international
community,
and above all, the Council, to do everything possible to assist that country.

95. Zambia is gravely concerned at South Africa’s
relentless lust for aggression and for the destabilization of the neighbouring independent African States.
These acts of aggression by’ South Africa have reached
alarming
proportions, which underscores the imperative necessity for the Council to put an end to the situation without any further delay. In this connection,
I am reminded of the unprovoked attack that South
Africa made on Mozambique on 6 December 1982.
I am reminded also of the presence of South Africa’s
military forces in the southern part of Angola, in direct
contravention
of the territorial integrity, independence
and sovereignty of Angola. I am further reminded of
the threats of the use of brutal force that South Africa
has issued to Botswana and Zimbabwe, and generally to all countries in the southern African region.

101. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
KABA
(Guinea) litztcqmtcrtion *porn
Since this is the first time I have spoken in
the Council this month, it’is my great pleasure most
warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of my
country, the People’s Revolutionary
Republic
of
Guinea, on your accession to the presidency of the
Council. Your country, the People’s Republic
of
Poland, maintains with mine, since its accession to
full sovereignty, the best of relations of co-operation
and friendship. We are therefore very pleased to see
you presiding over this body which has as its main
function the maintenance of international peace and
security.
102.

Mr.

Frcrzch):

96.
It is most disturbing that, for South Africa,
international
law seems to be there to be honoured only
in the breach, while the rest of mankind honours it as
a standard of international
conduct among nations.
This international
lawlessness by South Africa deserves unreserved and strong condemnation
by the
law-abiding
international community.

103. We wish to take this opportunity also to express appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Azores
Typaldos of Panama, who so admirably acquitted
himself of his duties in the course of last month.
104. The Council is once again meeting to consider
the consequences of further barbarous acts of the
fascist and racist rCgime of Pretoria against the independent States of southern Africa. It is instructive
that that rCgime continues to adopt as a line of international conduct in its relations with its neighbours

97.
My delegation
considers it beyond
human
comprehension
that South Africa could be killing in
cold blood all those, inside and outside its borders, who
are opposed to the despicable system of upnrthc+d,
and at the same time subjecting its peaceful neigh9

the permanent violation of the basic provision
Charter of the United Nations.

109. Mr. MALINGA
(Swaziland): Mr. President,
my delegation is pleased to see you presiding. I do
not hesitate to say that under your able guidance
the deliberations of the Council will be conducted
successfully. Allow me to express to the members of
the Council, through you, my delegation’s gratitude
for having been given this opportunity to participate
in the discussion on the invasion of Lesotho by South
Africa.

of the

105. The Revolutionary
People’s
Republic
of
Guinea is convinced that it is imperative that the Council envisage stronger measures to put an end to the
arrogance of the Pretoria rigime and to bring it to
reason
. .
106. It is in the name of the principle of solidarity
with peoples fighting for their freedom and dignity.
;I principle to which the Government of Guinea remains
committed. that Mr. Ahmcd SCkou Touri. President
of the Revolutionary
People’s Republic of Guinea,
has addressed to the President of the Council the
message that it is now my honour to read out:

I IO. The Government
and people of Swaziland
were greatly shocked to learn about the invasion of
Lesotho by South Africa on 9 December. That unprovoked act of aggression against the peace-loving people
of Lesotho resulted in the loss of innocent lives and
the destruction of property. Our nation was deeply
grieved by the tragic loss of human life, and we were
very much concerned about the damage to and destruction of property. Upon receiving the sad news, the
Regent Queen Mother conveyed to King Moshoeshoe.
on behalf of the nation. a message of condolence
expressing our sincere sympathy at the loss of life,

“I have the honour to inform you of the deep
indignation of the people and Government
of the
Revolutionary
People’s Republic of Guinea following the armed incursion by the fascist troops of
Pretoria against Maseru. capital of the Kingdom of
Lesotho. ;I Member of the United Nations. on the
false pretext of destroying one of the rear bases of
the African National Congress of South Africa.
Viewed in combination with the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia and of part of the national
territory of Angola and the repeated acts of aggression against Mozambique and Zimbnbwc. we do not
doubt that this new. gross and premeditated
violation of international law directed n?ninst Lesotho
is part of the global strategy of colomalism aimed at
dcstahilizing the independent States of Africa with
the blessing and the material and moral support of
intcrnationnl imperialism. The people and Governmcnt of the Revolutionary People’s Republic of
Guinea. aware of their responsibilities
with regard
to the preservation of peace in Africa and in the
world, most energetically condemn the militarist
kind expansionist policy of the crptrrthcid
rigime
and express their active solidarity with the peoples
of southern Africa in their determination to eliminate
the last bastions of cotonialisnl from that part of
thr African continent. The people and Government
of the Revolutionary People’s Republic of Guinea
appeal urgently to the Security Council to adopt
energetic enforcement measures against the Pretoria
rtigime in conformity with Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. An evasive attitude
on the part of certain permanent members of the
Council would only encournge the South African
:luthoritics in their policy of aggression characterized by the domination and oppression of the
African peoples.” [SPY S//552.5.]

I I I. My delegation listened attentively to King
Moshoeshoe when he addressed the Council on
14 December [2406rh mc~cti/l,yj. He related. with calm
and restrained emotion. the tragic events that had
gripped with shock and revulsion not only the people
of Lesotho but also the whole of civilized humanity.
He told the Council that units of the South African
Defence Force had invaded his kingdom and caused
damage and loss of life in the capital. Maseru, where
at least 42 people had been killed, among whom were
women and children. He said that numerous homes
had been destroyed. Some Lesotho nationals had
been murdered in cold blood, This act of wanton
aggression by South Africa constitutes a flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law.
112. The delegation of Swaziland is speaking in the
Council in a gesture of sympathy and solidarity with
the Government and people of the sister Kingdom of
Lesotho in regard to the act of naked aggression
carried out by the Republic of South Africa on 9 December. which resulted in the brutal killing of innocent
civilians in Lesotho.
113. South Africa’s violation of the territorial integrity of a neighbouring State sets yet another dangerous precedent which could engulf the whole region
and which thus threatens international
peace and
security. Swaziland cannot and will not condone the
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
another State. The Government of Swaziland therefore condemns the violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lesotho by South Africa and
reiterates its total abhorrence of the loss of life and
damage to property resulting from such violation.
We cannot understand how a State can carry out such
an act against another State for the simple reason that

107. My Government sincerely believes that the
only means of freeing Africa from the iniquity that is
~rptrrtlwid
is the adoption of strong enforcement
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
108. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Swaziland. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
IO

that State is fulfilling a humanitarian duty to persons
who have found the system of lrporfl?cid intolerable.

terday, stated that the attacks alleged to have been
launched from Lesotho occurred a long distance from
the borders. It is therefore surprising that South
Africa. which maintains the most sophisticated security network in the region, should have been unable
to detect the so-called saboteurs during their sojourn
in its territory. South Africa appears, then, to be trying
to make its neighbours responsible for its internal
security situation, which it finds difficult to control.

114. My country also borders South Africa, and in
many ways we identify ourselves with the bereaved
people of our sister kingdom. Together we share the
lot of history: colonial subjugation and deprivation.
Even though we are struggling with the task of the
economic advancement of our peoples, we have never
abandoned our responsibility to provide humanitarian
assistance and protection to our brothers who have
fled the hard grinding-stone of brutal racism. It is cleat
in the mind of every Swazi that this tragic and bloody
event that has befallen the people of Lesotho is the
result of their noble humanitarian act of giving refuge
to the defenceless and oppressed people of South
Africa.

I 18. Even though some neighbouring
States are
falsely accused of harbouring freedom fighters. the
truth of the matter is that these States have done their
utmost to create an atmosphere of good neighbourliness. The South African Government knows it. The
Lusaka Manifesto8 is evidence of the fact that Africa
desires a peaceful negotiation of problems confronting
the region. King Moshoeshoe rightly pointed out here
that Lesotho pioneered constructive dialogue, even
at the expense of its honour. That gesture of extending
the hand of friendship was a brave demonstration
of
Lesotho’s desire to live in peace with its neighbour.
It took that risk to its reputation knowing full well that
blame for failure to realize peace is often put on those
who seek it.

115. Lesotho, as the Secretary-General
said on
14 December [ikid.], is courageous in carrying out its
international obligations under the Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees of 19516 and the Protocol
relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967,’ as well
as the Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of
Refugee Problems in Africa, adopted in 1969 under
the aegis of the OAU. It is therefore obvious to the
international
community that Lesotho has been made
a scapegoat for the deteriorating
situation within
South Africa itself. The people of Lesotho have been
singled out as a target for vengeance for the internal
resistance to apartheid by the majority of the people
of South Africa, who for too long have been denied
power-sharing in the land of their birth.

119. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country recalled in a recent statement that all successive
Prime Ministers of Swaziland also desired and believed
in the settlement of disputes by peaceful means. We
are by nature a peace-loving people. The late King
Sobhuza was an advocate of peaceful contact and
exchange of views between conflicting parties. Some
of the heads of State of the region have also bilaterally
extended an olive branch.

I 16. Swaziland is conscious of the fact that uportheid is the major cause of the destabilization of neighbouring States and the overall deterioration
of the
situation in southern Africa. The countries of the
I-egion have for some time been aware of the orchestrated publicity aimed at conditioning public opinion
in South Africa to the view that the neighbouring
States are being used as bases for subversive activities
against that country. Some of the agents of the rlgime
have sunk so low that they either plant or carry arms
of war across international borders. It is possible to
believe that they sometimes style themselves members of the liberation movement, in order to give
credence to false allegations aimed at causing a division between the refugee community and the populations of the asylum States, The so-called resistance
movements
are created and promoted for the purpose of destabilizing
neighbouring
Governments.
Where they do not exist, imaginary movements are
created in order to give an impression that the country
is faced with internal opposition. All kinds of intimidation ploys are employed. It is clear that the stage
is being cunningly prepared to justify the cold-blooded
murder of our peoples in protection of crpmthc~id.

120. In spite of these efforts to create an atmosphere conducive to peaceful contacts, a false picture
of neighbouring States as launchitig bases for subversive attacks is being developed so as to justify naked
murder and State terrorism.
121. Swaziland is particularly saddened by these
tragic developments, because King Sobhuza attempted
to create an atmosphere conducive to dialogue and
peaceful negotiations within the region, following a
similar assault on the territorial integrity of a neighbouring State.
122. The labelling of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland-states
neighbouring South Africa-as launching
pads for subversion is one deadly design in a series.
It is a design whose full import can be well understood
when viewed against such wild machinations as the
information
scandal of the Muldergate era, the Seychelles ~OIQ attempt, the northern Namibia genocidal
death squad known as the Butterfly Commando and
so on. This catalogue of bloody and erratic schemes,
which now includes the invasion of Lesotho, makes it
extremely
difficult for the neighbouring
States of
the region to believe that South Africa sincerely
desires to Ii\ 16 in peace with its neighbours. We are

I 17. South Africa’s attempt to justify its act of
aggression against Lesotho strikes a false note, because
King Moshoeshoe, in his address the day before yesI1

convinced that this latest scheme is aimed at making
the neighbouring States battle zones.
123. Having said that, I also wish to point out, in
all fairness, that it is equally important to realize that
in fact there exists within South Africa, even among
the Afrikaaner tribe, a body of civilized, decent and
warm-hearted people who genuinely desire a peaceful change within their country and the entire region.
They have recognized the need to build bridges of
confidence not only across the colour and ethnic lines
but even across international frontiers. The world
would like to believe that this body of men who desire
a meaningful change includes men within the Government of South Africa itself, because some time ago it
was announced in this chamber that South Africa was
moving away from racial discrimination.
124. A desperate and tragic act such as the invasion
of a neighbouring State makes it difficult for the international community to believe that there indeed
exist within the South African ruling oligarchy people of stature who would stand tall against all the odds,
against everything that means resistance to efforts at
reconciliation,
These South African pa,triots who
desire to create a new dispensation of hope and peace
are frustrated, because a meaningful change within
a system that is based on subjugation and that generates violence is impossible to realize. They are
angered, because they are conscious of the fact that
wherever they go in the world they carry with them
the stigma and label of racism. The crparrhcid image
haunts decent men in South Africa, We understand
their ernotions of frustration and, as a neighbour. we
can only offer words of encouragement
for them to
stand up and be counted on the side of truth and
justice.
125. That is why we stated in the General Assembly
in the debate on the policies of clptrr-thrid of the Government of South Africa that:
“South Africa should be called upon to convene
a national convention consisting of genuine representatives of the people of South Africa to map out
a new course for the future , . . . Those recommendations for a national convention
still stand
valid; they offer a most constructive approach for a
peaceful and lasting solution. Without a shadow
of doubt such a convention would create a forum
in which the leaders would meet under conditions
of equality. This would be an arena of national
reconstruction, a place where the problems that
have torn apart the fabric of South African society
would be identified, analysed, and solutions would
be prescribed in accordance with the principles of
justice and human dignity.“”
126. In conclusion, we of the Swaziland delegation are cognizant of the fact that the acts of aggression are calculated to intimidate
the neighbouring
States with a view to making them subordinates and

thus making possible the perpetuation of the internationally unacceptable policy of rrpurtheid. We view
this situation with dismay and indignation.
127. My delegation also joins in the appeal made by
King Moshoeshoe that the Council restrain South
Africa from flouting the Charter of the United Nations. violating the territorial
integrity of Member
States of the Organization and pursuing a strategy of
naked terrorism against a whole sub-continent [ibid.,
porrr. 37).
128. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
129. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): I should like
at the outset to extend to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of December. I should like
also to extend our warm congratulations to Mr, Cartes
Ozores Typaldos of Panama on the efficient and
impartial manner in which he carried out his duties as
President for the month of November.
130. Once again we meet to discuss a complaint by
an African State against South Africa for its unprovoked aggression against its territorial integrity. This
is not the first occasion on which the Council has been
requested to consider an issue affecting peace and
stability in southern Africa.
I3 I. The naked act of aggression against Lesotho by
South Africa is but another link in the chain of actions
aimed at destabilizing neighbouring African States in
the area. It is also another step, as King Moshoeshoe
said the day before yesterday, in an attempt to install
its agents in their Governments [ibid.. prrro. 341. Moreover, the Pretoria rigime’s act of wanton aggression
is aimed at intimidating Lesotho into dissociating itself
from the world-wide condemnation of the policy of
trpnrthcid and from offering moral and humanitarian
support to the oppressed South African refugees.
This is to no avail. The world-wide condemnation
of nprrrtheid and other facets of South Africa’s policies
will continue as long as those policies persist.
132. Although South Africa claims to be interested
in a settlement of the Namibian problem and in confidence-building measures, it has shown by its deeds
that it has no real intention of contributing to the
restoration of peaceful conditions in southern Africa
or to the creation of a climate conducive to Namibia’s
independence.
133. Egypt strongly condemns the premeditated act
of aggression carried out by South Africa. It is a grave
and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principle of respect for the territorial
integrity of a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations.

IRY
134. My delegation would like to stress that the
imposition
of mandatory sanctions against South
Africa has been made more imperative than ever as
the last possible peaceful way of compelling that Government to change its policies. Serious actions in
accordance with the relevant chapters of the Charter
must be taken to deter South Africa from repeating
its acts of aggressiun and destabilization against frontline States and to put an end to its vile policies.

135. Lastly, we should like to express our inherent
support of and solidarity with the people and Government of Lesotho. We will continue to extend all necessary economic
assistance to sisterly Lesotho.
Egypt hails the policy of the Government of Lesotho
of giving asylum to political refugees from South

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
esttin en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

od300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sent en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations

PUBLlCACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secdon
de Yentas,

88-60989-October

1989-2~~~~
