UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
NOV 2 6 ~8~1
THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR L.
Li.\-L.-“L-..

1929’”

MEETING:

-.

18 JUNE 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

... ... ... .. ... ... ... .. .... .. .... .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Situation in South Africa: killings and violence by the apartheid
regime in
South Africa in Soweto and other areas:
(a) Letter dated 18 June 1976 from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Republic and the United Republic of Tanzania to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 12100);
(b) Telegram dated 18 June 1976 from the President of the Democratic Republic
of Madagascar to the Secretary-General (S/12101) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1929)

. _i
“”

S/PV. 1929

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1929th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Rashleigh

E. JACKSON

(Guyana).

2. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the limited number
of seats available at the Council table, I invite the
representatives of Cuba and Madagascar to take the
seats- reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited
to take a seat at the Council table when they are given
the floor.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

Adoption

2.

Situation in South Africa: killings and violence by
the apartheid regime in South Africa in Soweto
and other areas:
(a) Letter dated l8 June 1976 from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic
and the United Republic of Tanzania to the
President of the Security Council (S/12100);
Telegram
dated 18 June 1976 from the Presi@I
dent of the Democratic
Republic of Mada-- gascar to the Secretary-General
(S/12101)
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Acosta
(Cuba) and Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar)
took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
,chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/l929)

1.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform the members
of the Councilthat
I have just received a letter bearing
-today’s date from the representatives of Benin, the
Libyan Arab ;Republic and the United Republic of
Tanzania [S/12102] which reads as follows:
“We have the honour to request that in the course
of the current discussion of the Security Council
concerning :the situation in South Africa-killings
and violence’by the apartheid regime in South Africa
in Soweto and ‘other areas-an
invitation ,under
rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure be
extended to ‘Mr. Thami Mhlambiso,
representative
of the African National Congress of South Africa,
and to Mr. David Sibeko, representative of the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania.”

was called to order at 10.30 p.m.
Adoption

18 June 1976, at 9 p.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

If I hear no objection,
agrees to that request.

Situation

in South Africa: killings and violence by the
apartheid regime in South Africa in Soweto and other
areas:
(a) Letter dated 18 June 1976 from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and the
United Republic of Tanzania to the President of
the Security Council (S/12100);
(b) Telegram dated 18 June 1976 from the President
of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar
to the
Secretary-General
(S/12101)

I shall take it that the Council

It was so decided.
4. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened at very short notice and
as a matter of urgency in accordance with the request
addressed to the President of the Security Council
this afternoon by three non-permanent members of the
Council, the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Republic
and the United
Republic
of Tanzania
[S/12100]. A request for a Council meeting was also
contained in a telegram which the President of the
Democratic Republic of Madagascar today addressed
to the Secretary-General
[S/12101].

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Security Council that I have received
letters from the representatives
of Algeria, Cuba,
Liberia and Madagascar in which they ask to be invited
to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose to invite these representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.

5. The first speaker is the representative of Liberia,
Chairman of the Group of African States, upon whom
I now call.
6. Mrs. BROOKS-RANDOLPH
(Liberia):
Since
I represent the interests of the African Group, let me
first take this opportunity
to congratulate
you,
Mr. President. We have no doubt that under your

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria) and Mrs. Brooks-Randolph
(Liberia), took
places at the Council table.
1

wise guidance
results.

this Council

will achieve some fruitful

13. The Pretoria regime controlling the Reuublic of.
South Africa will no-doubt consider this heinous act’
to be an internal affair. But where human rights are
brutally violated and a heavily armed police force
maliciously attacks defenceless high-school students,
then it becomes very much the concern of the international community.

7. I wish also to thank the members of the Council
for responding to the request of the representatives
of the African Group for the convening of an emergency
meeting of the Council necessitated by the diabolical
acts committed
by the Pretoria regime against the
precious jewels of Africa-that
is, our youth.

14. In the same press release issued by the African
Group it was also stated:

8. The item on our agenda is urgent. It needs actions
rather than words. I shall therefore be very brief.

“The United Nations and the international community have a special responsibility
towards the
oppressed peoples of South Africa and the liberation
movements’, and as such the African Group calls
upon all true friends of Africa to. support the
people of South, Africa in their just struggle against
the fascist regime of apartheid .”

9. In the press release issued today by the African
States, it is stated:
“The African Group at the United Nations has
received with great shock the news of the coldblooded murder of peaceful demonstrators by South
African police.”

15. The African members are also concerned that
in this racially tense area of the world commitments
are being made to supply South Africa with atomic
reactors or other means by which they can exterminate
the peoples of Africa.

From the report on the incident in The Christian
Science Monjtor,
we gather that these students had
committed
no crime. They were simply protesting
against the action of the South African Government,
which had insisted that they be taught mathematics
and social studies in Afrikaans and not in the English
language. The students felt that that was against their
interests and they therefore protested,
carrying
banners expressing their views. Today’s press release
also stated:

16. In conclusion, the African States condemn these
atrocities by the Pretoria regime which have resulted
in the death of hundreds of innocent people, including
children six and seven years old.
17. The African States call on the Security Council
to take bold and positive action against the racist
regime of South Africa, which for the past 30 years
has flouted the resolutions of both the Council and
the General Assembly.

“The African Group resolutely condemns this
crime and renews its unswerving solidarity with the
masses of the African people in South Africa who are
joining the growing uprising against the apartheid
regime.”

18. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Algeria.

10. I should like to stress again that the racist South,
African regime has once again defied the soul of Africa
in its direct massacre of our children-the
future of
Africa. We consider the slaughtering and injury of
hundreds of Africans to be tantamount to premeditated
genocide.

I now call on the representa-

19. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
French): The extremely urgent nature of this meeting
of the Security Council suffices in itself to emphasize
the gravity of the situation that is to be the subject
of the Council’s discussions. In availing myself of the
Council’s authorization to participate in these discussions, I think that it is my duty to confine my
statement to the precise problem before us today,
without entering into developments
which, since
apartheid is involved, would in any event be supertlous
since there is no longer any need to convince anyone.
This. restraint which I thus wish to impose on myself
will not, however, prevent me from thanking you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for allowing the non-aligned group to make its voice
heard, through me, in this debate. Nor would I wish
to miss this opportunity to express to you my personal
satisfaction at seeing you conducting the work of this
Council, with your well-known competence, intelligence and authority, at a time when the Council has
before it questions of vital importance for non-align-.
ment and for world peace.

11. The insistence of the South African Government
that high-school students who have never studied the
Afrikaans language should now be taught mathematics
and social studies in Afrikaans raises a serious question
about the intention of the South African Government.
There is no doubt in my mind that this is a grand
design to retard the educational
progress of the
Africans.
12. The event in Soweto, in which more than a
hundred students were gunned down by the racist
police of the South African regime, is reminiscent of
the savage holocaust that took place in Sharpeville
in 1960. A few minutes ago it was announced over
the radio that the death toll continues to rise and that
over 800 persons have been wounded.
2

20. The news reaching us from Johannesburg amply
proves that the events now taking place in South
Africa are far from being simply minor incidents
without importance
or repercussions.
The persistence of these disturbances and the fact that they have
spread despite the positioning of impressive numbers
of police and acts of merciless repression, as well as
the participation
in the demonstrations
of an evergrowing crowd and the determination
of the Africans
to pursue their struggle against apartheid, are all factors
that should convince us that a revolutionary
situation
is being created in that region of Africa. Journalists
on the spot have stated that the situation is deteriorating
hourly in the ‘black sections of the largest suburb of
Johannesburg,.where bloody riots have been exploding
for two days now. Today these riots have spilt over
the bounds of the black sections, and confrontations
between whites and blacks have begun to be reported.
Thus, the well-known process of the chain reaction of
violence and repression has been. initiated,
and
everyone knows that the uncontrolled development of
such a process quickly gets completely out of hand
and finally leads to the worst possible catastrophes.

aroused in every country of the world by the system
of apartheid. By accepting the dangers and sacrifices
inherent in violent action, these Africans have shown
that they understood how ineffective would be any
peaceful action initiated by the international
community to induce the racist regime in Pretoria to
abandon the system of apartheid. The responsibility
which they have thus assumed is enormous, because
they know better than anyone the strength of the
forces they will have to tight. Their own merit will
only be increased thereby because in defending its
dignity a people cannot allow itself to be deflected
from its purpose by the numerical superiority of the
forces which oppress it.
24. Information
has been received to the effect that
white students joined the black demonstrators in the
course of the recent incidents. If that is true, it would
at least introduce an element of hope into the present
tragedy, because that would mean that at least a
portion of the white population in South Africa is
sufficiently alerted to the dangers inherent in the
system of apartheid or sufficiently convinced of its
moral unacceptability
to dare to stand up to the
authority which represents’it and to go even further,
in other words, to associate themselves with the
demonstrators and to share their dangers and reinforce
their struggle.

21. The Security Council is aware of the imminent
danger inherent in these events, so it is unlikely that
we shall need ‘to appeal to it to assume its responsibilities and to take without delay the steps it considers
fit to avert an even more serious deterioration
of the
situation.

25. We have already had an opportunity to denounce
the direct or indirect support given by certain Govemments to the racist regime of South Africa by supplying
arms or by developing
economic relations which
encourage and strengthen the system of apartheid.
In the present circumstances,
the attitude of those
Governments
becomes even more reprehensible
because they can no longer be unaware of the tragic
consequences involved, consequences for which they
bear a certain measure of responsibility.

22. At any rate, no one can be unaware of the
profound significance of what is at present happening
in South Africa. The obstinate way in which the racist
regime of Pretoria has maintained
the system of
apartheid is, without a shadow of doubt, the root cause
of the present tragedy, as it has been the reason for
the nightmare which up until now has been the daily
lot of the black African population.
The universal
condemnation
of apartheid was clearly not enough to
ensure its disappearance.
It was, however, to be
foreseen that by thus preserving a society based on the
separation of the races and based on the subjugation
of the black majority by a white minority, the system
of apartheid
was inexorably
moving towards an
explosion like the one we witness today. It was
fostered by long-repressed
racial hatreds, steadily
increasing mistrust and valid fears about the vicissitudes of a future threatened by attempts at revenge and
the defence of privileges which had finally been called
into question.

26. The Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries met in
Algiers from 30 May to 2 June before violence broke
out in South Africa. However, even at that time it
was concerned at the situation developing in that
country because of the persistence of the system of
apartheid. The final communique which it issued at the
conclusion of its work contained the following paragraph, which I should like to read out:
“The Bureau expresses its serious concern over
the steady support given the racist minority regime
by certain Western Powers. In this connexion, it
condemns the most recent decision of the French
Government
to provide the South African regime
with nuclear reactors and calls upon the French
Government
to reconsider that decision, since its
implementation
would have the gravest repercussions on the struggle against the obnoxious system
of apartheid
and on peace and security in the
region.“’

23. What is happening today is an ample demonstration of the fact that the Africans in South Africa have
become aware of the state of inferiority in which they
have been kept up to now in the system of apartheid
and also a proof of their desire to accede to complete
equality as free and equal men. The violent incidents
which we have heard about also show that the Africans
in South Africa can no longer rest content with the
international solidarity which has always been demonstrated in their favour nor with the general indignation

27. The recent turn taken by events in South Africa
and the active phase that has now begun in the struggle
3

National Congress at the fact that Guyana, a country
which has consistently supported and identified itself
with the liberation
struggle, is presiding over this
meeting: Through you I must also congratulate all
those Governments which have voiced their outrage at
the dastardly and barbarous murder of African schoolchildren and others by the South African Government.

of the Africans against apartheid can no longer leave
any room for the sort of ambiguous attitude of some
who take occasion to condemn apartheid loudly, while
at the same time maintaining
extremely
friendly
-and
fruitful-relations
with the Government
of
Pretoria. These times are sufficiently serious for us to
expect everyone, every country and every Government
to be fully alive to their responsibilities
and to act in
accordance with their declarations.

33. We are meeting tonight to consider the emergency
situation that has arisen in South Africa as a result of
the legitimate uprising of the African people against
the illegal apartheid regime of South Africa.

28. What is happening in South Africa may degenerate into a situation which will be extremely regrettable for that country. But we are all aware of the
serious repercussions that would result from this
throughout southern Africa, at a time when more
attention is being paid to its future and to ways in
which it might move, as smoothly as possible, towards
a lasting state of equilibrium.

34. I do not propose at this stage to go into the whole
history of the apartheid regime, but I think it proper to
give a few explanations
regarding the policies of
apartheid and the motives actuating the architects of
the obnoxious system which has been roundly condemned by the General Assembly, the Security Council
and all the other agencies of this august Organization.

29. In the Security Council we have, at one and the
same time, those countries which are most sensitive
to the threats now lowering over Africa and those
countries which have always tried to argue against the
need for resorting to violence in order to re-establish
justice. In the Council there are those who, since
they cannot force the Pretoria regime to give up its
racist practices, have attempted to bar it from the
international
community.
There are also those who
have preferred to keep it in our midst in order to be
able to condemn it at leisure-as
if that could in any
way change the situation.

35. Vorster today is faced with an uprising which the.
ANC, the legitimate
spokesman and representative
of the African people, has for decades warned would
inevitably erupt, for, generation after generation, my
people have been targets for wanton violence, repression and torture to death, execution and long terms of
imprisonment
for having dared to raise a finger against
apartheid. This of course has to stop. We are prepared
to pay the price.
36. In March of 1960, the international
community
witnessed the massacre in Sharpeville, where 69 people
were mown down and shot to death and hundreds of
other defenceless men, women and children were
maimed by the South African police. That time the
African people were protesting against the notorious
Pass Laws. These laws alone, one would think, would
be sufficient to keep the African people in check. No,
not for the South African Government.
We have the
Suppression of Communism
Act, the Riotous Assemblies Act, the Immorality
Act, the General Laws
Amendment
Act, the Group Areas Act, the Urban
Areas Act, the Bantu Education Act, the Separate
Universities Act, the Job Reservation Act, the Bantu
Authorities Act, and the infamous Terrorism Act, to
name only a few.

30. But those divisions can no longer hold in the
face of the present events. There can be no one here
who is a protagonist of injustice, no one who supports
racism or defends apartheid.
What the Africans in
South Africa expect of the Security Council is already
vividly exemplified by the struggle which they are now
waging, by the sacrifices which they accept and by
the hope which guides them. It would of course be
a very modest contribution
by the Council to their
search for justice and dignity if its discussions were to
culminate in a unanimously reaffirmed condemnation
of apartheid, in the expression of the warmest possible
solidarity of the Council with the African peoples in
South Africa, and in the absolute prohibition
of any
political,
economic or military
relations with the
Pretoria regime. This is also the very least that we
can expect of the Council.

37. Specifically,
this evening we are gathered to
consider the grave situation that is unfolding in South
Africa as a direct result of the Bantu Education Act.

31. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed that
Mr. Thami Mhlambiso,
representative of the African
National Congress (ANC), to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, wishes to make a statement. If no
member of the Council objects, I shall invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

38. In 1964 the South African white supremacist
Government passed the Bantu Education Act. In the
terms of this act all African education was to be
through the medium of the mother tongue. English,
which for decades had been used as a medium, was
to be taught as a subject. The Africans were to be
taught to honour their chiefs and their humble tribal
backgrounds. For as Verwoerd once said, false hopes
must not be raised in the minds and aspirations of
Africans, as the green pastures in South Africa are not

32. Mr. MHLAMBISO:
In general, I am not familiar
with diplomatic protocol, but I do think that at this
stage I must express the satisfaction of the African
4

43. We wish to implore the Security Council and the
international
community
to look upon the Government and supporters of apartheid not only as a menace
to the African people of South Africa, but also as a
threat to the African continent and to international
peace and security. All efforts must be summoned
with deliberate speed to bring an end to apartheid.

for them. I am not quoting Verwoerd; I am merely
giving the gist of what he was saying when pushing the
Bantu Education Bill through Parliament. The implications are clear: the Africans were to remain in perpetual
servitude; they were to be hewers of wood and drawers
of water. Vorster today still intends to remain in that
cradle of privilege which is the strict preserve of every
white man in South Africa, while the African is a
sojourner in the land of his birth. The Bantu Education Act, therefore, is seen by the African people and
all democracy-loving
people as an important extension
of the apartheid system.

44. The demonstration
by African school-children
and students, joined by white students at the University
of the Witwatersrand,
is now no longer just a
demonstration:
it is a struggle of the oppressed peoples
of South Africa against an illegal white minority
regime. Already eight other African townships have
joined in the struggle. The students of the universities
of Zululand and Turfloop have already demonstrated
their indignation by destroying the buildings, libraries
and all symbols of the oppression which has been
their lot at those institutions
since the introduction
of Bantu education and the Separate Universities
Act, which gave rise to the tribal colleges.

39. Some supporters of apartheid may argue that
Bantu education and instruction in one’s mother tongue
is not so undesirable a proposition but we know that
the orbit of our mother tongues is very narrow. It is
fallacious to think that a child coming from a Bantu
education institution can benefit from the advancement
that mankind has made. This is why the African people
are at war with Bantu education. In this world of
shrinking horizons, it is criminal on the part of any
Government to waste and imprison the minds of the
African people. Any democratic Government would
make sure that its future citizens get a free, universal
and democratic education. Our people are denied all
these rights. This is not surprising, however, for no
undemocratic
Government
can have democratic
education.

45. I must point out in all humility
that we are
unable to give exact figures as to how many children
have been shot or hacked to death by the South
African police. From communications
we have
received from the people at home, we have learnt
that well over a hundred are reported killed, and
hundreds maimed. It is also reported that, apart from
the police with its wanton violence, the army is standing
in readiness to march in. All the time, helicopters
are constantly hovering over the townships, ready to
kill at any moment.
- __-___..-. ----~.
46. I cannot emphasize strongly enough the need
for strengthening
the arms embargo against South
Africa. I also wish to say, with all the courage and
support of my people that I can muster, that the
French Government should bow its head in shame, for
the helicopters mostly being used today were supplied
by the French. The United States Government must
also be condemned for the enriched uranium it has
been selling to South Africa. Of course, France has
supplied South Africa with all the weapons which it
needs to mow down defenceless schoolchildren.
It is
now going further in supplying South Africa with
nuclear reactors in order to wipe out every African
Government north of South Africa’s borders that may
support the liberation movement. The British Govemment also bears a share of the blame, for we must
also hold that Government responsible for what is going
on in South Africa today, for it was the British
Government
which sowed the seeds of white supremacy in South Africa. There are many other countries, including West Germany, which must be strongly
condemned
for having supported
the apartheid
Government in South Africa, and there are Govemments which co-operate very closely with South
Africa. But at this stage, I want to confine my remarks
to these countries.
-----__
-

40. The illegal white supremacist Government
of
South Africa must be wiped off the face of the earth.
The struggle of the African children and students,
who are being murdered in dastardly fashion by the
South African police, must be seen as part and parcel
of the general struggle of the African people, under
the leadership of the liberation movement against a
racist settler regime.
41. I recall the meeting of the Security Council in
1974 when my friend Piet Botha yelled himself blue in
the face asking to be given six months, during which
period his Government was to bring about meaningful
changes in South Africa. Mr. Botha at that time
professed that they did not have hatred for blacks.
I wonder how he would explain things today.
42. Just after the statement by Mr. Botha, the racist
regime of South Africa decided to increase its military
expenditure. The defence budget for the financial year
1975/76 amounts to 948 million Rand: an increase of
36 per cent over the previous financial year. This
amounts to 18 per cent of the entire budget, and
3 per cent of South Africa’s gross national product.
These figures are given in the report of the Special
Committee
against Apartheid.2
The South African
Government,
in a white paper on defence and armaments production,
justified
this increased military
expenditure as a measure for “countering all forms of
insurgency and the maintenance
of a credible and
balanced conventional force”.

47. Just in passing, we wish to suggest that the
Secretary-General
should do all in his power to stop
5

the Kissinger-Vorster
meeting. How can Mr. Kissinger
forget so easily that Vorster is a Nazi and was interned
at Koffefontein
during the Second World War for
sabotaging the war effort against Hitler? I need hardly
mention that as the United States Secretary of State,
Mr. Kissinger should always be mindful of those men,
women and children who were gassed by Hitler. The
African people are today living in a gas chamber in
South Africa. If Vorster wants to correct the situation
in South Africa, the first people with whom he should
meet are the parents of all those school-children
who have been killed during the present uprising.
Indeed, Vorster should meet with the legitimate
leaders of the African people whom he has incarcerated
on Robben Island or exiled, and not just with his
chosen puppets.

sion-Govemment
buildings. I do not need to mention
the police-those
are animals. So also shall the South
African Government be treated. It is a violent Govemment, and nothing short of armed struggle can bring
peace and security for all of us in South Africa.
5 1. We are equally determined to ensure that mankind
is, once and for all, freed of the scourge of apartheid.
We are the alternative government, the true leaders
and spokesmen for all South Africans.
52. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed that
Mr. David Sibeko, representative of the Pan Africanist
Congress (PAC), to whom the Council has extended
an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, wishes to make a statement. Accordingly,
as there are no objections, I shall invite Mr. Sibeko
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

48. It has not been for lack of courage that the
African people have taken so long to demonstrate
their total rejection of apartheid.
We are a people
which was defeated after fighting for many years with
the South African Governments that succeeded each
other there. But although we were defeated, we were
never conquered, for how can one quell the will and
the spirit of a people to be free in the land of their
fathers, of a people to rule themselves, of a people
to have a place in the sun?

53. Mr. SIBEKO:
Mr. President, your country is
a progressive member of the non-aligned movement,
and we regard it as a privilege to address this Council
during your term of office. But for the grave developments taking place in my country I should be taking
this opportunity to pay the fullest tribute of respect to
Guyana and its courageous people, whom you represent with particular
distinction
in the United
Nations.

49. In conclusion, the ANC, which is the vanguard
liberation organization in the struggle against upartheid, in the struggle against colonialism,
and in the
struggle against imperialism,
also sent a cable to
Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
condemning the savage act of
murder which has resulted in the killing and maiming
of hundreds of African people and other South African
patriots. We have also requested, through the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, that
a meeting of that Committee be called to study the
current situation in South Africa. This, too, I must
mention: cables have been sent to .Yvonne Burke,
Chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus of the
United States, United States Congressman Charles
Diggs, United States Senator Dick Clark, and the
National Council of Churches of Christ in the United
States. The Secretary of the Special Committee against
Apartheid has been requested to distribute the texts of
these cables to all appropriate sections of the United
Nations.

54. We have met on this occasion to familiarize
ourselves with the facts of the situation that is unfolding
in Azania following the dastardly murder of small
children by police goons in the employ of the South
African apartheid regime. We have respect for the
dignity of this Council and its members, who have so
kindly allowed us to appear before them, and we
recognize the solemnity of this meeting and the gravity
of the situation facing our people inside Azania, and we
have not come here to make propaganda. We will
therefore unfold the facts and try and attempt to relate
them in perspective so that the full depth of what is
unfolding in our country is given the appreciation it
deserves, so that in the end, when the Council has
ceased to be seized of this matter, appropriate action
may be taken within the terms of reference available
to the Council under the Charter. We hope that for
once we shall not be witnesses to a spectacle in which
the solemn duties entrusted to the Council suffer
sabotage at the altar of vested interest.

50. We should all like to leave this meeting tonight
or tomorrow morning having the full assurance that
appropriate measures are going to be taken against the
racist regime, for the international
community should
have no misconceptions’
about the feelings of the
African ,people. The international
community
must
bear with us, because we have for so long pursued a
non-violent course, attempting to explore all avenues
so as not to endanger the lives of the people in South
Africa, to demonstrate amply to the international community that we are not cut-throats, even at this stage
when my people are being killed. Their targets are
still the symbols of apartheid, the symbols of oppres-

55. Sixteen years ago this Council convened in very
similar circumstances to consider an almost identical
situation.
On 21 March 1960 the Pan Africanist
Congress launched an unfolding programme of positive
action for the liberation
of Azania. It specifically
targeted the loathsome pass system as the first objective to be attacked. The history of what happened
to African patriots who responded to that clarion call
at Sharpeville,
Langa, Nyanga and Vanderbijl Park
on that important date in the calendar of our liberation
is very well known. The wholesale massacre by
6

59. Determined nob. to be cowed by the fire power
of the police, who are armed with pistols, rifles and
machine guns, African militants are hitting back with
stones, clubs, shovels and any other kind of weapon
they can lay their hands on. For me as an Azanian
-and
I speak as someone who has made a small
contribution to the struggle of my people-it
is a matter
of great pride to hear that my people are seizing the
initiative
through the revolutionary
process of selfreliance, relying first on themselves to free themselves
from the yoke of white-settler
domination
in this
fashion. Picks, shovels, stones, bread knives. And
against what? The most sophisticated army in the
continent of Africa, the army of a country that spends
one and a half billion dollars per year on arms and
other equipment that it purchases from our friends,
some of whom are represented round this table.
Armoured cars, helicopters-you
name it-Vorster
has it and we do not have it. But the people are
fighting. It is a matter of great pride and a source of
dignity to us that this fight has been initiated and
is being carried out by children. Indeed, had I been
born but two years earlier, some of them could have
been my grandchildren.

trigger-happy
South African police of African men,
women and children on 21 March 1960 led, among
other important
events, to the first-ever consideration of the question of apartheid by the Security
Council. Thus Sharpeville was immortalized
in the
annals of the United Nations.
56. Within South Africa, Sharpeville had created an
unprecedented crisis for the racist regime. This was
a bold initiative spearheaded by bold men and women
determined to make whatever sacrifice was deemed
necessary for their freedom, for the liberation of their
country. It is fitting, therefore, that those sons and
daughters of Africa who laid down their lives so that
Azania might be free and independent
among the
nations of the world have been posthumously honoured
by the General Assembly, which has in effect declared
21 March “Sharpeville
Day”, the International
Day
for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination.
57. Two days ago, the South African racist regime
initiated a campaign of wanton murder which will even
surpass Sharpeville,
and by far. As I speak to you
tonight, it has already surpassed Sharpeville in terms
of the loss of human life. We have in our possession’
eye-witness accounts from irrefutable sources which
report that completely
unprovoked
South African
fascist police tired point-blank at a young boy during
a demonstration
against the imposition of the narrow
Afrikaans language of the Boer settlers as the medium
of instruction
in mathematics
and social-science
subjects in primary and junior secondary schools in
Soweto. The little boy was between six and seven
years old. The young woman who picked him up was
a reporter for a Johannesburg
newspaper, Sophie
Tema. She struggled to take the young boy to the
nearest clinic in the press car. The boy was bleeding
from his mouth. He was dead on arrival at the hospital
clinic. It was that callous and cold-blooded
murder
that ignited the time-bomb
that has been lying just
below the surface in Azania, waiting for just such a
detonator to set it off.

60: I understand very well the sentiments of an
Azanian brother who said, “Our children are going
about doing what we should have done long ago”.
‘We are not proud of the fact that we did not set an
example for our children earlier. Of course, I am not
in any way disparaging the sacrifices that were made
by those freedom fighters whose actions preceded this
initiative. The records here contain information about
what Poqo has done under the leadership of PAC in
Azania. The archives of the United Nations also
contain information
about what Umkonto we Sizwe
has attempted to do under the leadership of ANC.
But the present struggle goes far beyond the initiatives
attempted in the past.
61. As I have said, we are not making propaganda;
we are stating facts, facts which stare us in the face,
so that this Council may grasp the gravity of the
situation unfolding in our country.

58. ‘As all of us around this table know, an unparalleled wave of resistance is spreading throughout
Azania. The apartheid regime is running scared, and it
has resorted to the only way it knows to deal with such
popular resistance. Vorster, who has been unmasked in
his very carefully cultivated attempt to strike a supercool posture-to
borrow from modem parlance-has
now flung his sheep’s clothing to the dogs. His face,
that of a murderous wolf, has been revealed, and the
evidence is .a11 too plain in the mounting death toll
among Africans in Soweto and in other areas where
Africans are joining the snowballing demonstrations.
This evening, the official report-that
is, the police
report-says
100 people have been killed and more
than a thousand have been injured. We know that in
Soweto alone more than 2,000 policemen have been
deployed and ordered to seal off the complex of
African townships. Inside the complex, police with
dogs on leash are roaming the streets in large numbers
and shooting at random at groups of demonstrators.

62. Before coming to this meeting, we received news
that the dark pall of smoke from burning government
buildings in Soweto has spread to at least 10 African
townships outside Soweto and around Johannesburg.
The areas affected include Kagiso, 20 miles from
Soweto; Alexander Township, 9 miles from Johannesburg City centre; Tembisa, about 15 miles from
Johannesburg; and the University of Zululand, more
than 200 miles away, outside Transvaal Province,
where Soweto is located. Furthermore,
the BBC
reported this morning that trouble was brewing also
in Johannesburg’s
industrial areas. African workers
could soon be taking industrial action-a
move that
will have far-reaching consequences, as we know from
what happened after Sharpeville.
63. We have said before that in regard to its military
strength South Africa, like all reactionary oppressors,
7

is a paper tiger. Vorster has called out his police to
ring off African townships. But, as I am talking to
this Council, he is stretched to the limit, because he
cannot put a policeman on every square inch of territory around African townships. The violence that
started in Soweto has now spread to other African
townships. It has hit Bramley, next to Alexander
Township,
where today the African masses have
staged some attacks.

who do not give active support none the less give
practical support by their complacency
and their
reluctance to see the status quo-which
admittedly
affords them unrivalled opulence-change
in favour
of the oppressed black majority.
68. Yesterday PAC began consultations
with the
African Group at the United Nations with the object
of having this emergency meeting of the Security
Council convened. The response has been swift and
our struggling people will treasure this important act
of solidarity. Greatly stimulating at this time when our
people are up against the most fearful odds are the
messsages of solidarity pouring in from all over the
world. Among Western countries the Scandinavians
are once more in the forefront; Sweden and Norway
through their Prime Minister
and their Foreign
Minister,
respectively,
have condemned the apartheid regime’s violence against African school-children
and other demonstrators.
The Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, has added his weighty voice to
the growing chorus against the apartheid regime, and
we thank him for responding to the letter that the PAC
sent to him yesterday. These statements will certainly
go some way towards assuaging the pain of the
wounds suffered by the champions of freedom in
Azania.

64. This is a very interesting situation for those who
are selling nuclear reactors-a
subject we shall deal
with later-to the South African racist regime. A great
Vietnamese revolutionary once said to me when I was
in Hanoi: “We are not afraid of the nuclear bomb,
because if the United States imperialists
use the
nuclear bomb they will have to blow up 500,000
American soldiers”. We deplore the fact that these
highly destructive facilities are being extended to South
Africa, but we want to call attention to the fact that
even this will not prevent actions such as the present
ones from eventually triumphing over South African
white fascist rule. It is just as a matter of human
responsibility that we call upon countries in the West
to desist from continuing to arm the South African
racist regime, and thereby to make our burden lighter.
65. Imagine what would have happened if France
had not sent Alouette
helicopters,
and Panhard
armoured cars to South Africa; or if my good old
British friends had not sent Buccaneer aircraft and
Saracens to South Africa; or if our American friends
had not sent trucks which are now being used in
Soweto to carry police. If the South African racist
regime were without all that equipment,
how much
more swiftly would the forces of liberation
be
attaining their goal: the total liberation of Azania.

69. However, I must point out that this meeting has
been called because the responsibility
of the United
Nations towards the oppressed people in Azania and
their liberation movement should go far beyond words
of condemnation.
Before the Security Council disposes
of the matter before it, decisive action should be taken
against the apartheid regime as a way of showing
practical support for the heroic struggle Azanians are
waging for their freedom.

66. We are told that the University
of the North
at Turfloop-some
150 miles from Soweto-has
now
been closed following a demonstration
by over 2,000
African students. For me, as a black man from
Azania, I find it very touching that South African
whites who in the past had distinguished themselves
by cheering on police terrorists as they were going
in to massacre Africans in our ghettos are now being
seen on television in the United States showing solidarity for the African school children. We have seen
white students from the University of the Witwatersrand demonstrating in solidarity with African schoolchildren in African ghettos. That picture which some
of you might have seen of a bleeding white girl being
. -manhandled and pushed into a police car possibly
-just possiblydffers
hope for the future of race
relations in a liberated Azania.
-- -.- -_-.-. --___ .-. .-. . .
67. The barbaric rule of apartheid colonialism,
with
all its ugly ramifications that are so well documented
in this Organization, has more than earned the disgust
of all decent human beings. It is a pity that the great
majority of whites in South Africa do not count themselves as belonging among decent human beings. Those

70. As I have already said, the uprising spreading
through our country was- detonated by a struggle
against the imposition of Afrikaans as a medium of
instruction in vital subjects. In the Universal Declaration of Human ‘Rights article 26 categorically states:
“Education
shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It shall promote understanding, tolerance
and friendship among all nations, racial or religious
groups, and shall further the activities of the United
Nations for the maintenance of peace.”
The South African racist regime-a
regime which,
incidentally, is a signatory of that solemn Declaration_ __.
in the light of what I have said and in the light’ of
what is well known, is in gross violation of the article I have quoted, not to mention the other 29 articles of that Declaration.
71. When the school-children of Orlando West Junior
Secondary School began the strike against Afrikaans
on 17 May they were at the same time acting in defence
8

of a sacred principle of the United Nations. Their
action is therefore an indictment of the South African
apartheid regime. There is no way for that indictment
not to extend to the United Nations itself if once
more those of its Members with a vested interest in
maitaining apartheid-colonialism
once more render the
United Nations-to
coin a phrase-a
“toothless
bulldog”.

for talks about talks. Sobukwe flatly said he would not
accommodate Vorster, and we would like that to be
underscored in the PAC. Sobukwe flatly said that he
would not accommodate Vorster because the fellow
has no better instinct than that of survival. This was
reported last year in Africa Report, an American
magazine. Among Sobukwe’s many fine qualities is
his ability to judge human beings, a category into
which Vorster barely fits.

72. Here I recall the other occasion when I had the
honour to appear before the Security Council on behalf
of the Azanian people. The solid arguments we presented on that occasion for the expulsion of South
Africa from the United Nations were rewarded with a
very impressive majority-10
members voted in favour
and two abstained, but there were three negative votes.
Unfortunately
but predictably,
those negative votes
were cast by Western countries with the power of
veto. Therefore, by what was then an unprecedented
triple veto, apartheid South Africa’s total expulsion
from the world body was stayed. PAC offers no prize
for guessing where the child-killers will be looking for
saviours should the Council once more deem fit to take
decisive action against the apartheid regime and in
support of the defenders of the principles of the United
Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration
of
Human Rights in Azania.

77. In his struggle for survival, Vorster is hell-bent
on unleashing even greater violence before surrendering to the Azanian people’s just demand-their
inalienable
right to self-determination.
It is a right
that has been enjoyed by almost all the peoples of
the world. In the decades of hard struggle that we have
been waging, we have more than earned the right to
self-determination.
Apartheid
is essentially
a byproduct of a far more sinister form of domination,
a ruthless and calculated exploitation
of the Azanian
masses and their natural resources by monopoly
capital. All of us around this table know that full
well.
78. The reports from Soweto tell of widespread
arrests of prominent Africans, along with other African
demonstrators.
This is part of Vorster’s survival
formula. The main victims are leaders and members
of the black consciousness movement, that is, members of the South African Students Organization,
the
Black People’s Convention
and the Black Allied
Workers Union. The dedicated sons and daughters of
Africa who are members of those mass organizations
have chiefly been responsible-on
the surface, at
least-for
broadly rekindling the fires of black resistance in the past few years.

73. As he watches his French-supplied
South
African Air Force helicopters dive into the black pall
that is shrouding Soweto and the other areas where
Africans are putting up resistance, and drop tear-gas
bombs, Vorster completely
ignores the Security
Council’s call, made after Sharpeville, for the aparfheid regime to “initiate
measures aimed at bringing
about racial harmony based on equality. . . and to
abandon its policies of apartheid and racial discrimination” [resolution 134 (1960)].

79. Vorster’s police are also saying that they are
looking for infiltrators from abroad who are stirring up
trouble from the underground. An African boasted to
the Christian Science Monitor-as
reported in its issue
of 17 June-that
underground workers are there but
the police cannot lay their hands on them.

74. In face of the mounting threat that could remove
him from power, Vorster is panicking and is a desperate man. This morning he called for the maintenance of law and order at all costs, and his police
chief flunkey, Jimmy Kruger, promised that they would
now be taking stronger measures to crush the uprising
by the Africans in Azania.

80. Our sources also say that a number of informers
have been liquidated,
along with white police and
government officials; and that, as you know, is a very
strong deterrent against telling. The racist regime is
being outsmarted by the black resistance movement,
and the record amply shows that, when outsmarted,
Vorster does nothing but resort to even more wanton
violence and massacres.

75. I have said that Vorster has lost his carefully
cultivated super-cool because he says even his highly
prized encounter with United States Secretary of
State Kissinger does not enjoy priority over the
maintenance
of “law and order” in South Africa.
What has happened to the “statesman”
who was going
.. to help the Zimbabweans gain majority rule? Under
pressure, Vorster is no less obtuse or vulgar than Ian
Smith.

81. Yesterday, The Times of London said in an
editorial
that the authorities
of apartheid
South
Africa have lost disastrously, because of the police
violence, “their political prestige and the credibility of
their racial policy at a time when they never so
desperately needed to claim it was working”. Now, if
it is obvious to the Times that apartheid South Africa
is no longer a going concern, it should be easier for
the conscience of the world-which
is the role in which

76. Not so long ago some people were toying with
the idea of Vorster releasing Mangaliso Sobukwe, the
national leader of our people and President of the
PAC from house arrest, and my brother, Nelson
Mandela, the leader of the ANC, from Robben Island
9

.

the Security Council is cast on this occasion-to
act
without let or hindrance, because, emerging from an
interview with Sobukwe, a Washington Post reporter
once remarked:

than 1,000 injured. This carnage-and
it is nothing less
than that-committed
by the authorities in Pretoria
has rightly evoked the outrage and indignation
of
humanity all over the world, irrespective of ideological
or political considerations.

“He [Sobukwe]
is convinced that large-scale
guerrilla war will soon break out in Namibia and will
ultimately
spill over to the South African heartland itself. The tide of black liberation, he thinks,
cannot be resisted, and the regime of Prime Minister
Vorster, for all its outward strength, will crumble
surprisingly fast.”

87. Yet, it is not sufficient to be outraged, for
outrage and indignation alone have not in the past and
will not in the future deter the racist authorities from
proceeding on the course of disaster and destruction.
We all remember Sharpeville.
In fact, the United
Nations has made it an annual affair to commemorate
that bloody massacre. Yet such commemorations
and the continual display of wrath and indignation
by the international community have not deterred the
apartheid regime from continuing its suppression and
oppression of the African people. We now have the
Soweto massacre; and, as if that were not enough,
in an attempt to crush the popular uprising of the
African people, as demonstrated in Soweto, the South
African authorities
have gone on to commit more
murders, more maimings and more injuries in several
other townships where the resistance to apartheid
and discrimination
has been demonstrated.

The reporter also said:
“Sobukwe
hears that young South African
blacks greet each other in the segragated townships
with clenched fists, the symbol of black power.”
That was in February. Yesterday The Times of London
further commented: “The young are roused, poised,
awaiting their moment in South Africa.” So we do
not hear only indirect reports; we see them in our
own living rooms on the television screen saying
“Power to the people!”

88. The question is: now that the ‘African people of
South Africa have clearly demonstrated
and openly
and fearlessly shown their determination
to resist the
obnoxious system of apartheid,
and with the corresponding calculated carnages committed
by the
South African authorities in an attempt to stem the
tide of resistance, where does the Security Council
stand? This is the question which the African Group in
asking for this meeting of the Council, wanted the
Council to ponder.

82. The Organization of African Unity, in a statement
this morning, pledged once more that it will assist
PAC and ANC and the people of Azania to repel
South Africa’s reactionary violence with revolutionary
violence.
83. All we ask is that the Security Council, before it
lays aside this item on this occasion, should resolve
to take mandatory action to effect the arms embargo
and other punitive measures to curb trade and diplomatic ties with South Africa.

89. We have already heard in moving terms the
presentation of events given by the authentic spokesmen of the African people of South Africa, the representatives of the African National Congress and the
Pan Africanist Congress. I shall therefore refrain from
going into too many details. A brief outline of these
sad and revolting events would, however, be pertinent.

84. Finally, we wish to appeal to the Council to
uphold the slogan “Long live Azania!“,
which was
heard by the reporter from The Christian Science
Monitor last Wednesday in Soweto, by recognizing
that the Azanian people’s fight against apartheid and
colonialism
is a legitimate struggle for self-determination.

90. The immediate sequence of events is quite clear
from all reports: more than a month ago, African
secondary school students in Soweto, a segregated
location of Johannesburg, began to boycott classes
in protest against the order of the regime that
mathematics, history and geography must be taught in
Afrikaans.

85. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): This
is not an ordinary meeting of the Security Council.
It is a meeting which, I believe, every member of the
Council would have liked to avoid, for the circumstances which prompted the President of Madagascar
in his Telegram to the Secretary-General,
and the
African Group at the United Nations, through the
African members of this Council, to call the present
meeting are tragic indeed.

91. The African students not only suffer from segregation and rampant discrimination
in education, but are
required to study some subjects in English, and some
subjects in Afrikaans, to satisfy the prejudices of the
white rulers. They are thus subjected to severe
handicaps in pursuing their education. According to
all accounts, there are hardly any qualified African
teachers to teach the subjects in Afrikaans, and the
students find it difficult to follow the lessons in
Afrikaans.

86. In the last 48 hours, the South African racist
authorities have been on a murder rampage, killing,
maiming and wounding innocent people, including
students, and not even sparing school children.
According to news agency reports by 8 o’clock last
evening, more than 100 people had been killed and more
10

92. The demands of the students were fully justified;
in fact, they were fully supported by teachers, school
principals and parents. The apartheid
rkgime was
adamant; it made no effort to find a solution. It was
looking for a confrontation
to drown the black
student movement in blood.

99. Nothing dould be more indicative of the careless
disregard shown by these trigger-happy instruments of
South African oppression
that their undisguised
shooting of innocent children. These new heroes of the
South African system, armed with rifles and Sten
guns, shooting at random at unarmed school children:
great heroes indeed.

93. On 16 June, 10,000 African students led a peaceful-1 repeat, a peaceful-demonstration
in support
of their demands. They were blocked by 300 heroic,
courageous policemen.
According
to eye-witness
reports, these courageous police officers fired at the
demonstrators
at random, directly into the crowd,
without the slightest provocation. Soon, more police
cars raced to the scene; a special police squad recently
set up by the rdgime to combat urban terrorism was
dropped into Soweto by helicopters, along with tear
gas canisters. Incidentally,
it is pertinent to point out
that South Africa does not manufacture helicopters:
they had been obtained from several Western countries which are still equivocating
about the arms
embargo.

100. These are sick people, but they are a natural
product of a sick society. It was certainly not inexperience that led to the massacres. It is now, as it
was in fact in 1960, the desperation of the authorities
determined
to protect the oppressive system, and
devoid of any sense of human decency and human
morality.
The destruction
of life-African
life-is
nothing, in their conception. The system has built
them to be like that. To pretend otherwise is to run
away from the ugly reality.
101. These events have justifiably
aroused the
indignation
of the international
community
and of
nations all over the world. The Secretary-General
was absolutely right in asserting in his statement
yesterday that the continuing tensions and unrest in
South Africa emphasize once again the necessity of
putting an end to the policy of apartheid and racial
discrimination.
:

94. They then practically
sealed off Soweto, and
ordered reporters out, to put down the resistance by a
massive show of force and violence. The rkgime, as we
know, had segregated the blacks in the Soweto township, separated from the rest of Johannesburg,
precisely in order to be able to suppress any resistance.
The township, which has a population of 1 million-or
half the population of Johannesburg-is
built in such
a way as to be suitable for military operations.

102. The Special Committee against Apartheid,
statement of 17 June, pointed out, inter alia:

in its

“The killing of the black students follows a series
of police attacks against demonstrating
workers
and students in the past four years, described in
South Africa as ‘mini-Sharpevilles’.

95. The rising toll of dead and wounded shows that
the rigime is dealing with the situation as a virtual
war against the blacks.
96. In the centre of Johannesburg, several hundred
white students from the Witwatersrand
University
held a demonstration
to express their solidarity with
the black students. They were brutally attacked by
the thugs from the Rand Afrikaans University-students who have been indoctrinated by the rigime with
racism, fascism and fear-and
later led, of course,
by the police.

“These events are, on the one hand, yet another
example of the brutality of the Vorster regime, which
has again resorted to large-scale detentions, trials
and tortures of prisoners to intimidate the growing
opposition to racism. It has introduced in the current
session of Parliament two new laws which are even
more obnoxious than the armoury of repressive laws
condemned by the United Nations and the intemational community.

97. Instead of trying to end the violence and meet
the just demands of the people, the Vorster regime is
reported to have called out the Defence Force in
a virtual declaration of war.

“These events demonstrate, on the other hand,
the growing militancy of the oppressed people and
their courage in the face of inhuman repression.”

98. It was but natural that when the shooting of
African students and little children took place, people
should recall the tragic memory of the Sharpeville
massacre of 21 March 1960. At that time, police fired
at peaceful demonstrators
against Pass Laws, in the
township of Sharpeville,
killing
69 people and
wounding nearly 200. We were told at that time that
the massacre had taken place because the police were
inexperienced and had lost their nerve. Now, however,
there is no doubt that the massacre was deliberate
and premeditated,
a wanton act on the part of that
ri5gime.

The Special Committee’s

statement

continues:

“In resolution 3411 C (XXX) of 28 November
1975, the General Assembly proclaimed
that the
United Nations and the international
community
have a special responsibility towards the oppressed
people of South Africa and their liberation movements, and towards those imprisoned, restricted or
exiled for their struggle against apartheid.
Every
crime committed by the Vorster regime against black
people is, therefore, a direct affront to the United
Nations and the international community. The killing
11

of the black school-children
crime.‘*

of Soweto is such a

to abolish unnecessary discrimination.
Soweto has
shown the world how far he has gone-to the edge
of black hell.”

103. But reactions have not been confined within the
circles of the United Nations. The representative of
the PAC referred, for example, to the declarations
made by the Prime Minister of Sweden and by the
Foreign Minister of Norway. I believe that these
declarations are so moving and so apt that they merit
mention here. Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden
issued the following statement:

The Yorkshire Post, which is not renowned for radical’
views, in its editorial considered that “the South
African Government must have been quite out of its
mind”. I could not agree more with it.
106. I have made these random quotations
and
I have deliberately
avoided quotations
from any
African spokesmen, whether at the governmental level
or at any other level, in order ,to demonstrate that
indignation
against these barbaric events is indeed
universal. But although these events were sparked by
a grievance of African secondary school students,
they reflect much more. As Mr. Barney Ngakane,
the senior African official of the South African Council of Churches, said, “This issue has become, in a
way, a symbol of resistance among the youth to white
oppression and white authority”.
I believe The Times
of London of 17 June expressed the problem aptly
when it editorialized as follows:

“The massacre in Soweto in South Africa fills
us with anger and despair. Police opening fire on
peacefully
demonstrating
school-children
is an
appalling manifestation of the brutality of an unjust
society. This event confiis
once again that in the
long run it is impossible to base human relationships
on a system which violates the principle of the
equality of all people. Apartheid is not only in direct
conflict with our whole conception
of human
decency and dignity. It is also the greatest obstacle
in the way of peaceful development
in southern
Africa.“‘3
And the Foreign
pertinent remarks,

Minister
declared:

of Norway,

“... Afrikaans was only the detonator; the explosive is the whole South African apartheid policy.
Two or three years ago, however, the edict might
have been grumblingly accepted. Now that there is a
free African State on one of the Republic’s borders
and now that Africans are fighting it out with white
troops in Rhodesia on another, it cannot be. The
young are roused, poised, awaiting their moment in
South Africa.”

in equally

“The use of violence and weapons against schoolchildren
and youth clearly demonstrate[s]
the
unbearable racist situation that prevails in South
Africa.‘14
104. I go back to South Africa. The Christian Institute of Southern Africa, in a statement on 17 June,
made the following pertinent declaration:

107. Like the events at Sharpeville,
the recent
incidents are not isolated ones. They indicate that the
South African regime will go to any lengths out of
cowardice to suppress innocent people. It is a regime
which lives in fear because it knows that the injustice
it is committing
will one day be crushed. From the
viewpoint of the oppressed majority, these incidents
are a manifestation of the continuing struggle against
the apartheid system, for they are nothing less than an
uprising. It will be remembered that those who were
massacred in 1960 were protesting against the Pass
Laws. Those students and children who have been
killed and those who are still being killed in South
Africa today are protesting against the teaching of
Afrikaans in their schools. But both the Pass Laws
and the teaching of Afrikaans are oppressive measures,
symbolizing and intended to perpetuate the heinous
apartheid system. But the Africans of South Africa,
who number more than 18 million, will not sit idly by
amidst this brutality.
Their demonstrations
and
protests are a beginning of an end to the system of
the racist regime. Their uprisings are self-generating in
that no self-respecting people can fail to meet cowardly
violence without resorting to the legitimate form of
struggle. Indeed, the internal situation in South Africa
clearly reflects the growing resistance to the apartheid
system. For example, the terms and working conditions
in the mines are no longer accepted by the workers.

“In calling for a national convention of the true
leaders of the people at an early date, we reiterate
our conviction
that the violent conflagration
in
Soweto is but a sign of black attitudes throughout
the country and is a direct result of the policies of
apartheid.
We assert our solidarity with the oppressed of our land and call upon all Christians,
white and black, not to rest or fear in these times of
stress, but to press on through the peril until a just
society is won.”
105. Since the South African propaganda machine
is renowned for its efficiency, I should also like to
quote some relevant comments
made by no less
important newspapers than those originating
in the
country of my good friend the representative of the
United Kingdom. The Daily Mirror, in its editorial of
today, asserted, inter alia:
“The name of Soweto bums like a raw brand in
the face of South Africa. Rage, despair and bloodlust
have taken this huge African township outside
Johannesburg by the throat.. . Will the South African
Government ever learn that repression by a minority
is vicious and futile? Last year Mr. Vorster promised
12

Furthermore,
the political
consciousness
of the
Africans is growing day by day. This is the more true
because the victories achieved by the people of
Mozambique
and Angola have inspired the Africans
to speed up their liberation struggle.

encouraged by the advance of the liberation struggle
-that is, in Angola and Mozambique.
Needless to say,
the apartheid regime seems to have gone particularly
mad after its rout in Angola and since the Security
Council justifiably condemned its aggression against
that independent African State.

108. The South African regime has been engaged
for some time in an effort to destroy the “black
consciousness movement’*,
which is led mainly by
black students and youths and which has acquired
extensive support in the black community.
Since the
demonstrations
held under its leadership on the tenth
anniversary of FRELIMO
[Frente de Liberta@o
de
Mocambique-liberation
front of Mocambique]
on
25 September 1974, the regime has detained, tortured
and put on trial numerous leaders of the black consciousness organizations,
such as the South African
Students Organization, the Black People’s Convention,
the Black Allied Workers Union, the Black Communities Programme and several black cultural groups.
The trial of nine leaders of these organizations is still
going on, after two years. But despite this repression
black youth has constantly found new leaders and the
movement has survived as a result of the courage and
militancy of the black people. During the session of
the white Parliament this year, the regime introduced
two new obnoxious repressive laws. Those laws are
intended to destroy any remnants of legality in South
Africa and to suppress the black movement.

113. What lessons can we draw from the events in
Soweto and in other African townships? The most
obvious is that the apartheid system is wholly and
completely untenable. Despite the massive repressive
legislation,
despite the ruthless atrocities that have
been committed,
despite all the measures that have
been adopted by the South African regime, the Africans
have continued to resist the apartheid system, and, in
fact, there has also been an increasing number of
white liberals and progressives opposed to that regime.
114. We have very often been told of the changes
that are taking place in South Africa. We have heard
of the cosmetic changes, the elimination
of petty
apartheid. Mr. Vorster is now changing. He is becoming more outwardlooking-and
so on, and so on.
The murders of children and students clearly demonstrate that all this talk is utter nonsense. We have
been told that South Africa desires peace with its
neighbours, that it desires peaceful co-existence with
the African States, that it desires to promote cooperative interaction
with the sovereign States of
Africa. But a regime which thrives on internal aggression against its own people and external aggression
against its neighbours cannot have any right to claim
any co-operative interaction either with free Africa or
with the rest of the world. Furthermore,
it would
be the greatest of tragedies and the height of naivete
if free Africa were to accept coexistence with the
oppression, represkion and violence that is daily being
inflicted upon our fellow Africans in South Africa.

109. Obviously, the Pretoria regime is in a hurry to
consolidate apartheid by speeding up its bantustan
policy. It is planning to declare the sham independence,
of Transkei on 26 October. Incidentally,
that date is
also the tenth anniversary of the revocation of the
Mandate over Namibia;
it will be a date of infamy
in South Africa. According to its calculations, when
Transkei becomes independent not only the 2 million
people in that Bantustan but also the 2 million Xhosaspeaking people in the rest of South Africa will have
to become “citizens of Transkei” or stateless people.
The 2 million Xhosa-speaking
people in South Africa
will automatically
become aliens.

115. There is yet another lesson, and that is a lesson
of which we should like to speak as mildly, as solemnly
as possible, and without acrimony, without bitterness,
but obviously with a lot of suffering. To those who
continue to pay lip-service in support of the struggle
against apartheid and then continue to supply that
with
massive
assistance,
economically,
regime
materially,
and, even more, militarily-to
those
nations, whose honour we do not want to question,
whose sovereignty we are in no position to challenge,
we appeal to consider their conscience. For every
single dollar that is pumped into South Africa and
every single weapon that is supplied to the South
African regime enables that regime not only to
preserve a measure of respectability among the international community,
but, more seriously, to continue
with massacres of the kind that are now happening
in South Africa.

110. The crisis in South Africa has been unfolding
rapidly in recent years. As I have stated, there have
been numerous killings of workers and youth in the
mines, in the factories and in several cities. The regime
has hoped that it could intimidate the people by these
acts of police violence. As events have now demonstrated, it has failed miserably, hence the resort to
large-scale massacres.
111. This crisis has many factors. I do not intend to
go into these factors in detail, but just let me enumerate
them.
112. First, there is the continuing repression and the
intensification
of apartheid in contradiction
to the
propaganda disseminated abroad by the South African
regime. Secondly, there is the economic crisis. And,
thirdly,
the upsurge of the liberation
movement

116. In the past we have heard in the Council
arguments that some of the weapons being supplied
to South Africa were for external defence. When the
African representatives
in the Council have argued
13

and argued that you cannot differentiate between arms
for internal repression and arms for external defence,
repeated pleas have been made to us to try and convince us how wrong we have been. But the mu-rent
events in South Africa clearly demonstrate
the
contrary. The helicopters being used by the South
African authorities
are not used to protect South
African territorial
integrity or South Africa’s independence; they are used as part of the repressive and
oppressive machinery
against the African people,
against little children,
against innocent students,
against bystanders. Let them, therefore, search their
consciences when they decide to continue supplying
arms to South Africa, when they decide on massive
collaboration
with South Africa in the economic and
trade fields, and when they decide to supply nuclear
reactors to that regime.

to come again to the Council after further Sharpevilles. The United Nations does not need further coldblooded massacres to be convinced of the necessity
for prompt, swift and decisive action. Certainly the
African States do not need such massacres in order
to be convinced. That is why we have supported and
shall continue to support the liberation movements in
South Africa.
121. We do not believe that our Western colleagues
need these sad reminders. To them and to the rest of
the Council we appeal for swift and decisive action.
122. Mr:
PAQUI
(Benin)
(interpretation
from
French): It is late; this is the time not for long speeches
but for positive and concrete action: That is why my
delegation will limit itself to a few observations. The
facts of the case now before the Council are well
known to all the members.

117. Another lesson is that a people cannot accept
perpetual subjugation, however mighty the oppressor
may be. In this field, I believe the representatives of
the ANC and the PAC have said all’that needs to be
I
said.

123. After’the
Sharpeville events of sad memory,
which the international community has commemorated
ever since they occurred, the torch of violence is
now blazing over Soweto and in several other parts
of South Africa, where the abominable
apartheid
regime is clearly demonstrating
its unshakable determination to prove its great contempt for the various
resolutions adopted by all the organs of the United
Nations family and its determination
pitilessly to
repress any attempt of the black people of South
Africa to raise their voices against, the policy of
apartheid established by the Vorster gang in South
Africa.

118. In view of all this, what can .we do? What can
the international community do in order to alleviate the
sufferings of our brethren in South Africa, in order to
minimize
the holocaust in an increasingly
serious
situation that is now building in that area, a situation
which, let there be no doubt, poses a direct threat to
international
peace and security?.. What , can the
Security Council do? We believe that the Council
must act in a responsible manner. It must be faithful
to its responsibilities
as the organ for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We believe that the
Council must do everything within its power, in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
Charter, to ensure that an end is put to’ the apartheid
system.

124. The events in which the South African Nazi
police have been unleashed against schoolchildren
and other students, events that have culminated in the
death of some hundred persons and the wounding of
hundreds of others, are a crime against mankind as a
whole. The reports in the international
press do not
even try to hide the barbaric and savage nature of
this repression.

119. Of course, in calling for this meeting of the
Security Council the African members of the Council
were aware that they could not at this stage go into
all the measures they are demanding.
There will
certainly be a time when we shall approach the Council with demands for measures that we believe the
Council must adopt in order to meet the requirements
of the situation. But, for the present, when killing
continues, when little children are still suffering and
becoming victims of the trigger-happy
new heroes
of the apartheid system of South Africa, we believe
that this Council has a responsibility’ to echo in unison
the collective indignation, the collective wrath of the
international
community at the injustices being committed against the African people, at the tyranny being
perpetuated by the Vorster rbgime. We believe that
the Council has a responsibility
to show solidarity and
support for the legitimate
struggle of the people of
South Africa. We hope that the Council will act in
accordance with the needs of the hour..

125. The events that have led to the urgent convening of the Security Council must arouse the conscience of those who still believe that they are justified
in complacently dreaming that in one way or another
they can deflect the madmen of Pretoria, led by
Vorster, from their policy of apartheid.
126. According to press reports, this arrant racist,
this mentally retarded person is seeking ways and
means to enable the Ian Smith regime to review its
policy in order to come to some agreement with the
blacks and establish conditions favourable for a black
majority government in Zimbabwe. At the appropriate
time we have denounced this masquerade relating to
the so-called liberalizatidn
of the policy of a Govemment which denies the most elementary freedoms to
the overwhelming majority, the blacks and the coloured
persons in South Africa, and which claims-at
least
officially-that
it wants to counsel moderation to the

120. We really do not need to come again to the
Council after further Sowetos. We really do not need
14

Smith regime installed in Zimbabwe. Of course, this is
crude comedy, for what is happening in Soweto and
elsewhere in South Africa proves, if proof were still
needed, that what Vorster is seeking above all is to
strengthen the racist Pretoria-Salisbury
axis and to put
into effect a political philosophy of ancient times.

fraud of reconciliation and dialogue it has been peddling
in the recent period, and they have laid bare its sinister
feature of being adamantly inimical to the people of
Azania and the whole of Africa. As the great Chinese
revolutionary Lu Hsun rightly said, “The debt of blood
must be repaid in kind. The longer the repayment
of the debt is delayed, the greater the interest it will
bear.” The greater the oppression, the fiercer the
resistance. It will be utterly futile for Vorster and his
like to try to crush the just struggle of the Azanian
people by bloody massacre. It will inevitably arouse
the people of Azania and the whole of Africa to more
vigorous resistance with boundless indignation
and
to further unity and struggle by all effective means
until the South African racist regime is completely
buried.

127. My Government has already had an opportunity
to criticize severely the criminal action which the
racist apartheid regime is continuing to take in Soweto.
We believe that Vorster’s and Smith’s defiance of
the international community fully justifies the application against those regimes of the provisions of Chapter VII of the’charter.
For the events in Soweto and
the strengthening of the Pretoria-Salisbury
axis are
without doubt. serious threats to international
peace
and security. The Council must not wait for a general
conflagration in ,Africa before deciding to act.

132. The Chinese Government
and people have
always firmly supported the Azanian and other
southern African peoples in their just struggle against
‘racism and colonialism and for national independence
and liberation. The Chinese delegation maintains that
the Security Council must immediately
take action
strongly to condemn the atrocities committed by the
.South African racist authorities and to mete out the
necessary punishment to them, enjoin them to stop
immediately
their persecution and repression of the
.African people, and call upon all States and peoples of
the world to give active support to the just struggle of
the Azanian people against racism and for liberation
until they win complete victory.

128. My delegation dares to hope that those who lend
their support to that regime by giving it military
assistance and strategic material and by refusing to
look facts in the face will understand that morality,
elementary morality; makes it more than ever indispensable that ‘they stop supporting this abhorrent
regime and examine their conscience. May the victims
of Soweto and other places in South Africa help them
finally to decide to give resolute assistance to the
efforts to isolate Vorster and his disciple, Ian Smith.
129.

Mr. LA1 ‘Ya-li (China) (translation from ChiSince 16 June the African students and people
in South Africa who are the victims of racist persecution there have taken to the streets for demonstrations
in Soweto and’other areas in protest against the South
African authorities’
policy of apartheid and racial
discrimination.
This is in fact an entirely legitimate
and completely just act. However, the South African
Vorster racist authorities wantonly sent a large number of armed police to carry out a genocidal massacre
against bare-handed young students, and even many
schoolchildren
were not spared in the cold-blooded
slaughter. It is reported that as of now some 100 people
have been killed and nearly 1,000 wounded. The situation is still developing.

nese):

133. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): The Soviet Union
and its delegation, like many other countries and their
missions to the United Nations, have learned with
intense indignation and outrage of the unprecedented
monstrous crimes committed by the racist regime of
South Africa against the African population, the true
masters of that country. The mass shootings and
killings of completely innocent children, adolescents
and young Africans perpetrated in cold blood by the
racist police and soldiers over the last four days in
Soweto and other parts of South Africa cannot fail
to arouse strong indignation, outrage and very strong
condemnation.
These brutal and callous acts of
terrorism and violence can be compared only with the
equally monstrous atrocities which three decades ago
were perpetrated by the Hitlerite executioners and
their Fascist henchmen in the occupied territories of
the Soviet Union and other countries of Europe.

130. The Soweto incident is the most serious incident
of barbarous slaughter created single-handedly by the
South African racist regime since the Sharpeville
massacre of 1960. It is also a most flagrant provocation against the Azanian people and the entire African
people. The Chinese delegation is very indignant at the
brutal .atrocities committed
by the South African
racist authorities and condemns them most severely.
In this connexion, we should like to express our deepest
sympathy and solicitous regard to the families of the
victims and voice our firmest support and solidarity
with the Azanian people who are engaged in heroic
struggles against brutality.

134. Today the world is once again convinced of the
fact that the racist Vorster and his henchmen are
fascists too, not only in spirit or, so to say, in a
like minded approach, but in action or, rather, in bloody
crimes; only they call their racist crimes by a new
word, apartheid.
135. The Soviet Union, together with all African
and other countries, strongly condemns these callous
crimes of the South African racist authorities and very

131. These shocking atrocities of brute force committed by the Vorster regime have totally exploded the
15

firmly calls for them to be brought to an end. The
world community
and the United Nations have long
since condemned and put the stamp of shame on the
racist policy of apartheid and branded it as a most
heinous crime against mankind. At the twenty-eighth
session of the General Assembly the International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of
the Crime of Apartheid
was adopted
[resolu,tion 3068 (XXVIII)].
The country that proposed the
adoption of that Convention,
as everyone knows,
was the Soviet Union. Today all Members of the
United Nations once again realize how timely that
measure was and how accurate was the description
of the regime of apartheid.
Today in the Security
Council the Soviet delegation once again appeals to all
States which have not yet signed or ratified that Convention to accede to that important
international
instrument
as soon as possible so that the South
African racist criminals may in the very near future,
in keeping with the provisions of the Convention,
be held criminally
responsible at the international
level for their deeds and. be subjected to the most
severe legitimate punishment. The racists who have
usurped power in South Africa and are oppressing
the indigenous population in the country will, if that
action is not taken, be able to extend the scope of their
monstrous crimes to neighbouring countries. That will
be the source of a real danger of racial conflict, of
racial war in Africa, and of a threat to international
peace and security. The aggression of South Africa
against Angola is proof of that.

cil-to
take very decisive and urgent measures to
eliminate the criminal policy of apartheid pursued by
the South African authorities. Speaking at this meeting,
the representatives of African countries have, in the
view of the Soviet delegation, put forward a number
of timely, important and, in the circumstances, necessary proposals designed to ensure an immediate halt to
the violence and killings of the indigenous population
by the South African authorities and force them to
abandon their policies of racism and apartheid. The
Soviet delegation
fully supports the position and
proposals of the African countries.
139. In the view of the Soviet delegation,
the
strongest sanctions in the Charter should be applied
against South Africa. We agree with the statement
made yesterday by the Acting Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid in which an appeal was
made for a total embargo on all supplies for the armed
forces and police in South Africa and for total isolation
of the South African racist regime.
140. In the view of the Soviet Union, following
today’s urgent meeting of the Security Council, further
action must be taken, both by the Council and by
other organs of the United Nations and the intemational community.
That is the only way in which we
can put an end once and for all to racism and apartheid in South Africa and to that Government’s
continuing crimes against mankind.
141. The Soviet Union has always been and remains
a strong supporter of the courageous fighters against
racism and apartheid and, together with the African
countries and all progressive mankind, will continue to
provide them with active assistance and aid in their
noble and just struggle for freedom and independence.

136. In resolution 3411 G (XXX) the General Assembly reaffirmed that the racist regime of South
Africa was illegitimate
and had no right to represent
the people of South Africa. At the same time the
Assembly also reaffirmed that the national liberation
movements were the authentic representatives of the
overwhelming majority of the South African people.

142. The position of the Soviet Union on all questions of anti-colonialism
and anti-racism was again
reaffnmed in the programme adopted by the Twentyfifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union following the report of Comrade Leonid Ilyich
Brezhnev, that is, the programme of further struggle
for peace and international
co-operation,
and for
freedom and the independence of the peoples. The
programme says the following:

137. As everyone knows, the General Assembly has
frequently called on all States to cease completely
all co-operation
with the criminal racist regime of
South Africa, and that includes halting co-operation in
the military field. Nevertheless,
a number of Members of the United Nations, as has been mentioned
here, and primarily
certain Western countries, are
continuing
to disregard these many appeals and
decisions by the United Nations to put an end to cooperation with South Africa. Today when that callous
racist regime has finally unmasked itself as an enemy
of peace and mankind, those who in words support
respect for human rights now have an opportunity to
back up their words with deeds, to come out in
defence of the rights of the indigenous population of
South Africa, to condemn its racist regime for its
bloody crimes and to put an end completely to the
provision
of any political,
diplomatic,
economic,
military or other support to it.

“To consider as crucial the international
task of
completely eliminating
all vestiges of the system of
colonial oppression, infringement of the equality and
independence of peoples and all seats of colonialism
and racialism.”
143. The representative
of the African National
Congress, in his sharp political
statement which
exposed South Africa, expressed and stressed the faith
of the people of his country in the United Nations and
in its principal organ, the Security Council. He urged
the Council to adopt urgent measures against the racist
regime of South Africa. It is the duty of every member
of the Council and of the Council as a whole to heed

138. The events in South Africa require the intemational community-and
primarily the Security Coun16

150. Yesterday the Special Committee issued a press
communique
condemning
the wave of senseless,
wanton and atrocious killings of innocent black schoolchildren in Soweto and other parts of South Africa.
In its statement the Committee,
inter aliu, called on
Governments
and organizations
to denounce this
fresh and dastardly crime of the Vorster regime.
Already 100 people have been killed and many more
injured. The number of casualties already exceeds that
of the notorious Sharpeville massacre of 1960.

those appeals and to condemn the racist regime, take
effective measures against it and put an end to its
racist crimes.
144. The delegation of the Soviet Union, considering
the importance and urgency of this question, believes
that today-and
I repeat today, not tomorrow-the
Council should take a decision. The Council must
strongly condemn the racist regime of South Africa and
call for an immediate
halt to the violence against
the African population.

151. Can there still be any doubt that the Vorster
regime is bent on suppressing the black majority of
South Africa, in its megalomaniac
pursuit of the
anachronistic
and savage policies of apartheid and
racial dominance? Can there still be any doubt that the
apartheid regime is the incarnation of the unjust society
that seeks to impose its will through violence and
terrorism? This is, in the view of the Special Committee, what terrorism is all about.

145. The Soviet delegation is willing to vote today in
favour of the draft resolution on this question which
has been submitted by eight members of the Council. We are convinced that this draft resolution, if put
to the vote today, will be adopted by an overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council.
146. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform
members of the Security Council that I have received
a letter dated 18 June from Mr. Nicasio Valderrama,
Rapporteur of the Special Committee against Apartheid, which reads as follows:

152. I do not need to describe in detail the sad,
the deplorable events taking place in South Africa
today. I merely wish to reiterate the appeal made
by the Special Committee in the statement it issued
yesterday, for a total embargo on all supplies for the
armed forces and police in South Africa, and for the
total isolation of the South African racist regime.

“On behalf of the Special Committee
against
Apartheid, I have the honour to request that I be
allowed to make a statement before the Security
Council on the item presently on its agenda.”

153. As the Special Committee
has pointed out on
numerous occasions, and again yesterday, the conflict
in South Africa is,a conflict between racism and nonracialism. The ractst regime of Pretoria, in its stubborn
insistence
on maintaining
white domination,
is
precipitating
a racial conflict which can have incalculable consequehces for international
co-operation
and peace.

147. On previous
occasions,
the Council
has
extended invitations to representatives of other appropriate United Nations organs in connexion with the
consideration
of matters on its agenda. It seems
appropriate, accordingly, for me to extend an invitation
to Mr. Valderrama under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection,
I shall
take it that the Council agrees to this procedure.

154. The black people of South Africa are upholding
the principle of non-racialism.
That is why their just
cause has obtained the courageous support of hundreds
of white students of the Christian Institute of South
Africa and of many others.

It was so decided.
148. The PRESIDENT:
I invite Mr. Valderrama,
Rapporteur of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

155. By taking action to eradicate apartheid,
we
shall be showing our solidarity with the black people
of South Africa in their righteous and just struggle,
as well as with those whites who are standing by them
in South Africa.

149. Mr. VALDERRAMA
(Rapporteur of the Special
Committee
against Apartheid):
On behalf of the
Special Committee
against Apartheid,
I should like
to thank you, Mr. President, and the other distinguished members of the Security Council for giving
me this opportunity
to participate in this debate. It
is a matter of great satisfaction to the Special Committee that these proceedings are being conducted
under the presidency of the able representative
of
Guyana, a country which has consistently supported
the struggle for liberation in South Africa and southern
Africa. Only a few days ago the Committee
sent a
message of congratulations
to the Prime Minister of
Guyana on the tenth anniversary of that country’s
independence
commending
its contribution
to the
struggle against apartheid and colonialism.

156. I should like to emphasize that the tragic events
of the past few days were predictable. The Special
Committee had repeatedly warned that the ruthlessness
of the racist regime of Pretoria and the growing
militancy and resistance of the oppressed people of
South Africa were bound to lead to a conflict. Many
South Africans only recently warned the South African
racist regime of the grave and imminent
danger of
violent conflict.
157. If we limit ourselves today to mere condemnations of the apartheid regime and fail to take effective
17

action to put a stop to its crimes, we shall be totally
failing in our duty to the oppressed black people of
South Africa.

regime end forthwith its nightmarish violence against
innocent and defenceless black Africans, and take
immediate
steps to abolish, once and for all, the
criminal system ofapartheid and racial discrimination.

158. Sixteen years ago, the Council met urgently to
consider the wanton killings of Africans in Sharpeville.
It condemned the massacre and called for the aboliton
of apartheid.
The Council is meeting again today
because it has been unable to take the effective action
that was required by the situation in South Africa.
We hope that all the Powers concerned will now see
their way to facilitating such action.

161. The PRESIDENT:
The sponsors of the draft
resolutions have asked that the following additions
be made. At the end of the second preambular paragraph, add “1976,“.
Insert a new preambular paragraph before the existing second preambular paragraph, which would read as follows:
“Having
considered
also the telegram from the
President of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar
to the Secretary-General
(S/12101),“.

159. For years the Special Committee has been calling
for the imposition of a mandatory arms embargo against
the racist regime of Pretoria, under Chapter VII of the
Charter. This call has been repeatedly made and has
been endorsed by the General Assembly by overwhelming majorities. Events in Soweto and other parts
of South Africa justify this call.

The meeting rose on Saturday,

19 June, at 1.15 a.m.

Notes

* A/31/110, annex, p. 9.
2 Qfficial
Suppiement

160. .In the view of the Special Committee,
the
Council should not only condemn the latest atrocities
in South Africa, but should also demand that the

Records
NO. 22.

’ AIAC.l15/L.438,

of the General
-

Assembly. _

Thirtieth

Session.

p. 6.

4 Ibid.

5 Subsequently circulated as document S/12103.

18
Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-September

1984-2,200
