S/PV.8396

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8396th meeting

Tuesday, 13 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Vaverka
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2421 (2018) (S/2018/975)
Twentieth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/976)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-37382 (E)
*1837382*

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2421 (2018) (S/2018/975)
Twentieth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/976)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/975, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2421 (2018),
as well as to document S/2018/976, which contains the
twentieth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Following the certification of the
election results on 19 August, the Government
formation process moved forward with the election of
Mohammad Al-Halbousi as Speaker of the Council of
Representatives, on 15 September, and Barham Salih
as President of Iraq, on 2 October, who then nominated
Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi as Prime Minister-designate.
On 24 October, the Iraqi Parliament reviewed the
new governmental programme, endorsed 14 out of
22 Cabinet ministers, and confirmed Mr. Abdul-Mahdi
as Prime Minister. Of the five sovereign ministries,
Finance, Foreign Affairs and Oil were endorsed, but
the ministries of Defence and Interior are yet to be
allocated. No female or minority candidates were
appointed to ministerial positions, but the Prime
Minister intends to consider them for governmental
2/22

13/11/2018

posts and other key positions in subsequent rounds of
Government formation.
While the Government formation process has not
been without controversies, the political blocs have
demonstrated a willingness to act in support of the
Prime Minister. Competition and differences have
been largely political and not sectarian, and in this way
they represent a break from the past. The guidance of
the supreme Shia religious authority, Grand Ayatollah
Al-Sistani, has significantly influenced the process.
The main negotiations with Prime Minister AbdulMahdi have been led by cleric Muqtada Al-Sadr of the
Sairoun Alliance and Mr. Hadi Al-Ameri of the Fatah
Alliance on behalf of their coalitions — Islah and
Binaa, respectively. All of these primary partners and
political forces now share a responsibility for creating
an enabling environment for the new Prime Minister
and Government to deliver on its programme, and
for its stability. The support of all the political forces
represented in Parliament, including those who will
now be in the opposition for the first time since 2003,
will be essential. Barring this, Iraq’s political forces
and leaders will fail their people.
The Government’s programme, which includes
advisory inputs from the United Nations, represents
a general outline of a national project to respond to
the needs and demands of the Iraqi people. As stated
in the programme, its focus and pillar should be the
citizen. The programme outlines specific plans for
reforms, investment and the private sector with a view
to transitioning Iraq from a crisis context to sustainable
development; recommends steps to tackle corruption
across all sectors; and sets out a framework to guide
the planning and work of each ministry. In addition
to delivering tangible improvements in the daily lives
of Iraqi citizens, a key focus area of the programme
includes job creation for the unemployed, young people
in particular.
The rehabilitation and reconstruction of liberated
areas and the return of internally displaced persons are
also key priorities. The programme aims at strengthening
security, fighting terrorism and enhancing law and
order and the rule of law, among others, by putting
all arms under the strict control of the State. It also
stresses the prevention of militia formations outside the
framework of the State and the withdrawal of troops
from the cities. The programme confirms that special
attention will be given to resolving pending challenges
with the Kurdistan region, including the issues of
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8396

budget allocation and financial resources, oil and
disputed areas.

recorded to have legally and safely entered Iraq. Efforts
to disturb this massive movement of people failed.

I commend the exemplary democratic transfer of
power between the outgoing Prime Minister, Haider
Al Abadi, and incoming Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi.
At the handover ceremony on 25 October, Mr. Al
Abadi recalled the achievements of his Government
in defeating Da’esh and uniting the country based on
the Constitution, at a time when the economic situation
had deteriorated owing to deep-rooted corruption
and a massive decrease in oil prices. He recalled the
return of millions of displaced families to liberated
areas and the establishment of a national army and
security forces. He also noted improved relations with
all of Iraq’s neighbours, including the Arab countries.
Finally, he underlined that political processes in Iraq
have witnessed a gradual departure from sectarian
approaches and rhetoric. For all of this, he and his
Government, the Kurdistan Regional Government,
diverse armed forces and formations, and the people of
Iraq deserve acknowledgment and gratitude.

Most of Da’esh’s movements in recent months
have reportedly been through the desert joining
central Iraq and its Anbar and Ninawa provinces to the
western border with the Syria. In response, Iraq has
deployed thousands of troops on its border with that
neighbouring country to curb Da’esh, which remains in
control of several areas across the border in the Syrian
Deir ez-Zor province. Also, Da’esh remains active in
some other Iraqi provinces, notably in Kirkuk, Salah
ad-Din and Diyala.

Iraq must now build on these foundations. The new
Government intends to start immediately, particularly
on the delivery of services and jobs, reforming and
energizing the economy, and fighting corruption and
administrative red tape. In this regard, Iraq will require
and counts on the continued support of the international
community. We must not let the country down.
On 30 October, the results of the Kurdistan region
parliamentary elections, held on 30 September, were
approved. The first session of the new Kurdistan
regional parliament took place on 6 November, but
failed to elect its speaker and the two deputies. The
dominant Kurdistan Democratic Party now intends
to consult with all Kurdistan region political parties,
notably the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, on the
Government formation.
The new Government of Iraq intends to
introduce robust measures to further improve and
achieve sustainable security throughout the country,
intensifying efforts to uproot Da’esh terrorist cells
to counter this insurgency. Reports of the arrests of
Da’esh terrorists and their leaders or on the elimination
of sleeper cells and hideouts are issued almost daily.
Security measures put in place for the Arba’een
pilgrimage were successful. Among the 15 million
pilgrims, close to 2 million foreign visitors were

The United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) continues to advocate justice and
accountability for international crimes. On 6 November,
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights jointly launched a
report entitled Unearthing Atrocities: Mass Graves in
Territory Formerly Controlled by ISIL. At least 202
mass graves have been discovered in Iraq, and they
are believed to contain the remains of many thousands
of victims of atrocities perpetrated by Da’esh. I am
pleased to report that the Special Adviser and Head
of the Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh, Mr. Karim Khan,
arrived in Iraq on 30 October.
In October, UNAMI established a women’s
advisory group on reconciliation and politics in Iraq,
which will serve as a political inclusion mechanism
to ensure that the voices, concerns and experiences of
Iraqi women are included in political processes that
shape national reconciliation based on the principles
of peaceful coexistence, respect for diversity and
non-discrimination.
Nearly two years after the defeat of Da’esh by Iraqi
security forces and coalition allies, more than 1.9 million
Iraqis remain displaced, primarily in the north and west
of the country. Although 4 million people have returned
home since the end of the conflict, the rate of return
has decreased significantly. Humanitarian actors and
the UNAMI senior women’s protection adviser are also
concentrating on how to best strengthen the centrality of
protection around women and children with perceived
affiliations with extremist groups.
A critical barrier to the return of internally
displaced persons is that the need for residential
buildings to be cleared of mines by mine action actors
remains unmet. The Funding Facility for Stabilization

18-373823/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

reached a significant milestone, having now completed
1,517 projects across all nine sectors of work in the
five liberated governorates of the country. There are
245 new projects already tendered, but they will not
be implemented without additional donor support.
We also urge the Government to begin making its
own contributions to donor-funded international
development programmes, including those under
the Facility.
The need for concrete results in public projects
beyond the current focus on liberated areas is perhaps
most evident in the southern city and province of Basra.
There, a combination of water scarcity and high levels
of contamination in supplies of drinking water led to
more than 100,000 being admitted to hospital with
symptoms of gastroenteritis between mid-August and
mid-October.
On 28 October, the Government of Iraq chaired the
first formal meeting of the Executive Committee on
Recovery, Reconstruction and Development. This highlevel committee is mandated to provide a coordination
platform for strategic guidance on national priorities
to take forward the work set out at the International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, held in
Kuwait in February. This signals the Government’s
determined shift towards development and investment.
I am delighted to report that on 11 and 13 November,
respectively, after over a year of preparations, President
Salih and representatives of the Iraqi Ministry for
Foreign Affairs delivered to the Kuwaiti Ministry for
Foreign Affairs numerous items of property taken
during the invasion of Kuwait, including over 2,300
books, an archive of Kuwaiti television videotapes,
a sword and a valuable painting. I welcome this clear
indication of commitment by the Government of Iraq
to resolving the complex file of outstanding issues
with Kuwait. When I met the new Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Mohamed Alhakim, on 5 November,
he assured me that he would give the greatest attention
to and support for efforts on this important file.
In conclusion, as this is my last report to the
Security Council in my current capacity, I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, your
predecessors and the members of the Security Council
for the support you have kindly provided to me during
the three years and nine months I have served in my post.
I would also like to express my highest appreciation
to UNAMI and United Nations country team staff for
4/22

13/11/2018

their dedication, professionalism, proactive efforts
and unwavering commitment to working in support
of UNAMI and United Nations mandates serving
Iraq and its people. I would also like to express my
gratitude to and appreciate for Ms. Alice Walpole, my
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
and Electoral Assistance, and Ms. Marta Ruedas,
my Deputy Special Representative for Humanitarian
Affairs and Development, for their cooperation,
capable leadership and management of United Nations
activities across Iraq.
Finally, I would like to warmly welcome my
successor, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and wish
her success in leading the Mission and in helping Iraq
to achieve a durable and sustainable peace, stability and
prosperity for its people. I encourage the authorities and
society of Iraq to offer Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert the same
generous support and cooperation that they have shown
to me during my tenure. I have the honour of serving
the United Nations and Iraq during a particularly
difficult period that has against all odds and scepticism
ended well, with promising future prospects for the
country and its people. Iraq is a success, a positive
story in a region marked by many negative trends and
developments. The United Nations in Iraq has shown
its relevance and will continue to build on the firm
foundations of its partnership with Iraq and its people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I want to
express our special thanks to Special Representative
Kubiš for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in Iraq, to congratulate him on a
successful three years and nine months of service, and
to thank him for his exception leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) during
this pivotal chapter in Iraq’s history. On a personal note,
having worked with him in Iraq for the first half of his
tenure, I wish to thank him for his tireless efforts in
very challenging circumstances and for his consistent
wise counsel and friendship over these years. His
ability to engage with Iraqi stakeholders from all walks
of life has illustrated for all of us UNAMI’s vital role
in facilitating critical political dialogue and showed
the great potential that UNAMI has to make positive
impact in Iraq. We, along with the rest of the Security
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

Council, also look forward to working closely with his
successor, Special Representative-designate Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, when she begins her tenure
in December.
Since the Council’s last UNAMI briefing (see
S/PV.8324), Iraq has a new President and Prime
Minister, which deserves the Security Council’s
congratulations. Iraq’s new Government is poised to
make a serious of important decisions that will set the
course of the country’s history for decades to come. We
encourage the new Government to focus on tackling
corruption and delivering essential services to all of
its people, including its many diverse communities of
all ethnicities and faiths. We also call on Iraq’s new
leaders to promote the participation and representation
of women at all levels.
The United States has pledged to work closely
with President Salih, Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi and
Council of Representatives Speaker Al-Halbousi to
deliver stability, security and prosperity for all Iraqis.
Much work remains to be done and bold leadership will
be required. The credibility of the new Government
hinges on providing access to jobs, clean water and
electricity. It is vital that the Government deliver on
those essential services as swiftly as possible.
We also call on the new Government to ensure
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally
displaced persons who suffered so greatly from terror
at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams
(ISIS). The atrocities committed by ISIS cannot go
unpunished, and we call on the new Government to
work closely with the newly established United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL to swiftly begin
evidence-based investigations on the ground, as
mandated by resolution 2379 (2017).
As Iraq continues to grapple with terrorist threats,
even after the defeat of ISIS, we must remember that
no threat of violence can reverse the spirit of the
Iraqi people. We are encouraged by the stories of the
many Iraqis who have returned to their homes and are
beginning to rebuild their communities. The UNAMI
mandate underscores the importance of supporting Iraq
and meeting the needs of all Iraqis, including women,
youth and members of all religious and ethnic groups.
We strongly encourage Iraq’s new leaders to work
closely with UNAMI to address the unique needs of
those groups and individuals as part and parcel of the

S/PV. 8396

broader national and community-level reconciliation
effort that Iraq needs to undertake. Iraq’s new leaders
should also work closely with UNAMI to help create
the conditions that will allow the Iraqi people to shape
their own future, free of outside interference.
Iraq has once again entered a key moment in its
history, making major strides towards a more stable,
secure and democratic future. Now Iraq’s leaders have
the task of showing that they can deliver on the high
expectations of their people. The United States stands
ready to support Iraq in achieving that goal.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for his valuable briefing.
Despite the many challenges that Iraq is facing in
the post-Da’esh period, the Iraqi people have proven
themselves capable of rebuilding their country and
of confronting the challenges facing them in order to
strengthen the principles of democracy in their country,
as reflected in the mid-May parliamentary elections.
The outcome of the elections has been accepted and
confirmed and the country has seen a peaceful transfer
of power, which has allowed a new Iraqi Government
to be established within the time frame set by
the Constitution.
I take this opportunity to sincerely congratulate,
on behalf of the State of Kuwait, the leadership, the
Government and the people of Iraq on the election of
His Excellency Mr. Barham Salih as President of the
Republic of Iraq and His Excellency Mr. Mohammed
Al-Halbousi as Speaker of the House of Representatives,
and the appointment of His Excellency Mr. Adil
Abdul-Mahdi as the Prime Minister to head the new
Government. We are fully confident that all of them are
trustworthy, and we wish them every success as they
make efforts in the best interests of our brotherly Iraq
in order to fulfil all the aspirations of its people, who
deserve to live in a stable, prosperous and safe State.
We hope that the full Cabinet of the new Government
will be appointed soon because the post-election phase
is very critical in Iraq. We believe that those positive
developments are promising and reflect positively on
the situation in Iraq and indeed in the entire region.
It is high time for Iraq to be able to recover from the
painful tragedies that it suffered over the past few years
at the hands of the terrorist group Da’esh. The State

18-373825/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

of Kuwait renews its solidarity with the leadership, the
people and the Government of Iraq in their efforts to
defeat terrorism and entrench Iraqi national unity, while
preserving the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the country. We were delighted to host the Iraqi
President in Kuwait just two days ago, which speaks
volumes of the links that tie our two countries together
and allow us to move sincerely forward together to
serve the interests of our two peoples.
Allow me now to address two points: first, UNAMI
responsibilities under its mandate; and secondly, the
commitments pertaining to the Kuwaiti and third-party
nationals who have been reported missing, and the
lost Kuwaiti property, including the national archives
of Kuwait.
With regard to the first point, I would like to
commend the United Nations staff in Iraq for their
tireless efforts to forge a promising future for that
country through its ongoing advice and assistance
to the Government and the people of Iraq, as well as
all stakeholders in the framework of a partnership
that brings together UNAMI and the United Nations
country team. That partnership is apparent in many
much-needed areas.
In that regard, I underline the continued full
support of the State of Kuwait to and its cooperation
with the Mission and the country team to allow them to
fully carry out their tasks. The aim is to meet the needs
of Iraq. We are very well aware of the scale of the major
challenges facing Iraq. That requires the full support
of the international community in order to ensure its
stability and security.
We are completely convinced that security and
stability cannot be achieved without sustainable
development in its various dimensions. We will
continue to provide all kinds of support to the brotherly
Iraqi people so that they can meet their needs.
The International Conference for the Reconstruction
of Iraq was hosted by Kuwait in February, with the
cooperation of Iraq, the United Nations, the European
Union and the World Bank. The pledges we made
at the Conference demonstrated international and
regional solidarity with our Iraqi brothers to heal the
wounds inflicted by Da’esh. I refer to the programmes
of rehabilitation and reconstruction for cities liberated
from terrorism. We shoulder our responsibilities towards
the humanitarian situation of our Iraqi brothers. That is
a response to the humanitarian appeals of the United
6/22

13/11/2018

Nations to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people,
particularly displaced persons, in order to let Iraq
achieve its future vision of a new and united country.
Our concern today is that terrorist groups continue
to pose a threat to the security and stability of Iraq
and the region, despite the fact that Da’esh has been
defeated. That is why we must all pull together, step
up our efforts and take more critical measures in order
to ensure that the perpetrators of those horrifying
crimes are accountable and brought to justice. The
State of Kuwait counts on the efforts made by the Iraqi
authorities to arrest and prosecute the perpetrators of
those terrorist acts, in coordination and cooperation
with the international mechanism involved in collecting
evidence, which was established by resolution 2379
(2017). Those are critical steps within the broader
framework of the global counter-terrorism strategy.
I turn now to my second point regarding the
commitments made to the Kuwaiti and third-party
nationals who have been reported missing, and the
lost Kuwaiti property, including the national archives
of Kuwait. That is an important issue due to its
legitimate human and legal dimensions. The State of
Kuwait appreciates the efforts that have been made by
the Security Council to implement all the remaining
commitments pursuant to its relevant resolutions since
the liberation of Kuwait in 1991. We commend the firm
resolve of Iraq to meet all its international commitments
towards the State of Kuwait in that regard. We are ready
to provide the support that Iraq needs in order to speed
up the implementation of the remaining commitments
stipulated in the relevant Council resolutions.
At the same time, we urge UNAMI to continue to
fully discharge its mandate pertaining to the missing
prisoners and the return of Kuwaiti property, including
the national archives, pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013).
The steps that have been taken so far are insufficient
and no significant progress has been made since 2004.
We underscore that the State of Kuwait has spared
no effort to support measures over the past 28 years
to uncover the fate of its missing Kuwaitis and other
third-country individuals. In that regard, we cannot but
commend the efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in chairing the tripartite mechanism,
including its Technical Subcommittee. At the same
time, I thank the United Kingdom, France and the
United States for their recent positive contributions
by providing the Subcommittee with satellite images
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

and maps dating back to the relevant period from 1990
to 1992. We hope that those contributions will yield
positive results on the ground.
I should like to draw the Council’s attention to
another issue related to the remaining commitments,
namely, the question of Kuwaiti assets, including the
national archives, which represent our historic wealth
and an important part of the national heritage and
memory of the Kuwaiti people. Unfortunately, we do
not know what has become of them. We therefore hope
to follow a new and innovative approach with a view
to making progress in that area. At the same time, we
welcome the efforts of the Iraqi authorities to return
to the State of Kuwait the books and other assets that
have been found, despite taking more than a year to
accomplish that.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait appreciates the
valuable efforts of Mr. Kubiš as Head of UNAMI and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Iraq.
We commend his dedication and personal commitment
over the past three years, and wish him every success in
his future endeavours.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I join
others in thanking Special Representative Ján Kubiš for
his briefing, which comes at a critical time for Iraq.
I also welcome his personal commitment to doing
the job that he is leaving and that he carried out with
exemplary determination in difficult circumstances.
I will discuss the latest developments relating to the
electoral process, the remaining challenges that must be
met so as to achieve a stable, inclusive and prosperous
Iraq, and France’s full support for those efforts and the
work of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8396

Minister, will be solid assets for the future. We hope
that the confirmation of the remaining eight ministers
will take place soon. The new Iraqi Government must
concentrate without delay on the road map for electoral,
economic and financial reform, as well as the reform of
the security sector, all of which are imperative.
Secondly, if that auspicious dynamic is to continue,
much remains to be done. First of all, Iraq’s stability,
which is crucial to preventing the resurgence of Da’esh
in any form, is a major issue for the region and our own
national security. We will remain mobilized in the fight
against terrorism, alongside the Iraqi security forces,
and in support for the international coalition’s efforts to
counter Da’esh to end that persistent threat definitively.
On the ground, Iraq continues to contend with
nearly 2 million internally displaced persons, who must
continue to be provided with assistance. The primary
goal of the international community — the stabilization
of the country — entails assisting with the voluntary and
safe return of displaced persons and ensuring security,
mine clearance and restoring basic services, without
which the prospects for sustainable return will remain
dim. More generally, however, as France has continued
to emphasize, only national reconciliation and inclusive
governance serving the interests of all sectors of Iraqi
society will make it possible to defeat terrorism. France
is committed to helping the new Iraqi Government
meet the challenges of national reconciliation and
inclusive governance.

First, as Ján Kubiš just made clear, we have seen
a decisive transformation in Iraq this past year. Iraq
was able to defeat Da’esh militarily and meet the
challenge presented by parliamentary elections and
political transition. Despite difficulties, the peaceful
organization of the electoral process within the
timeframe set by the Constitution — one year after
the military victory over Da’esh — is testimony to the
country’s recovery. We welcome that progress and the
appointment of new Iraqi authorities.

I stress the importance of women’s role in the
political process. France calls for progress in that
area. I also recall the important role that the Iraqi
justice system, which must be seen as exemplary
and beyond reproach, must play in ensuring that all
those responsible for crimes be tried with respect for
the rule of law. We also encourage ongoing efforts to
resume negotiations with Erbil so as to resolve pending
disputes. The stability of the country requires that the
Kurds be afforded their rightful place within a united
Iraq that respects its own diversity. In that regard,
France commends the measures put in place by Ján
Kubiš, which were decisive in resolving the crisis
triggered by the independence referendum.

Despite the tense regional and social environment,
the formation of the Government has demonstrated a
sense of responsibility on the part of the various actors
during the transition period. The relevant figures who
have emerged following the process, including the Prime

The priority that we must collectively accord to the
reconstruction of the country is one of the keys to its
future. Iraq will be able to consolidate its institutions
only if the Government moves quickly to implement the
recovery and resilience programme established at the

18-373827/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstruction
of Iraq, which the entire international community
has supported. I recall that Iraq will be incapable of
rebuilding itself if it is held hostage to regional tensions.
Dissociation is an imperative both for Iraqi leaders and
for external Powers.
Lastly, I reiterate that France fully supports the
people of Iraq in facing those challenges, which are
linked to their sovereignty and unity. France has
donated nearly €60 million to Iraq since 2017, in
addition to a budget loan of 430€ million. That aid
is based on responding to humanitarian needs and
supporting the stabilization of territories liberated from
Da’esh control. France also wishes to fully support Iraq
during its reconstruction phase, which has just begun,
and will remain fully engaged with the Iraqi people in
the coming months.
In conclusion, I commend the role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
under the leadership of Ján Kubiš, particularly over
the past several months. Iraq is stronger and more
inclusive and stable today, and together we can all
thank Ján Kubiš for his crucial contribution to that
progress and encourage UNAMI to stay the course
in according priority to supporting governance and
national reconciliation.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his excellent
briefing, and expresses its appreciation for the work
that he has accomplished since 2015. As his mandate
draws to an end, it is an agreeable duty for us to express
our gratitude and admiration to him and his entire
UNAMI team.
Following the successful holding of parliamentary
elections on 12 May, the Iraqi Council of Representatives
freely elected Mr. Barham Salih as President of the
Republic on 10 October. The appointment of Mr. Adil
Abdul-Mahdi as Prime Minister will allow the timely
formation of a Government that will address, inter alia,
security issues, including the threat that the Islamic
State continues to pose in Iraq. Moreover, the official
visit by President Salih to Kuwait on 10 November
led to discussions on strengthening relations between
the two States. Similarly, the outcome of the Kuwait
International Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq,
organized under the auspices of the United Nations,
8/22

13/11/2018

Iraq and Kuwait, is likely to further consolidate such
cooperation in the region.
Côte d’Ivoire hopes that the new Government,
which is the product of various consultations, will
create conditions conducive to genuine reconciliation
among the Iraqi people and lasting stability, while
respecting unity and sociopolitical and ethnic diversity.
The Government must spare no effort to meet its many
challenges, which will include, among other things,
finding sustainable solutions to the issue of the dignified
return of internally displaced persons by providing them
with basic administrative and social services, while
ramping up the reconstruction of conflict-affected
areas and ensuring women’s equal representation in
institutions and decision-making structures.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the constructive dialogue
between Iraq’s central Government and the authorities
of the Kurdistan autonomous region, which is aimed
at finding a peaceful solution to the dispute arising
from the 25 September 2017 referendum on Kurdistan’s
self-determination. The dialogue initiative has enabled
the Erbil and Sulaymaniyah airports to reopen for
international flights. My country hopes that the next
meetings between the Prime Minister of Iraq and
Mr. Nechirvan Barzani, Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
region, will finally enable them to settle the question of
the contested internal borders and the status of Kirkuk
province, as well as the management of oil and gas and
the revenue from those resources.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Government of Iraq and the international community
to prosecute the perpetrators of serious crimes. We
also welcome the visit to Iraq on 30 April by the
needs assessment mission of the Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh, as
well as the appointment on 31 May of Mr. Karim Asad
Ahmad Khan to head the Investigative Team, pursuant
to the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution
2379 (2017). The recent discovery of 200 mass graves
containing thousands of bodies in areas previously
under the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is convincing evidence of the urgent need for
the Investigative Team to intensify its work on the
ground and create a national database similar to those
established in Bosnia and Rwanda in order to identify
the victims of such barbarity as soon as possible.
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

My country urges the international community
to continue focusing sustained attention on the
reconstruction efforts undertaken by Iraq’s central
authorities with regard to implementing its securitysector reform programme, so that the country can
maintain professional defence and security forces
that are committed to respecting the rule of law and
human rights.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Historically, Iraq has been an important
factor for stability in the Middle East. Russia supports
constructive steps aimed at strengthening Iraq’s
domestic political situation and ensuring the country’s
security and socioeconomic development in full
respect for its sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. We note the enormous contribution of the
United Nations and Special Representative Kubiš in
stabilizing the situation in Iraq. We know that this
is a result of his ability to establish constructive and
mutually respectful dialogue between all the political
stakeholders in Iraq.
We were pleased to see that the parliamentary
elections held in May culminated in the election of the
Republic’s top leadership. We emphasize that Russia
respects the sovereign choice of the Iraqi people and we
urge everyone to do the same.
We welcome our Iraqi partners’ successful and
decisive efforts to combat the terrorist threat. Much
has been done on the counter-terrorism front, and the
so-called caliphate of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) has been dealt a crushing blow.
We believe that this was achieved partly thanks to
the uncompromising war on terrorism being waged
in neighbouring Syria. Russia has contributed to
that effort. But despite these successes, the security
situation in Iraq remains fragile. ISIL members remain
active in a number of Iraqi provinces, hiding in areas
that are hard to reach or posing as refugees or locals.
Terrorist attacks are still their weapon of choice. We
categorically condemn any acts of terror, express our
sympathies with the Government and the people of Iraq
and the families of victims, and wish the wounded a
speedy recovery. We believe that the only effective way
to combat this challenge is by coordinating our counterterrorism efforts. The initiative of President Putin of
Russia to create a broad coalition of States to fight
terrorism is as relevant as ever.

S/PV. 8396

Restoring the economy, the social arena and
national livelihoods generally is crucial for the Iraqi
leadership. The international community should help
Baghdad to develop comprehensive measures aimed at
improving socioeconomic conditions, and in that regard
we acknowledge the International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq held in February in Kuwait.
We want to draw attention to the priority of
providing assistance to refugees and internally
displaced persons, which, incidentally, is highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s latest report on the situation
in Iraq (S/2018/975). Needless to say, it must be done
jointly and without double standards, whether in Iraq,
Syria or any other similar context.
Russia has been supporting the Iraqi leadership’s
efforts on the security front and on long-term
normalization of the situation both politically and
practically. We are helping to strengthen the Iraqi
army and implementing effective collaboration on
regional security issues within the framework of the
quadrilateral coordination centre in Baghdad, and we
are expanding bilateral trade and economic ties. We
welcome Baghdad’s use of bilateral communication
channels with partners in the region, its implementation
of a good-neighbourliness policy and normalization of
relations with regional Powers. Baghdad and Kuwait’s
willingness to work to resolve as soon as possible the
legacy of all the problematic issues resulting from the
first Gulf War deserves particular support. As United
Nations High-level Coordinators at various stages of the
process, Russia’s Ambassadors Vorontsov and Tarasov
also contributed to resolving this humanitarian issue.
We are concerned about the possible negative
effects on Iraq’s fragile internal political situation as
a result of the artificial intensification of the situation
surrounding the Islamic Republic of Iran. Iraq has
the right to build and develop normal relations with
its Iranian neighbours, and no one has the right to
undermine those relations. We want to emphasize
once again the importance of launching dialogue
mechanisms in the region rather than sanctions and
threats, especially since the experience of that kind of
cooperation exists and has been developed.
Russia will continue to play an active role in the
Middle East, based on its historically friendly and
healthy relations with Iraq and other States of the
region. We are open to collaborating with regional
and international partners. Our shared efforts would

18-373829/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

be seriously helped by the promotion of a security and
cooperation architecture based on the assumption that
any issues that might arise would be resolved through
mutually respectful dialogue, not threats of force.
We would like to conclude on a positive note with
regard to the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq. We believe that it should continue to
prioritize assisting in the promotion of the national
reconciliation processes that are essential to achieving
the country’s long-term stability. For our part, in
all our contacts with all of Iraq’s political forces, we
encourage them to unite their efforts through inclusive
dialogue aimed at reaching consensus agreements that
take the interests of all ethnic and religious groups into
consideration. We want to express our gratitude to all
the Mission staff working in difficult conditions, and
personally to Special Representative Kubiš. We very
much appreciate his professional and personal qualities,
which have enabled him to earn the respect of all Iraqi
political forces, and we wish him every success in his
new important post.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
express special thanks to Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
productive and effective work for more than three years
in his capacity as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) at a critical time for Iraq.
Kazakhstan commends his skilful and persistent efforts
to cope with multiple challenges and help guide Iraq
on a positive track towards recovery and development.
We support the UNAMI’s endeavours to assist the
Iraqi people, promote political dialogue, and establish
Government institutions.
We congratulate Iraq on the election of its new
President, His Excellency Mr. Barham Salih, the
appointment of Prime-Minister-designate Adil AbdulMahdi and the partial formation of his new Cabinet.
Kazakhstan extends its sincere congratulations to the
Parliament, people and all political actors in Iraq on
their efforts to overcome serious challenges and build
Government institutions. We acknowledge that these
are bold steps towards strengthening democracy,
State-building and consolidating Iraqi society around
the country’s Constitution.
Kazakhstan expresses the hope that, as a matter of
priority, the new Government of Iraq will take measures
to restore social and economic structures and meet
the urgent needs of the local population. Kazakhstan
10/22

13/11/2018

calls on the representatives of various political parties
to support the newly appointed Prime Minister. Their
support is essential to improve the social status of
citizens, meet the needs of the people and strengthen
the Iraqi economy. We hope that senior officials of Iraq
will make an important contribution to the prevention
of religious and inter-tribal tensions in the country.
Kazakhstan reaffirms its position on the adherence
to territorial integrity, unity and respect for the
sovereignty of Iraq. We certainly support continued and
constructive dialogue between the federal Government
of Iraq and the regional Government of Iraqi Kurdistan.
We commend the fact that the Government continues
the process of electing senior officials despite the tense
situation in the Middle East, the threats posed by Da’esh
and the difficult internal socioeconomic situation. We
feel confident the new Iraqi Government will strive
to pursue an independent foreign policy and pay no
attention to the interests of various political parties and
outside forces.
We strongly condemn the recent deadly bombings
that targeted the residential areas of Baghdad and Sadr
City, and we wish speedy recovery to those injured.
Undoubtedly, those crimes and acts aim to break the
spirit of the Iraqis, in particular Baghdadis, who have
started to enjoy the fruits of peace and who fear the
derailment of their country’s steady progress towards
stability. The unity of people and decisive efforts
of the security forces are certain to foil the designs
of terrorists.
We commend UNAMI for its efforts to work
with civil society, especially women’s groups, for
Iraq’s recovery. Women, once empowered, can make
a dynamic contribution to the peace process, with a
leading role in decision-making and mobilizing the
grass roots. We also appreciate the commitment of the
Special Representative to engage the youth in training
for democracy building and other developmental
activities. Community awareness and constructive
programmes are especially critical to prevent young
people from relapsing into violent extremism.
We were saddened and horrified to learn of the
more than 200 mass graves containing the remains of
thousands of victims in areas of the country formerly
controlled by Da’esh. We strongly condemn those
horrific crimes committed in Iraq, which have caused
immense and unimaginable trauma for the victims’
families. That tragedy once again confirms that all
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

measures must be taken so that such evil is completely
wiped out and not allowed to appear elsewhere. We
endorse the view and resolve of Special Representative
Kubiš that determining the circumstances surrounding
the significant loss of life will be an important step
in the mourning process for families and along their
journey to secure their right to truth and justice.
We welcome UNAMI’s communication with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the Embassy
of Kuwait in Baghdad to schedule an official handover
of the first package of the located Kuwaiti property. We
praise the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq for its
readiness to surrender Kuwaiti property to UNAMI to
be safeguarded until the date of the transfer is set by
the parties. We also consider it important that closing
the file on missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, will contribute to normalizing relations
between the two brotherly countries. We ask the
tripartite mechanism to persevere and remain seized of
the matter.
The world community should remain committed to
supporting the Government and the people of Iraq in
their various historic endeavours, and Kazakhstan will
be a strong partner in the multilateral action and process.
We again thank outgoing Special Representative
Ján Kubiš for his dedication and contribution to the
settlement of Iraqi issues and wish him all the best in
his future endeavours.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

S/PV. 8396

country. We join the Secretary-General in calling for
political leaders and the Council of Representatives to
fulfil their commitment to elect women to high-level
political positions.
Moreover, we note with concern the protests in
Basra, among other places, where the population has
mobilized to demand more effective action by the
authorities to solve such basic problems as a lack of
water, fragile infrastructure and basic services, and
high youth unemployment. We regret that the violent
nature of some protests and the subsequent repression
produced fatalities. We recognize the right of citizens
to protest peacefully and stress the need for law
enforcement to always act with caution, proportionality
and full respect for human rights.
We underline the importance of the State enjoying
the support of all sectors of Iraqi society and the
international community to deal with the remaining
terrorists and ensure that those responsible for the
atrocious crimes committed in Iraq are duly prosecuted.
In that connection, we reaffirm the importance of
the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Ms. Nadia Murad,
increasing the visibility of the issue and encouraging
adequate attention to be paid to the thousands of Iraqi
women victims of Da’esh sexual violence.
We also consider it necessary to overcome the
reported disagreements regarding the structure and
deployment of the popular mobilization forces. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, Iraq must be able to
pursue its national interests without becoming a theatre
for the clash of regional interests.

Peru is following closely recent developments in
Iraq. We note the conclusion of the electoral process.
We believe that the recount of votes and the resolution
of registered complaints reflect the proper functioning
of the institutions and the rule of law that the country
requires to peacefully resolve disputes. We expect the
rapid establishment of a new Government capable of
facing the country’s important and urgent challenges
and responding to the legitimate demands of citizens
with a view to building sustainable peace in Iraq and
the region in a new phase following the terrorism
of Da’esh.

We consider it important that the new Government,
with the support of the international community, be
able to promote greater investment in reconstruction
and in the inclusive and sustainable development of
the country, generating employment and opportunities
to reverse the lack of confidence among the citizens
and prevent new outbreaks of extremism and
insurgency — especially considering that Da’esh has
been defeated but not eliminated. In that regard, and
by way of conclusion, we welcome the progress of the
recovery and resilience Programme proposed by the
Secretary-General and highlight the support offered
within its scope by UNAMI, the United Nations country
team, the United Nations Development Programme and
the World Bank.

We emphasize the importance of the greater
participation by Iraqi women in the political life of the

Finally, we would like to reiterate our appreciation
to Mr. Ján Kubiš for his outstanding work at the Head

18-3738211/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

of UNAMI as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral during a difficult and crucial period for
Iraq. It is work that we are sure will be continued
with equal success by his successor, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like to start by thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his
briefing — his final one to the Security Council in his
current capacity.
Please allow me to focus on three important
aspects: the formation of the new Government, inclusive
Government and accountability.
First, on the formation of the new Government, we
congratulate and commend Iraq on the formation of the
new Government within the constitutional time frame
and look forward to the appointment of the remaining
ministerial positions. Iraq has taken a very important
step this year towards democracy and long-term
stability. Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi presented an
ambitious programme and took initial significant steps
in favour of proximity to the Iraqi people, transparency
and reform. We are encouraged by those early signals
and expect that the Prime Minister and his Government
will continue to be inclusive and representative of Iraq’s
diversity when implementing that programme.
We also welcome the elections that took place in
the Kurdistan Region. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/975) spoke of a positive trend in the
communication between Baghdad and Erbil, a dialogue
that we hope to see continued and intensified. Equally
important is the need for the new Government to increase
efforts to meet the legitimate demands of its people and
provide basic public services. That includes safe and
sufficient drinking water, electricity, the creation of job
opportunities and countering corruption. Iraq can count
on the Netherlands to back such efforts — politically,
financially and through our private sector — as we
have done over the past years. We are in full support of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Iraq, which
will allow it to form and exercise the new Government.
My second point is that a diverse society wants
to see itself reflected in its elected leaders and in a
Government that is inclusive and representative and
includes the meaningful participation of women.
Iraq can be proud that it has historically been at the
forefront of women’s empowerment in the Arab world,
with the first Arab female minister nominated in 1959.
12/22

13/11/2018

That example can still be replicated. The meaningful,
political, social and economic participation of women
is ever so important in view of the dark period in its
history that Iraq and the Iraqi people experienced. That
is why I want to take this opportunity to commend
Nadia Murad for being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
in recognition of her voice, advocacy and all Yazidi and
other Iraqis who suffered as a result of sexual violence
and atrocities committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS).
Providing victims with means for their
rehabilitation and reintegration into society is a
priority area for Iraq’s second national action plan
on implementing resolution 1325 (2000). But in the
aftermath of the defeat of ISIS the focus will also be
on other areas of the national action plan, such as the
social and economic empowerment of women, which
Suzan Araf Maroof spoke about that in the Council in
August (see S/PV.8324). In that respect, we encourage
the Government to take steps to end impunity for
perpetrators of gender-based violence —for example,
by considering a law on violence against women that
criminalizes such violence, as other countries in the
region have implemented. In today’s Iraq the talents
of all its people are indispensable, including those of
women and young people, for its economy to grow and
deliver a better future for all Iraqi citizens — men,
women and children alike.
Finally, I want to mark the continuing engagement
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) on ISIS accountability and the
commencement of the work by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL. Earlier this
month, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights published an
important report entitled Unearthing Atrocities: Mass
Graves in Territory Formerly Controlled by ISIL.
Reportedly, an overwhelming majority of those graves
contained victims of ISIS. So far 1,258 bodies have
been exhumed, but it is estimated that there are human
remains of between 6,000 and 12,000 people.
The task for UNAMI, the Investigative Team
and the Iraqi Government is vast, that is, to secure,
collect and preserve evidence and to give information
to the families of the many missing. That is why the
Netherlands has decided to contribute financially to
the work of Investigative Team. We look forward to
Special Adviser Khan’s first briefing in December.
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

We encourage the new Government to continue
to collaborate closely with both UNAMI and the
Investigative Team on the collection, preservation and
storing of evidence of those crimes that may amount
to war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
In our belief that there should be accountability
in accordance with international standards, and
looking towards the future, we call upon the new Iraqi
Government — as we do on all others that have not done
so yet — to ratify and implement the Rome Statute and,
as such, recognize the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court.
In conclusion, I want to pay tribute to Special
Representative Kubiš for the excellent work he was
able to carry out with his team in implementing
UNAMI’s challenging tasks over the past three years
and nine months. We look forward to working with the
designated Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, who will
start in December. We wish her a lot of success.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for his informative briefing.
Let me also express our most sincere gratitude for
his outstanding service and enormous contribution to
peace and stability in Iraq. We look forward to closely
working with Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert. Let me
also reiterate our appreciation for the tremendous work
that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) is doing in assisting the Iraqi authorities.
Let me begin by commending Iraq for the completion
of the electoral process within the constitutional time
frame and by welcoming the election of Mr. Barham
Salih as President of the Republic of Iraq and of
Mr. Mohammed al-Halbousi as the Speaker of the
Council of Representatives. As pointed out by Mr. Kubiš,
it was an exemplary, democratic and peaceful transfer
of power. We also welcome the partial formation of a
new Government by Prime Minister Adil Abdul-Mahdi
and the adoption of the Government programme by
the new Council of Representatives. We are confident
that the appointment of the remaining members of the
Cabinet will be completed soon. We urge the political
parties to work constructively to that end and contribute
to the swift formation of an effective Administration.
We would also like to welcome the elections held in
the Iraqi Kurdistan Region and the progress made in
relations between Baghdad and Erbil. We call upon
them to capitalize on that positive trend and resolve

S/PV. 8396

all outstanding issues through dialogue and consensus,
based on the full application of the provisions of the
Iraqi Constitution.
With the electoral process completed, we encourage
the political parties in Iraq to work constructively
towards the implementation of political, economic
and social reforms, as well as the advancement of
stabilization and reconstruction in the areas liberated
from Da’esh. As the developments in the past months
have shown, Iraqi citizens need an accountable and
efficient Administration that would address the
expectations of all groups of Iraqi society.
Therefore, we would like to draw the attention
of the new Iraqi Government to the need to focus on
the delivery of basic public services and tangible
benefits for all Iraqis, including providing good
governance, creating job opportunities, improving
living conditions, fighting corruption and promoting
economic development. Last but not least, we believe
that consolidating security, law and order and providing
for the return of internally displaced persons should
also be among the most important areas of the new
Government’s focus.
We regret that none of the well-qualified female
politicians were elected to senior leadership positions.
We call upon the political leaders to ensure the
appointment of women to senior positions within the
new Administration and their representation at the
highest levels of decision-making structures. There is
no peace without justice, we have already said so in this
Chamber on a number of occasions, and it also relates
to Iraq.
That is why we believe that special emphasis must
also be placed on the issue of serving justice to the
victims of atrocities committed by terrorist groups,
based on fair-trial requirements and in accordance with
international standards. We express our full support
to the Investigative Team tasked with assisting Iraq in
holding accountable the perpetrators of violence. We
strongly urge the Iraqi authorities to include sexual
and gender-based crimes and other internationally
recognized crimes in the prosecution of Da’esh fighters.
We hope that the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to
Nadia Murad will provide further impetus to ensure
justice for women and members of religious minorities
in Iraq, who are victims of outrageous and unthinkable
violence by Da’esh. We also call upon the Iraqi
authorities to ensure the provision of humanitarian

18-3738213/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

assistance, protection and the integration of women and
children who are of Da’esh families that have no link
with Da’esh.
In conclusion, let me express Poland’s readiness to
cooperate closely with the new Government of Iraq as
well as our full support for the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the
briefing delivered by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš.
We wish to echo what has already been expressed by
other members of the Security Council in thanking him
for his work and efforts on dialogue and coordination
that have been carried out on everyone’s behalf. Much
of what we recognize as a triumph for the Iraqi people
is due in large part to the efforts by him and his team.
We commend the convening of the parliamentary
elections held on 12 May, which were carried out in
an orderly manner and in an environment free from
violence. We wish to highlight the certification of
those election results on 19 August by the Federal
Supreme Court and the subsequent vote on 20 October
of the Council of Representatives, which resulted in
Mr. Barham Salih being elected as President of Iraq,
who in turn appointed Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi as
Prime Minister-designate. We emphasize the spirit
of democracy and participation demonstrated by the
Iraqi people throughout that process and we call on the
elected representatives and all of the political actors
involved to enter into dialogue and negotiations that
will allow them to build a solid institutional framework
and stable governance to the benefit of the Iraqi people.
The newly elected authorities have a long road
ahead, including confronting the challenges that have
arisen in the south of the country, where it is now
urgent to implement actions in order to guarantee
access to basic services for the population and prevent
the emergence of violence, which would derail the
reconstruction and reconciliation efforts that must
prevail in this new phase. This is also an opportunity
that should be used to strengthen the dialogue and good
relations between Erbil and Baghdad.
Despite the progress made, we note with deep
concern that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/975) shows that attacks are still being
perpetrated by Da’esh, and that that terrorist group
14/22

13/11/2018

remains capable of coordinating and carrying out
attacks against the civilian population, civil and
diplomatic infrastructure, as well as against the forces
of law and order, such as those that have been reported
in Baghdad, Ninawa and Kirkuk, among others.
We are horrified by the 202 mass graves that have
been identified, which, according to the report by
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, contain the bodies
of approximately 12,000 Da’esh victims — mainly
women, children, people with disabilities and members
of the Iraqi forces. That high number of victims, which
could yet increase considerably, highlights the brutality
and criminality of that terrorist organization and the
urgent need to identify the perpetrators so that they can
be held accountable for their actions.
In that regard, we encourage the Government of
Iraq to make every effort to preserve the integrity of
those mass graves, not only to identify the victims and
return the bodies to the families, but also to collect and
preserve as much evidence as possible to ensure that the
violations of human dignity do not go unpunished. For
that reason, it is important to promote capacity-building
in Iraqi institutions in order to implement plans for
the establishment of genetic databases that will allow
for the exhumation, identification and preservation
of the bodies of victims, which will strengthen the
investigative work. The involvement of the Investigative
Team established pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017) is
essential to strengthening that work. It is also important
to set up and implement, in the short and medium term,
mechanisms for reparations to victims, which should
include policies to promote memory, among others.
To achieve that goal, the cooperation of the various
offices and agencies of the United Nations, as well
as the wider international community, is essential to
developing the technical capabilities of the Iraqi State.
In that regard, we hope that the recommendations
issued by UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in their report
from 6 November will be reviewed and implemented.
We also wish to highlight the work of the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in
the identification of improvised explosive devices,
anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of war
on Iraqi territory. We note in particular the removal of
explosives that were submerged below the Fallujah iron
bridge, as well as the launching of training workshops
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

on the safe elimination of explosive devices for police
officers from the Ninawa, Al-Anbar and Kirkuk
governorates, among others, in order to tackle the
possible threats posed by the existence of those devices
in the liberated areas. We also stress the essential
role played by UNMAS in the clearing of improvised
explosive devices that could be contaminating the mass
graves found in the territories previously controlled
by Da’esh.
We commend the efforts made by Iraq in
identifying the areas where other mass graves might
exist, as well as the work carried out on the recovery
and return of assets of Kuwaiti heritage. We also take
note of the data, maps and satellite images shared
with the International Committee of the Red Cross to
facilitate that process. However, we regret that there
has been no progress made in the returning of Kuwaiti
property that has been found so far, given that they have
already gone through a process of cataloguing in Iraq.
We stress the importance of the return of those assets
for the reconciliation process and the strengthening
of relations between Iraq and Kuwait. We note the
willingness of UNAMI to facilitate that transfer and
provide logistical assistance to those efforts.
To conclude, I wish to once again express, through
the representative of Iraq, the recognition of my people
and my Government to the people and the Government
of Iraq for having overcome such difficult years, which
has been and will continue to be an example for all of
humankind. We appreciate the sacrifices that they have
made on everyone’s behalf.

S/PV. 8396

clear message on the political will of the Iraqi people
and leaders to collaborate in facilitating the process
of democratization that is already under way in the
country. We hope that all political parties will support
and respect that decision. Like many other countries,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes to urge the
newly elected President to support the political will
of the people by promoting policies of national unity
that take into account the concerns of citizens from all
social strata and all of the different peoples that make
up the State of Iraq, while underscoring the urgent
need to continue working to address the differences
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government.
In that regard, it is important to highlight the
important work carried out by UNAMI, which
particularly supported the electoral process and supports
the new Government’s policy to guarantee the progress
of the State reconstruction process, which requires
promoting an increasingly inclusive political dialogue
and reconciliation. On the parliamentary elections held
in Kurdistan on 30 September, we commend the fact
that they took place successfully and we call on the
main political parties to respect the final outcomes of
those elections, and that all of the complaints that arise
be dealt with according to established legal procedures.

Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the team of
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for their comprehensive
and detailed briefing, in which the main events of the
past quarter were highlighted. My delegation is pleased
to note that the Parliament of the Republic of Iraq has
finally elected a President, a duty that has been granted
to Mr. Barham Salih, whom we congratulate and to
whom we wish every success throughout his time in
office. We also welcome the appointment of the new
Prime Minister.

We wish to voice our concern about the violent
incidents outlined in the report (S/2018/975), carried
out in the form of street demonstrations in the south
and other parts of Iraq, which, unfortunately, have even
affected the security of certain resident diplomatic
offices and Consulates. We hope that the local
authorities will be able to deal with the situation and
address with due attention the grievances and concerns
of the demonstrators, those of which seemingly pertain
to the basic needs of the citizens. However, we also take
into account the actions taken by the Parliament and the
Government, which include certain measures towards
finding a satisfactory solution to that situation. We
commend the tireless work of the Iraqi security forces
for their ongoing clean-up of areas that have been
cleared of explosives and other dangerous materials, as
well as for their continued search for the remnants of
Da’esh, which threaten the security of the population
and hinder the ongoing process.

We believe that the election of the new President
represents not only a further step towards ending the
political crisis that had left the country at a standstill
since the elections on 12 May, but also sends out a

I would like to express our sincere appreciation and
recognition for the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, which is perceived positively and
favourably in various areas of Iraqi society, such as

18-3738215/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

the public sector, electoral processes, human rights and
the rule of law and operational and security issues. We
would like to reiterate our recognition and gratitude to
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his commitment
and tireless efforts in leading UNAMI over the past
nearly four years. We wish him all the best in his
future activities. Finally, we urge all the members
of the Council and the international community to
continue to support the Iraqi people and their President
on their path to democracy and the reconsolidation of
the State, whose stability is fundamental to that of the
entire region.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): First, let me
join others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš, both for his briefings and
all the work he has done over the past three years and
nine months as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. We are grateful for his leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the significant contribution he has made
to Iraq during this pivotal period in its history. We
look forward to welcoming in December his successor,
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and working with her
to build on all the progress that he has made. Like the
Netherlands, today I would like to touch upon three
issues: Government formation, accountability and the
question of missing Kuwaiti persons and property.
First, the United Kingdom joins other Council
members in congratulating Iraq on the conclusion of
the 2018 electoral process. We especially congratulate
President Barham Salih, Prime Minister Adel Abdul
Mahdi and Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi, as well
as the Kurdistan Democratic Party following the
Kurdistan Region parliamentary elections. We welcome
the formation of the Cabinet, which is well under
way, and encourage the appointment of the remaining
Cabinet members to be done in an inclusive manner
and within the constitutional timelines. However,
like the representatives of Poland, the Netherlands
and others, we share the disappointment at the lack of
female members among those appointed to the Cabinet
to date, and we would encourage the Iraqi Government
in its efforts to address that issue and promote the
participation and representation of women at all levels
of decision-making in Iraq.
Once the Government has been fully formed,
the United Kingdom looks forward to working with
it to support it as it tackles the challenges that Iraq
16/22

13/11/2018

faces, those which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has outlined for us today. Those
include promoting effective governance, security sector
and economic reform, social protection for vulnerable
groups — including internally displaced people — and
improvements in the business environment. Recent
events that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has highlighted, particularly in southern Iraq,
demonstrate the importance of providing basic services,
including water and electricity, for all Iraqis.
Women have a vital role to play in all of the
areas that I have just mentioned, including national
reconciliation efforts. We note the encouraging
progress in that regard. In particular, we welcome the
introduction of the inter-agency gender-based violence
standard operating procedures in southern Iraq, which
will provide essential support services for survivors
of gender-based violence. The United Kingdom
encourages the incoming Government to ensure the full
implementation of Iraq’s national action plan on women
and peace and security.
Several speakers this morning have spoken about
the importance of accountability in Iraq. The scale
of the challenges facing the new Iraqi Government
are clear. For example, the recent discovery of over
200 mass-grave sites demonstrates the importance of
achieving justice for the victims of Da’esh crimes in
Iraq. Those graves must be protected to ensure that
the evidence can be properly collected and stored. The
United Kingdom welcomes the continued strong support
from both the Government of Iraq and UNAMI for the
important work of the United Nations Investigative
Team for the Accountability of Da’esh. I would also
like to extend my own congratulations to Nadia Murad
for her well-deserved Nobel Peace Prize. Efforts must
continue to locate those still missing following their
brutal kidnapping by Da’esh.
Thirdly, and finally, the United Kingdom would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2018/976) on resolution 2107 (2013) on the issue
of missing Kuwaiti persons and property. The United
Kingdom welcomes UNAMI’s ongoing support on that
important file. We hope that the new Government of
Iraq will make progress on locating and identifying
missing Kuwaiti persons and property. In that regard,
the United Kingdom welcomes the visit by the Iraqi
President to Kuwait on 12 November, and in particular
the transfer that took place of one instalment of
retrieved Kuwaiti property. It is very important that
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

this chapter of Iraq and Kuwait’s history can be closed
and that relations between those two neighbours can be
further strengthened.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his briefing on the latest developments in Iraq and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). Since that was his last briefing, we take
this opportunity to express our appreciation to him for
all his dedicated efforts and leadership as the Head of
UNAMI at a critical time in Iraq. We wish him all the
very best in his future endeavours. We also welcome the
appointment of Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head UNAMI.
We commend the people of Iraq on the completion
of their 2018 national electoral process, which paved
the way for the Government-formation process. We join
others in congratulating the people and the Government
of Iraq for their achievement. We highlight the holding
of the first session of the Council of Representatives
and welcome the election of the Speaker of the Council
of Representatives and of the President of the Republic
of Iraq and the appointment of the Prime Minister.
We welcome the peaceful transfer of power within the
constitutional timeline. We hope the new Government
will deliver on its programme in order to meet the hopes
and expectations of the Iraqi people. We recognize the
enormous challenge that Iraq continues to face. It is
vital that the new leadership and the Government build
on the important progress made in the past years to
rebuild the country.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/975), we are also encouraged by the progress
made with regard to the relations between Baghdad and
Erbil, including the discussions between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
over outstanding issues. We also note the engagement
between Baghdad and Erbil on the political process
in Iraq, particularly in the new Iraqi Governmentformation process. We hope the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government will further
capitalize on the recently generated positive momentum.
Despite the remarkable progress made recently,
we note that terrorism remains a serious challenge.
We commend the Iraqi Government and its security
forces for their continued efforts aimed at clearing the
remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant

S/PV. 8396

from the Iraqi territory, particularly from the north and
north-central parts of the country. We believe there
is a need for a comprehensive approach to addressing
the security challenges and ensuring durable peace,
promoting national unity, stability and reconciliation,
addressing the humanitarian situation and rebuilding
Iraqi economy and infrastructure.
In that regard, enhanced international and regional
cooperation is critical. We support the call of the
Secretary-General on the need to honour the pledges
made at the Kuwait International Conference for
the Reconstruction of Iraq. We commend the Iraqi
Government for its continued efforts to reach out to
neighbouring countries and other international partners
to strengthen bilateral relations and advance mutual
political and security interests.
In conclusion, we appreciate the role of UNAMI
in supporting and accompanying the Iraqi people and
the Government to ensure a smooth political transition
at this critical juncture in the political history of
the country. It is important that UNAMI continue to
lend its support to the new Government of Iraq as it
embarks on implementing its new programme to
address the many complex and difficult challenges
and put the country on the path of sustainable peace
and reconstruction. We hope that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will build
on the good work done over the past three years and
nine months.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his
briefing. Let me join others in expressing our sincere
gratitude for all the work he has done in support of
Iraq during his time as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We very much appreciate his
tireless efforts, including his firm commitment on
women and peace and security and, under his leadership,
the advocacy efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to promote women in
political and decision-making processes in Iraq.
Let me start by welcoming the confirmation of
President Barham Salih and Prime Minister Adil
Abdul-Mahdi. The partial formation of the Council
of Ministers is encouraging. At the same time, we are
disappointed by the lack of women among the ministers
so far appointed. As inclusiveness and representation
are key in the Government-formation process, I join

18-3738217/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

others in calling for the consideration of women
candidates for the remaining Cabinet posts.
Iraq needs a stable national Government that brings
Iraqis together and restores hope going forward. In
the aftermath of the defeat of Da’esh, it is particularly
important for the Iraqi people to feel that their voices
matter and that they have an accountable Government.
As has been underlined throughout this meeting this
morning, the resurgence of Da’esh must be avoided.
As the new Government now gets to work and
starts addressing the many challenges that lie ahead,
intensified efforts are needed to advance political and
economic reforms, address basic-service delivery, fight
corruption and strengthen the rule of law. The economic
prospects for all Iraqis, not least the youth, must also
be improved. Success will require strong national
leadership, but also international support, including
by a united Security Council. A long-term perspective
is needed for continued and coordinated international
efforts in support of Iraq.
To ensure long-term peace and development,
the root causes of conflict must be addressed. That
includes the distribution of resources and influence
among different groups in society. Reconciliation is
critical to building a stable country and preventing
future conflicts, and accountability is, in turn, crucial
for reconciliation.
Sweden supports initiatives to strengthen
accountability for violations of international law. We
welcome resolution 2379 (2017), on the United Nations
Investigative Team to hold Da’esh accountable. That is
an important first step in holding those responsible for
the atrocities carried out by Da’esh to account. We are
pleased that Special Adviser Karim Khan has started
his important mission and look forward to his first
briefing to the Council.
Like others, I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Nadia Murad for being
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts to end
sexual violence against women in conflict. We also
welcome that Iraq has adopted a national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000). We encourage UNAMI to
assist the Government in the implementation of the
plan, including protecting internally displaced people
from sexual violence.
We welcome progress made in the dialogue between
Baghdad and Erbil. With the new Government in place,
18/22

13/11/2018

the dialogue should be fully resumed, with both sides
showing good faith and a constructive approach. We
encourage the United Nations to use its good offices to
facilitate dialogue among Iraqi stakeholders. UNAMI’s
role remains crucial, and its political mission must be
fully utilized. We welcome the Mission’s strengthened
mandate, in particular with regard to the role of women
and the situation of children. Rehabilitation and
reintegration must be prioritized.
The inclusion — for the first time — of an
operational women and peace and security component
in the mandate will allow the Mission to further
focus on those issues. Implementation is now key,
and adequate financial resources are needed. How the
Mission will mainstream gender as a cross-cutting
issue must be followed up and reported upon. We
appreciate the advocacy efforts that have already been
made to promote the effective participation of women
in political and decision-making processes.
Finally, Iraq must be able to pursue its own national
interests and not become a proxy for confrontation by
regional interests. We strongly emphasize the need for
the continued respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Iraq, and we welcome Prime
Minister Abdul-Mahdi’s approach in that regard. As
Iraq moves forward on its path towards reconciliation,
stability and sustained peace, it can continue to count
on Sweden’s support. Strong national leadership and
the unity of the Council will be critical for sustainable
peace in Iraq.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš for his briefing. I highly commend
his efforts in leading the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) during his tenure as Head
of the Mission.
China congratulates His Excellency Mr. Barham
Salih on his election as President of Iraq. China welcomes
the progress made in forming the new Iraqi Government
and hopes that the new Government will continue to
promote economic development, improve people’s
living conditions and accelerate Iraq’s reconstruction
process. As mentioned by other colleagues before me,
peace, stability and reconstruction in Iraq are now at a
critical stage. I would like to make the following points.
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

First, the general direction towards a political
solution to the Iraqi issue should be adhered to. The
parties in Iraq should, within framework of the
Constitution, settle their differences through dialogue,
promote national reconciliation and achieve lasting
peace and security in the country. The international
community should effectively respect the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq,
support the United Nations in its good offices and
provide constructive assistance for an inclusive
political solution.
Secondly, there should be continued support for
combating terrorism in Iraq. The relevant parties
should strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation, unify
standards and fight against all Council-listed terrorist
organizations, as well as resolutely contain terrorist
forces and curb the return of their activities and the
momentum of their spread. The international community
should support Iraq in its effort to bring perpetrators to
justice in accordance with its domestic law.
Thirdly, efforts must be made to actively push for
the economic recovery and accelerated reconstruction of
Iraq. The Iraqi Government should speed up its national
reconstruction process, give full play to its resource
advantages, promote its economic development, enhance
its capacity to provide public services and improve
people’s livelihoods. The international community
should continue to provide support and assistance to
Iraq, help ease its humanitarian situation, assist in its
economic recovery and create a favourable environment
for the national reconstruction of the country.
UNAMI has played an important role in supporting
the Iraqi Government for an inclusive political dialogue
and national reconciliation and reconstruction, and it
is continuing to push for enhanced bilateral relations
between Iraq and countries of the region, such as
Kuwait, as well as the settlement of the remaining
bilateral issues. The international community should
jointly support UNAMI in carrying out its work
according with its mandate.
China supports any efforts conducive to the
political settlement of the Iraqi issue and the fight
against terrorism. As always, China will participate
in the economic reconstruction of Iraq and continue to
provide assistance to the best of its ability.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8396

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you and
the People’s Republic of China on presiding over the
Security Council this month and to express my thanks
for the efforts you are making to organize the Council’s
work. I would also like to thank the State of Bolivia
for its efforts during its presidency of the Council
last month.
It is my pleasure to welcome the briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš. I commend his tireless and
sincere work and that of his team. We are especially
grateful for his efforts and excellent leadership of the
work of UNAMI throughout the past years, which have
been full of challenges. I also would like to congratulate
his successor Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert. We look
forward to expanding bilateral cooperation with her to
serve the interests and needs of Iraq pursuant to the
mandate of UNAMI. We underscore our country’s full
support for her.
My Government also wants to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres for accepting
our request to extend the mandate of Mr Kubiš until
mid-January. We further thank the members of the
Security Council for supporting our request, which will
contribute to the continuation of the successes achieved
by the formation of the Government.
Iraqis have successfully concluded their
parliamentary elections. The political blocs and the Iraqi
Council of Representatives were an exemplary model
of democracy and peaceful transfer of power through
the election of His Excellency Mr. Barham Salih as
President of the Republic, as well as the formation of the
Government with Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi as the Prime
Minister, in addition to the selection of the Speaker
of the Council of Representatives Mr. Mohammad
Al-Halbousi within the time frame set out by the
Constitution. Those three events this year reflected a
desire to form an inclusive Government that represents
Iraq’s social and political unity — a Government that
is able to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi people in the
upcoming phase.
The newly elected Government has adopted a
comprehensive ministerial plan based on security,
economic and social pillars, which will serve all Iraqi

18-3738219/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

citizens. I would like to summarize this plan in the
following points.
First, the Government will attach special attention to
the provision of basic services in the Basra governorate,
liberated areas and other Iraqi governorates. We will
give more attention to resolving pending issues with the
Kurdistan region, in particular with regard to issues of
oil and financial management. We will work to enhance
national identity and promote community participation
and the protection of human rights in order to achieve
social peace, stability and security.
Secondly, we will work to achieve development
and economic goals. We will implement a policy of
economic reform and carry out a transition from a
revenue economy to a market economy through the
implementation of development plans that target vital
economic sectors that directly influence citizens’
lives. We will provide support for the private sector
so that it will contribute to economic growth. We will
diversify our resources so that we do not rely heavily
on oil revenues.
Thirdly, we will establish a system of good
governance in Iraq through the implementation of
the good governance compact adopted by the Cabinet
in 2017, which stresses the importance of improving
our financial and operational performance and the
provision of services to citizens. In this regard, we hope
that friendly States will invest in the process of national
capacity-building.
Fourthly, we will continue to work hard and
with resolve, in cooperation with all actors, to fight
corruption in all its forms and manifestations, as it is
one of the main obstacles to good governance in Iraq.
Fifthly, we will work to strategically allocate
financial resources based on a programme that
prioritizes the reform of public financial management,
which is one of the Iraqi Government’s main priorities.
Sixthly, we will follow up on the outcome of the
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, hosted by the sisterly State of Kuwait. We urge
friendly States to fulfil their pledges, as we have high
hopes for that outcome. The reconstruction of Iraq is
no less important than fighting terrorism. We call on
the international community to support Iraq and its
Government in the reconstruction of infrastructure in
all Iraqi cities. That is an important and crucial element
in achieving economic prosperity in the country.
20/22

13/11/2018

Iraq is at the threshold of a new phase following
our victory in the justified war against the terrorist
gangs of Da’esh. This requires support and cooperation
so that we can tackle the challenges of the post-Da’esh
phase. Iraq has natural and human resources that will
enable us to become a developed country. We should
therefore focus on achieving political, economic,
security and social stability as a prerequisite for
achieving sustainable development, promoting rights
and freedoms and achieving social justice.
My Government is stepping up its efforts to
eliminate all terrorist cells and to prevent their return in
any form or under any name. Therefore, we will attach
special importance to the ongoing capacity-building
of our armed forces in all its categories, including
the army, the police, the counter-terrorism apparatus,
Peshmerga and the popular mobilization forces. We
insist on prohibiting any military or armed formations
outside State control.
We are coordinating with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. In that connection,
this month my Government launched several counterterrorism projects, including youth capacity-building,
providing employment for youth, combating the
financing of terrorism and violent extremism through
strategic contacts, and prohibiting weapons of mass
destruction. Those projects meet 4 of the 16 priorities
that were identified by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and adopted by the Government of Iraq
in 2015.
The awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Nadia
Murad, an Iraqi citizen, is an acknowledgement by
the world of the tragedy of Yazidis and all victims
of terrorism and takfiri discourse in Iraq. The award
honoured her courage and perseverance to defend the
usurped rights, as well as the steadfastness of Iraqis in
countering terrorism and extremism.
Iraq derives strength from its cultural, religious
and ethnic diversity, as well its rich history. We need all
strata of society to rebuild and achieve stability in the
post-Da’esh period so that we can maintain the unity
and stability of the country. Since 2003, successive
Governments have worked to uphold and protect those
principles, which we have done by adhering to our
Constitution and applicable laws created to guarantee
protection and decent living standards for all.
18-37382

13/11/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

In this context, we find it odd that the SecretaryGeneral includes strange references to racial
discrimination in his report (S/2018/975). Racial
discrimination does not exist in Iraq. These references,
particularly in the light of the delicate circumstances
in which my country finds itself, constitute a serious
precedent that could undermine social peace. All
Iraqis enjoy their civil and political rights, which are
guaranteed by the Constitution and national legislation.
There is no discrimination against any social group.
Discriminatory discourse does not exist in Iraq.
The new Government will continue to apply the
same approach to humanitarian solutions for the return
of the families of Da’esh terrorist gangs. We are giving
priority to their psychological and mental rehabilitation
and their reintegration into their communities, once we
are sure that they have been rehabilitated. In this regard,
competent authorities in Iraq are considering a plan of
action to prevent the recruitment of children that has
been submitted by the United Nations country team.
We are fully aware that we must not overlook
the important role of Iraqi women and their efforts
to restore stability and achieving community
reconciliation in the liberated areas. A conference was
held in Baghdad to launch the Iraqi national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. The national action plan will enhance the
role and responsibilities of Iraqi women in support of
post-Da’esh peacebuilding. We are working to include
women in the new Iraqi Government at all levels and to
the greatest extent possible.
My country faces many difficulties and challenges,
primary among which is the lack of medical and
technical capacity to clear landmines and unexploded
ordnance, which remain among the principal hindrances
to the return of internally displaced families to the
liberated areas. In this regard, we stress once again the
urgent need to support the work of the United Nations
Mine Action Service. We urge donor States to continue
to support Iraq in mine-clearance.
My Government believes that certain countries,
including Iraq, that have suffered from terrorism and
serious crimes committed by criminal groups and
terrorist gangs turn to capital punishment as one element
of achieving justice for the victims and their families,
in accordance with article 6.2 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It is a sovereign
right of those States to do so. Capital punishment in

S/PV. 8396

Iraq is related to terrorist crimes. We apply fair and
thorough trial procedures, taking into consideration the
right of the accused to defend themselves and appeal.
In that regard, we note that Iraq’s penal code does not
include provisions that cover international crimes, such
as war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We are working hard to finalize draft legislation on
those particular crimes. This legislation would apply to
the crimes committed by the Da’esh terrorists.
My Government is working to establish strategic
partnerships with regional and international actors
based on common interest in order to promote Iraq’s
status in the international community and resolve
pending issues with neighbouring countries and
others. We look forward to achieving peace, security
and development. We enjoy a relationship of joint
cooperation with the riparian States so that we can
achieve a fair and equitable sharing of benefits based
on the principles of international law. That would avert
regional tension and instability. In this regard, Iraq
expects UNAMI to play an active role, in accordance
with its mandate.
In connection with enhancing bilateral relations
with neighbouring States, Iraq looks forward to
reaching an equitable joint formula for water-sharing
quotas with those States, as a result of the great pressure
exerted on the Tigris and Euphrates basin by climate
change, competition and inequitable use of joint water
resources. A large percentage of Iraqi land is under
the threat of desertification due to climate change and
water scarcity, which would clearly have a negative
impact on the fertility of the land.
Iraq underscores once again that we will not accept
the use of our territories by groups, whether they reside
in those territories or are merely passing through, to
launch attacks against neighbouring countries. In
return, we hope that those States will act in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations while respecting our sovereignty. We hope that
future reports of the Secretary-General will include
elements on the impact of unilateral measures and
violations by certain States that would lead to political
and security instability in Iraq.
We would like to stress once again the good
fraternal relations we enjoy with the State of Kuwait. My
Government is working to improve this relationship at
the political and economic levels. It is worth mentioning
that the President of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Barham

18-3738221/22

S/PV.8396

The situation concerning Iraq

13/11/2018

Salih, chose Kuwait as the site of his first official visit
outside the country, on 11 November. This attests to the
importance of Kuwait to Iraq. We are working to close
the files pending between the two States, including the
Kuwaiti National Archive, and submitted a package of
television archives to Kuwait on 12 November.

France, the United States and the United Kingdom for
providing the mechanism with maps. We hope that the
United Nations will allow the mechanism to use groundpenetrating radar and provide technical support, despite
the obstacles pertaining to the mechanism’s limited
budget.

My country is committed to making every effort
to progress on the file of Kuwaiti prisoners and
missing persons. We are striving to honour in full our
commitments under resolution 2107 (2013), including
by determining the facts surrounding the remaining
Kuwaiti prisoners and missing persons and third-country
nationals. Most recently, the Ministry of Defence called
on all Iraqi citizens to provide information on the
remains of Iraqi or Kuwaiti citizens who went missing
in the 1991 war, in addition to Kuwaiti property. We
have also run advertisements urging them to provide
such information.

In conclusion, the new Government of Iraq
is determined to implement the ministerial plan
identifying the national and social priorities of Iraq and
its citizens We hope that the international community
will continue to support us as we seek to ensure the
stability and prosperity of Iraq and its people.

I note that the mechanism is pursuing excavation
and exploration work under the supervision of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. We thank

22/22

Finally, we reiterate our thanks to Mr. Kubiš for
his years of service and wise leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. We are grateful for
the work of his team in Iraq and New York to assist Iraq
within the mandate of the Mission. We look forward to
working with Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and wish
her and her team every success.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

18-37382
