S/PV.8171

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8171st meeting

Tuesday, 30 January 2018, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Miller

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and
2393 (2017) (S/2018/60)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-02496 (E)
*1802496*

S/PV.8171

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (S/2018/60)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/60, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017).
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to provide the Security Council with an
update on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Years of conflict have caused immeasurable
human suffering and left countless civilians dead,
injured or missing. The United Nations estimates
that 13.1 million people are in need of protection
and humanitarian assistance, including 6.1 million
people who are displaced within the country. Another
5.5 million people have fled the conflict across borders
into neighbouring countries. The Council will have
heard at first-hand the account of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator in his statement to the Security Council on
22 January with regard to his visit to Syria, in which
he highlighted the plight of the Syrian people. During
the visit, he heard individual stories from some of the
people caught up in the violence and conflict. In Homs,
he saw entire districts of the city reduced to rubble. The
visit was the first for an Emergency Relief Coordinator
in more than two years. It was an important opportunity
to see ways in which the United Nations can support
people in need. It was also a chance to hold discussions
with the Government of Syria and our humanitarian
2/10

30/01/2018

partners on how to address some of the most pressing
humanitarian needs.
As fighting continues, I am particularly concerned
about the safety and protection of civilians caught up in
the violence in north-west Syria, where hostilities have
reportedly caused numerous deaths and injuries. Air
strikes and fighting in southern Idlib and northern Hama
have resulted in more than 270,000 displacements since
15 December 2017, driving people from their homes
to other areas of Idlib. Camps for displaced people are
overstretched, forcing most of those displaced to seek
shelter in some 160 makeshift settlements. During the
cold and wet winter months, many families have nothing
else but improvised tents, which they share with others.
Attacks on medical facilities and vital infrastructure
continue, with reports of at least 16 attacks on healthcare facilities during the month of December alone.
Yesterday Médecins Sans Frontières reported that air
strikes had hit a hospital it supports in the Saraqib
district of Idlib, causing five deaths, injuring others and
seriously damaging the facility, which is now closed.
That was the second reported strike on the facility in
nine days.
Further north, in Afrin, in Aleppo governorate, the
United Nations is carefully monitoring the situation
of over 300,000 people living in the district, which
is experiencing fighting. We have reports of civilian
casualties and that approximately 15,000 people have
been displaced within the district, with another 1,000
displaced to Aleppo governorate. We have also received
reports that local authorities inside Afrin are restricting
civilian movement, particularly for those who want
to leave.
I am also concerned about the situation in eastern
Ghouta and areas of Damascus, where civilian deaths
and destruction of civilian infrastructure continue to
be reported. In the first 10 days of the year, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights documented at least 81 civilians killed in the
enclave, including 25 women and 30 children. Scores of
residential buildings in the area have been damaged or
destroyed in recent weeks. I also note with concern that
shelling continues from eastern Ghouta into Damascus,
resulting in civilian deaths and injuries.
Although 29 patients in urgent need of medical care
were allowed out of eastern Ghouta in late December,
hundreds more, most of them women and children,
require immediate medical attention. So far, there have
18-02496

30/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

been 21 civilian deaths among those waiting for and
needing medical evacuation. Their needs are critical,
and the law is clear. I urge all parties, and all those
with influence over the parties, to see to it that all such
medical evacuations take place without conditions
or delay.
With reference to all of the flashpoints I have
highlighted, I call on the parties to ensure the protection
of civilians and civilian and medical infrastructure,
in line with international humanitarian law, and to
ensure the safe, sustained and unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all in need.
I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my concern about the protection situation in the city of
Raqqa, where returns continue despite the widespread
presence of explosive remnants of war. Nearly 60,000
individuals have reportedly returned since the end of
hostilities in October 2017. However, humanitarian
partners continue to emphasize that, given the high
prevalence of landmines, booby traps and unexploded
ordinance, Raqqa is not safe for civilian returns.
Deaths and injuries due to explosions have been
reported with alarming frequency, and trauma cases
nearly doubled in recent months. More than 534
civilians have been injured in blasts since the expulsion
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant from the
city in October 2017, of whom 112 people died. Each
week, between 30 and 50 civilians continue to arrive
at trauma centres in Raqqa after being wounded by
improvised explosive devices concealed in their homes
and neighbourhoods. Risk from explosive hazards
is not limited to Raqqa; there are indications that
substantial contamination also exists throughout Deir
ez-Zor governorate, where there has been little or no
mine surveying or clearance.
Despite the desperate humanitarian needs in many
areas in Syria, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners continue to face serious challenges in
accessing those in need. Last month, I briefed the
Council that none of our cross-line convoys were able
to reach besieged locations and that only two convoys
had accessed hard-to-reach areas. This month, the
United Nations and its partners have had no access to
any such locations at all. Not one convoy has been able
to deploy. Discussions about convoys have stalled over
requirements to lower the number of beneficiaries and
about splitting convoys in a way that would not allow us
to provide food or other essential items. Our deliveries

S/PV. 8171

must continue to be based on humanitarian principles
and international humanitarian law, impartially based
on civilian need.
At the same time, the United Nations is also seeing
access to areas previously reached under regular
programming coming to a halt. Local authorities in
north-east Syria have twice held humanitarian convoys
at the checkpoint with Government-controlled areas
in eastern Aleppo. Furthermore, local authorities have
requested changes related to the operations of our
non-governmental partners, which in turn has blocked
our assistance delivery to much of north-east Syria. The
situation has been further compounded by the refusal of
the Governor of Hassakah to issue facilitation letters for
our deliveries. While the cross-border operations of our
partners continue, such assistance is not sufficient to
meet the needs in the north-east. To solve the situation,
I call on all parties and those with influence over them
to engage now to see that access to those areas resume.
Finally, due to insecurity in the north-west, which
has included numerous rocket attacks from within
Syria into Turkey, on 20 January the United Nations
temporarily suspended cross-border deliveries at the
two authorized border crossing points in Turkey. The
United Nations remains in discussion with Turkish
authorities on restarting operations as quickly as
possible to ensure the continued delivery of assistance,
which hundreds of thousands of Syrians rely upon
every month.
Those access challenges underscore the importance
of using all the modalities of delivery at our disposal.
Despite prevailing challenges, the United Nations and
its partners have continued to reach millions of people
in need each month. For example, in December, regular
programming from within the country resulted in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to millions of
people, including over 3 million people who received
food assistance through 1,500 deliveries. The United
Nations and its partners also provided health, protection
and education services. Cross-border assistance also
continued to reach hundreds of thousands of people in
need, as 653 trucks delivered food assistance to more
than 500,000 people, health assistance for over 600,000
treatments, as well as other support for hundreds
of thousands.
After almost eight years of conflict, people’s needs
are as vast as they are critical. The United Nations
and its partners will continue to deliver to millions of

18-024963/10

S/PV.8171

The situation in the Middle East

people in need. The United Nations also stands ready to
bolster such support, but requires efficient and effective
mechanisms to ensure the safe and rapid delivery of
aid. To that end, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
has identified five areas where the United Nations is
looking to make concrete progress.
First, we need to finalize the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for 2018, for which we will
be seeking $3.5 billion to meet the needs of more than
13 million people in all parts of Syria.
Secondly, it is important that there be an agreement
on medical evacuations for hundreds of critically ill
people trapped in besieged eastern Ghouta. People in
other besieged areas should get the same assistance.
Thirdly, humanitarian access needs to improve.
The United Nations has requested agreement for three
to four United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
inter-agency cross-line convoys each week. We need
consistent access to all people in need.
Fourthly, we must reach agreement on the United
Nations-supported aid convoys from Damascus to
Rukban in south-eastern Syria. While the exceptional
delivery of assistance from Jordan in early January
was a positive development, a sustainable solution
is required.
Fifthly, more effective arrangements are needed
to enable the United Nations to support the work of
Syrian non-governmental organizations and to enable
international non-governmental organizations to perform
the stronger role they can, and are ready to, play in
relieving the suffering.
I hope that we will be able to report to the Security
Council next month on real progress achieved in those
five key areas, and that, month after month, we will
move forward until they are all fully addressed.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for her briefing.
When considering the Syria humanitarian issue, we
always have in mind the powerful plea last December by
the Russian Permanent Representative that we should
keep our differences over the politics in Syria out of our
4/10

30/01/2018

consideration of humanitarian issues — a view that we
strongly continue to endorse.
Last week, Mark Lowcock briefed us on his visit
to Syria. It was the first time that an Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs had visited Syria in
more than two years, having been blocked previously
from visiting. The United Kingdom commends the
Under-Secretary-General’s efforts to start a meaningful
dialogue between the United Nations and the Syrian
regime in order to improve the humanitarian situation
for the people of Syria. On the basis of discussions
and as we iterated today, the Under-Secretary-General
set out five clear asks to enable the United Nations to
sustain and improve its aid efforts. The United Kingdom
fully supports those asks. Unfortunately, the Security
Council has been unable to reach agreement on a text
that would unanimously call upon the Syrian regime to
ensure that those five asks are granted without delay. I
want to reflect on this disappointing situation.
One of the five key asks of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is the regime’s
agreement to allow three or four United Nations and
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys each week across
front lines to provide assistance to up to 2.5 million
people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. These
convoys are needed to deliver aid, including both food
and medical supplies, to civilians who have lived in a war
zone for almost seven years. That request for consistent,
regular access to all people in need is crucial. In 2017,
only 27 per cent of United Nations inter-agency convoy
requests were approved by the Syrian regime in full.
That is significantly worse than in 2016, when 45 per
cent of requests were approved. Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller’s briefing was especially concerning
in that respect. We cannot let that happen again in 2018.
Ninety-four per cent of those living under siege
are located in eastern Ghouta. The Al-Assad regime is
using humanitarian aid as a weapon of war by restricting
access to the besieged population. There were no aid
deliveries to the area for the whole of December, and
nearly 12 per cent of children under five years of age
in eastern Ghouta suffer from acute malnutrition. It is
appalling that innocent children are once again suffering
the most. The Under-Secretary-General also requested
the immediate evacuation of hundreds of people who
are in need of medical assistance from eastern Ghouta.
We call on those who can influence the regime to use
all of their authority to allow for rapid, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian access and medical evacuations
18-02496

30/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

for those in need. According to the Secretary-General,
18 people have already died while waiting for the
regime’s permission to leave the besieged city. People
are dying for want of health care and services that are
available fewer than 10 miles away, in Damascus.
Let us recall that the backdrop of the UnderSecretary-General’s visit was the escalation in air
strikes in eastern Ghouta and the north-west, including
Aleppo, Idlib governorate and northern Hama.
Yesterday at least five people, including a child, were
killed by an air strike on a hospital supported by
Médecins sans frontières in Syria’s Idlib governorate.
The facility was also seriously damaged and at least
six people, including three medical staff, were injured
as a result of the attack. The air strikes on the hospital
occurred while the doctors were receiving people who
had been injured an hour earlier in another air strike on
a market. Those strikes had already killed 11 people.
These events are taking place are in areas where
there are meant to be ceasefires with the stated aim of
putting a prompt end to violence and improving the
humanitarian situation. Unfortunately for the people
of Syria, that could not be further from the reality.
The deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Idlib and eastern Ghouta continues, in
blatant violation of international humanitarian law and
human rights law. The intensification of hostilities has
displaced approximately 270,000 people within Idlib
since 15 December 2017, stretching scarce resources
beyond their limits. The escalation of air strikes in
eastern Ghouta has resulted in hundreds of civilian
deaths since 30 December. UNICEF reports that, in the
first 14 days of 2018, more than 30 children were killed
by escalating violence in the enclave.
It is against that backdrop that I call on the regime
to allow for immediate, safe and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance to meet fully the needs of
those who require food and medical supplies. Let all
with influence exert it to ensure that. It is our must
crucial, immediate request. It is also imperative that all
parties adhere to agreed ceasefires and cessations of
hostilities, uphold international humanitarian law and
protect civilians.
Yesterday, a number of us visited the United States
National Holocaust Museum’s exhibition on Syria. We
saw the photographs of those killed and tortured by the
regime and we read their biographies, their life stories.
It had a profound effect on me, and it brought home how

S/PV. 8171

the tragedy in Syria is not just a geopolitical one — it is
a human one. For humanity’s sake, all of us around this
table must ensure that we have done our all.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her comprehensive
briefing. I reiterate France’s full support for the
recommendations of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, which
Ms. Mueller has just referenced.
I would also like to express my country’s grave
concerns about the latest developments in the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Several points are of
particular concern. We note the extremely dire situation
of the population in eastern Ghouta — still besieged
and denied the humanitarian assistance and medical
evacuations that they need — and the escalation of
violence, particularly in the Idlib region. In addition, we
are concerned about the attacks on hospitals, medical
facilities and the provision of health care, as well as the
persistent restrictions on humanitarian access in Syria,
which are unacceptable and have tightened further
in recent weeks — denying the civilian population
the access to the essential resources that they so
vitally need. Accordingly, I should like to make three
main observations.
First, we are particularly concerned about the
current escalation of violence in eastern Ghouta and
the Idlib region, which adds to the suffering of the
affected populations. In eastern Ghouta, 400,000
civilians are victims of almost daily bombings by the
regime and its allies. According to the World Health
Organization, approximately 750 people in eastern
Ghouta are still waiting for emergency medical
evacuation. Since 30 December, the wounded have
been unable to be transported out of eastern Ghouta to
receive care; 21 others have died from their wounds,
unable to wait another day. We note and stress that it is
the responsibility of the Syrian regime to allow those
medical evacuations to proceed without delay.
The situation in the south of Idlib and in the north of
Hama is very worrying as well. The continued bombings
led to the displacement of about 250,000 civilians last
month. More than 33 people were reportedly killed in
less than 24 hours. The town of Sarakab was bombed
yesterday morning, and the strikes hit the town market,
killing more than 11 people and injuring a number of
others. One hour later, the only public hospital in the
district — a hospital supported by the non-governmental

18-024965/10

S/PV.8171

The situation in the Middle East

30/01/2018

organization Médecins Sans Frontières — was struck,
killing five people, including a child, and injuring six
others, including medical staff.

political transition in the context of resolution 2254
(2015) can bring a lasting and credible end to the
suffering of the Syrian people.

France very firmly condemns attacks on healthcare workers and medical infrastructure, as well as the
indiscriminate bombings carried out in recent weeks by
the Syrian regime against civilians in eastern Ghouta
and in residential areas of Idlib province.

However, the regime is continuing its policy of
methodical and deliberate obstruction, as we saw
during the negotiation session held in Vienna on 25 and
26 January. In this context more than ever, we need
to support the United Nations and United Nations
mediation in Geneva, as well as eschew any temporary
solutions agreed without the opposition, which would
be unrealistic as they would not meet the aspirations of
all Syrians. It is up to those countries that support the
regime, primarily Russia and Iran, to bring to bear the
pressure necessary to ensure that the regime puts an
end to this negative and irresponsible strategy. Make no
mistake: there can be no negotiated political transition
in Syria without a total ceasefire, humanitarian access
throughout the whole of the territory and the creation
of a neutral environment that would restore trust and
ensure the safety of all Syrians.

France reiterates that indiscriminate bombings
and the use of incendiary weapons against civilians
represent serious violations of international humanitarian
law and could constitute war crimes or even crimes
against humanity. It is vital and urgent to bring to an
immediate end the bombings in Idlib and the siege in
eastern Ghouta. The Astana guarantors have taken
upon themselves the responsibility to supervise its
implementation, and we therefore urge these States to
effectively impose on the Syrian regime a complete
cessation of hostilities as well as respect for the basic
principles and norms of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
The second observation is particularly worrying:
the deterioration of humanitarian access in recent weeks
in Syria. We have reiterated this concern on numerous
occasions in this Chamber: the humanitarian situation
will not improve without comprehensive, unimpeded,
safe and ongoing humanitarian access to the aid
distributed by the United Nations and its partners.
Nonetheless, the regime is continuing to create
unacceptable obstacles to the provision of humanitarian
aid. The Syrian authorities have not authorized even a
single inter-agency convoy in several weeks. France
condemns this unacceptable attitude and reiterates its
call for the safe and unhindered access of the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners to civilians
throughout Syrian territory. The right of the Syrian
population both to humanitarian assistance and to
protection must be respected unconditionally.
The Security Council cannot remain silent given
these recurring violations of international humanitarian
law, which require a strong response from the Council.
Finally, I would like to touch on the obvious
discrepancy between the continuing violence on the
ground in Syria and the diplomatic offensives, which
are not facing up to the situation. We know that only
an inclusive political solution that is elaborated under
the auspices of the United Nations and that sets up a
6/10

How credible is a regime that is stepping up the
bombing in Idlib, preventing medical evacuations
in eastern Ghouta and refusing to authorize a single
humanitarian convoy? How credible can diplomatic
efforts be that are devoid of any specific assurances
and that do not lead to any significant and lasting
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Idlib and
eastern Ghouta?
We reiterate that humanitarian aid is unconditional
and apolitical. We therefore make an urgent request to see
proof of this on the ground. That is exactly what France
will seek to defend in the weeks to come, in line with
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), namely,
the establishment of a neutral environment that must
include the lifting of sieges, the cessation of hostilities,
prisoner exchanges and chemical disarmament, all of
this under international supervision so as to ensure
genuine constitutional reform and the holding of free
elections. That is the only way to bring a lasting end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and open the way to
an inclusive political process in Syria, in the interests
of all the Syrian people. It is for that reason that we will
continue to fully support the process stemming from
resolution 2254 (2015), and we will make every effort
to unite the Council in this respect.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her briefing.
18-02496

30/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Seven years after the start of the conflict in Syria,
the humanitarian situation in the country continues
to be a truly heartbreaking drama. While several
parties to the conflict are responsible for a wide array
of violations of international humanitarian law, it is
especially painful to see the horrifying effects of the
military actions taken by the Syrian authorities.
Instead of protecting their own citizens, the Syrian
authorities are bombing them. Instead of providing basic
services to their people, the authorities are destroying
hospitals and schools. Instead of allowing humanitarian
aid into the most affected areas, the authorities are
starving some of their own people.
The outlook for 2018 remains grim, with a
worsening humanitarian situation and a continuation
of the battle for influence by regional Powers. Allow
me to focus on three important aspects: the current
situation on the ground, cross-border aid delivery and
the implementation of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs’ (OCHA) five asks.
On the situation on the ground, the international
community has been providing funding for a
principled humanitarian response. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands has provided amply to the United Nations
and to international non-governmental organizations in
order to provide relief for the suffering of the Syrian
people. But this relief is hardly reaching those in need.
In besieged eastern Ghouta, we are witnessing the
use of starvation as a method of warfare. Not a single aid
convoy has reached the 400,000 people trapped there in
the last three months. Where have we seen this before?
In Idlib, because of the continuous intensified aerial
bombardments, aid to more than 250,000 internally
displaced persons is extremely difficult to deliver.
Improvised explosive devices in Raqqa and
elsewhere in Syria have caused large numbers of
casualties. The Netherlands urges all Council members
to continue their contributions to make all of Syria free
of mines and explosive devices.
Concerning cross-border aid delivery, it is equally
disturbing that today, one month after the Council
renewed the authorization of cross-border aid, some
of these very aid convoys cannot cross the border
because of the security situation. The consequences of
this lack of cross-border aid for the large number of
displaced people in north-west Syria are tremendous.
There is an urgent need to ensure that all convoys can

S/PV. 8171

have safe passage to reach those in need, both in Afrin
and beyond.
In Afrin, the intensification of the military
operation there last Sunday has led to more displaced
families that have nowhere to go. We call upon all
parties to protect civilians, to facilitate humanitarian
access and to allow for the safe passage of all people
who wish to leave areas under attack.
Turning to the implementation of OCHA’s five
asks, the recent visit by Mark Lowcock to Syria was
in itself a positive step, but it is imperative that the
dialogue on aid delivery yield effective results as
soon as possible. In effect, the requests made by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator do not differ much from
those of his predecessors, effectively highlighting
the lack of progress in terms of sustained, principled
humanitarian access to those most in need.
The message of the humanitarian and international
community has been consistent: respect your obligations
under international humanitarian law, protect your own
citizens — including health workers and humanitarian
aid workers — and allow for rapid, safe and sustained
humanitarian access.
In conclusion, it is crucial that the Security Council
unequivocally unite itself behind the concrete and
attainable five asks of OCHA. It remains essential
to see progress on the rapid, effective and principled
implementation in the coming weeks of all five asks
of OCHA. We call on Council members to consider
steps to be taken collectively in case no progress takes
place and on those who have influence on the Syrian
authorities to make sure that humanitarian aid reaches
those most in need. Let us not forget that lives are
at stake.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): The
Security Council met only last week (see S/PV.8164) and
heard the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs describe his visit to Syria and reiterate a series
of requests that, in his estimation, would be a positive
step towards improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria.
Sadly, not only has none of those requests been
approved by the Syrian regime, but also the situation in
places such as eastern Ghouta continues to deteriorate
beyond our worst imagaination. To the surprise of
no one, cross-line deliveries in Syria, particularly to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, remain stalled. In

18-024967/10

S/PV.8171

The situation in the Middle East

fact, there have been no United Nations inter-agency
convoys anywhere for more than six weeks and no
convoys to a besieged area for more than eight weeks.
We deplore what are, frankly, starve-and-siege
tactics, preventing the distribution of aid, which must
be needs-based. As a result, many families are going
without the most basic food, medicine and other
supplies required for survival. Hospitals reuse syringes
and other medical items meant for single use and,
during the coldest months of winter, families who have
run out of fuel and cooking oil burn household items to
stay warm. That is happening in Ghouta and elsewhere
throughout Syria.
We need an immediate, unconditional humanitarian
pause in eastern Ghouta, where the impact of air strikes
and artillery shelling on the civilian infrastruture has
forced the closure of more schools and medical clinics.
Those bombings continued over the weekend, further
proving that any supposed ceasefire in the area was
merely aspirational.
We reiterate the need to evacuate hundreds of
critically ill people trapped in eastern Ghouta. We have
seen no movement on that issue since late December,
and the list continues to grow. Only a few weeks ago,
we heard that the medical evacuation list contained
600 names, including hundreds of children. That list
has now grown to at least 750 people, according to the
United Nations staff on the ground.
Over the weekend, the United Nations reported
that another critically ill person on Ghouta’s medical
evacuation list died due to the lack of medical
treatment. Such deaths are senseless and reflect the
Syrian regime’s depraved disregard for human life.
Such gratuitous cruelty suggests that the regime’s
siege of eastern Ghouta is directed not at the armed
opposition but against the civilian population. We need
not remind the members of the Council that a siege
directed against civilians is a violation of international
humanitarian law.
We also appreciate the fact that Sweden and Kuwait
worked on a draft presidential statement to address
such dire humanitarian challenges. The overwhelming
majority of Council members agree that we must
be clear in demanding that the Syrian authorities
allow immediate medical evacuations and cross-line
assistance. When there are hundreds of thousands of
Syrians besieged by the regime and starving due to the
8/10

30/01/2018

regime’s actions, such demands are the very least that
the Council can make.
We would also like to take a moment to thank the
Government of Jordan for facilitating an extraordinary
delivery of humanitarian assistance in mid-January
to the internally displaced populations stranded at
Rukban. That population now has food and relief items
for one month. However, we continue to wait for the
Syrian regime’s formal approval for the United Nations
to begin cross-line aid deliveries to that vulnerable
population from Damascus. The United Nations
submitted its proposal in mid-November and has still
receievd no response. All arrangements have been
made for the deliveries to begin as soon as possible.
The Syrian regime has only to grant its approval and to
stand out of the way for life-saving assistance to reach
those in need.
As we heard earlier today, members of the Security
Council visited the United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum in Washington, D.C., yesterday and saw the
exhibition about the Syrian regime’s arbitrary detention
and torture of more than 100,000 civilians. The name of
the exhibition is “Please Don’t Forget Us”. We should
bear that, and what the Syrian regime is capable of
doing, in mind as we discuss yet again what is taking
place in easter Ghouta and elsewhere in Syria.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for her briefing.
Bolivia regrets the crisis in Syria, which, after all
these years, has caused so much destruction and the
loss of so many lives. Ms. Mueller told us that, since
the beginning of the conflict, more than 500,000 people
have died; currently, there are 13.1 million people who
need humanitarian assistance, 2.9 million of whom are
trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas; and at
least 6.1 million people have been internally displaced.
We believe that the most recent events have resulted
in an increase in the number of dead, of people who need
humanitarian assistance and of internally displaced
persons. We call for the cleaning and demining of and
access for basic humanitarian assistance to the city of
Raqqa to take place as soon as possible to allow for the
safe and dignified return of those families who were
displaced due to the conflict. We regret that, since the
month of October 2017, approximately 220 people have
died and others have been injured in blasts.
18-02496

30/01/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The recent events in Syria show once again the
urgent need to revitalize the Geneva political process,
reinforcing the tangible results of the Astana meeting,
in consultation, of course, with all the parties involved,
including the opposition, in order to facilitate the
development of mutual confidence-building measures
and, as a result, the improvement of the political and
humanitarian situation. We are certain that this will
also allow for the release of detainees and hostages
and the search for the disappeared, as well as for the
establishment of conditions for a political process and a
sustained and lasting ceasefire.
We express our support for the efforts made recently
in Vienna and for the work to take place in Sochi. We
welcome the decision of the Secretary-General to allow
his representative to participate in those events.
We once again remind the parties to the conflict that
they must allow unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance, ensuring and safeguarding the security
and physical integrity of humanitarian workers, in
particular in the besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
In that regard, we reiterate once again our highest
recognition for the work being done by the staff of the
various humanitarian assistance agencies and bodies on
the ground, and we urge the parties involved to meet
their obligations under international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
We remind the parties involved that they must
implement the Astana agreements, respect the
de-escalation areas and prevent any attacks on civilian
institutions, such as residential areas, schools and
hospitals, in line with international humanitarian law,
to ensure the protection of civilians and unimpeded
access for accredited humanitarian organizations
to provide the greatly needed assistance. In that
regard, we underscore the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which has
reached 800,000 people through cross-border convoys.
We hope that those operations can continue, for which
better coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic are recommended.
In that context, we underscore the agreements arrived
at among Iran, Russia, and Turkey on 22 December
2017, and we urgently call for strengthening them so as
to free detainees and abductees, as well as to positively
identify missing persons. We stress the importance of

S/PV. 8171

the work of the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of
Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
has become a guarantor of security and the distribution
of humanitarian aid, while ensuring the evacuation of
persons from areas facing armed conflict.
Lastly, it is important to point out that the
humanitarian situation, which is affecting more
than 13.2 million people in Syria, must be resolved
exclusively through an organized, inclusive and
political process based on dialogue and led for and by
the Syrian people, which would allow for a peaceful
solution respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of Syria. We call on members of the
Security Council to make every effort to ensure that
it remain unified on such an issue as fundamental as
humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for her detailed briefing.
The humanitarian landscape in Syria that
she described to us this morning is, once again,
disheartening. Over the past several years, the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General and Security Council
meetings on this issue have repeatedly related victim
fatalities, the renewal of the large-scale displacement
of refugees, besieged cities, an increasing spread of
diseases, a high level of malnutrition, the destruction
of medical infrastructure and other scourges. Given
such a situation, the only remedy left is to ensure the
immediate, safe and unrestricted access of humanitarian
assistance and strict compliance under international
humanitarian law, in particular respect for the principle
of proportionality as related to conducting military
attacks and taking the appropriate precautions with
regard to their impact on the civilian population.
We therefore regret the persistent restrictions
placed on access to humanitarian aid in various areas
of Syria, in particular the tragic and untenable situation
facing the people of eastern Ghouta and Idlib. We hope
that the ceasefire agreement in eastern Ghouta, recently
deliberated in Vienna, will have a positive secondary
effect in addressing the pressing humanitarian needs
of its people. We appreciate the work of the Syrian
authorities and Russia that resulted in the medical
evacuation of 29 people from eastern Ghouta in
December 2017. At the same time, we encourage them

18-024969/10

S/PV.8171

The situation in the Middle East

to intensify such efforts as there are hundreds of other
people who are in need of urgent care.
Another issue that deeply concerns us pertains
to demining and, in general, to the deactivation of
explosive ordnance, in the light of what is happening
daily in cities, such as Raqqa in which 30 to 50 victims,
who fall prey to such ordnance, are recorded weekly.
We see as positive the dialogue aimed at humanitarian
goals between the United Nations and the Government
of Syria, especially the visit to the country by UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark
Lowcock. That dialogue and the joint statement on
humanitarian mine action issued following the latest
Astana meeting positively herald that more substantial
progress could be made in that area. Concerning
military operations in densely populated areas, such
as Afrin, we call for preventing any escalation that
could further exacerbate the suffering of the people
and hinder achieving a political solution pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
It is absolutely necessary that the Council show the
world its unity and sense of commitment, and send a
message that prioritizes human beings over political
interests. We therefore hope that a consensus can be
reached on the adoption of a text that reflects the five
priorities outlined by Mr. Lowcock, which constitute
the bare minimum for alleviating the human suffering
of the Syrian people, and that is why Peru fully
supports them.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): In taking the floor at this meeting on the
humanitarian situation of Syrian Arab Republic, I
should like to begin by sincerely thanking Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
for her detailed briefing on the very unfortunate

10/10

30/01/2018

humanitarian situation that Syria is currently
undergoing. Moreover, we listened to Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock’s briefing on 22 January following
his visit to Syria, in which he pointed out for us five
areas where improvement is needed in order to address
the serious humanitarian situation, including the
imperative to address the needs of some 13 million
people in Syria, to facilitate medical evacuations and
freedom of movement across borders, and to adopt
measures so that the United Nations and international
non-governmental organizations can provide effective
assistance to the Syrian people.
Both Ms. Mueller and Mr. Lowcock’s briefings
afford us a very desolate overview that must focus the
attention of the international community on making
every effort necessary to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people. The specific situation in eastern Ghouta,
in which almost 94 per cent of the people are trapped, is
a particularly a worrisome issue. The situation of more
than 600 people in need of urgent medical care has been,
and is being, exacerbated by air-strike campaigns that
have led to the displacement of those in Idlib and Hama.
In addition to all this, we also point to the
catastrophic humanitarian situation resulting from the
ongoingOperation Olive Branch, which is leading to
the substantial displacement and suffering of civilians.
On the one hand, that can only elicit our deep concern,
and, on the other hand, we must call for redoubling
the efforts of the United Nations and the international
community to find a solution to the very serious
humanitarian crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

18-02496
