S/PRST/2009/27

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 October 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6207th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 October 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace
consolidation in West Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council remains deeply concerned by the situation in
Guinea which might pose a risk to regional peace and security following the
killings that occurred in Conakry on 28 September, when members of the army
opened fire on civilians attending a rally. It strongly condemns the violence
that reportedly caused more than 150 deaths and hundreds of wounded and
other blatant violations of human rights including numerous rapes and sexual
crimes against women, as well as the arbitrary arrest of peaceful demonstrators
and opposition party leaders.
“The Security Council reiterates the need for the national authorities to
fight against impunity, bring the perpetrators to justice, uphold the rule of law,
including the respect for basic human rights and release all the individuals who
are being denied due process under the law.
“The Security Council welcomes the public statements by the
International Contact Group, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union, in particular the communiqué of the
African Union Peace and Security Council meeting dated 15 October 2009 and
the communiqué of the ECOWAS Summit held on 17 October 2009. It
welcomes the mediation undertaken by President Blaise Compaore of Burkina
Faso, including his efforts to create a more conducive and secure environment
in Guinea, and calls upon the international community to support his action.
“The Security Council welcomes the ECOWAS Summit’s statement
supporting the Secretary-General’s decision to establish an international
commission of inquiry to investigate the events of 28 September, in order to
ascertain the facts that took place, to identify the perpetrators with a view to
ensuring that those responsible for violations are held accountable and to make
recommendations to him. The Security Council takes note that the authorities
of Guinea have officially committed to support the work of the international
commission of inquiry in secure conditions.
“The Security Council welcomes further the ECOWAS Summit’s
statement stressing the importance of the establishment of a new transitional

09-58121 (E) 281009

*0958121*

S/PRST/2009/27

authority that would ensure credible, free and fair elections, of ensuring that
the Chairman and members of the National Council for Democracy and
Development (CNDD), the Prime Minister and those who hold high office in
the new transitional authority will not be candidates in the forthcoming
presidential elections and of setting up benchmarks in the transition timetable.
The Security Council calls for the elections to be organized as scheduled in
2010.
“The Security Council further recalls in this context its resolution 1888
(2009), in which it urged the Secretary General, Member States and the heads
of regional organizations to take measures to increase the representation of
women in mediation processes and decision-making processes with regard to
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
“The Security Council takes note of the decisions by the African Union
Peace and Security Council on 17 September and 15 October regarding the
imposition of targeted sanctions against the President of the CNDD and other
individuals. It also takes note of the decision of ECOWAS to impose an arms
embargo on Guinea. It takes note further that the African Union Peace and
Security Council will meet at the level of Head of States on 29 October.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to follow the situation
closely. It requests the Secretary-General to update it as appropriate on the
situation on the ground, the potential implications for the subregion, the
international investigation of the killings of the 28 September 2009 and the
measures taken by ECOWAS and by the African Union.”

2

09-58121
