S/2018/807

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 August 2018
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2380 (2017)

Report of the Secretary-General
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 15 of Security Council
resolution 2380 (2017), in which the Council requested me to report on the
implementation of the resolution, in particular with regard to the implementation of
its paragraph 7.
2.
The report covers developments since my previous report of 7 September 2017
(S/2017/761) until 31 August 2018. The information and observations herein are
based on submissions by Member States, regional arrangements and the United
Nations system.

II. Smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons in the
Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Libya
3.
Since the issuance of my previous report, men, women and children have
continued to die and go missing at sea on their way to Europe. As at 27 August,
1,530 deaths had been recorded in the Mediterranean Sea in 2018. Of those, 1,103
individuals perished along the so-called “central Mediterranean route”. Close to
67,100 arrivals to Europe by sea had been recorded in 2018 as at 27 August. In 2017,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) recorded more than 119,300 arrivals
in Italy by sea, 91 per cent of whom had departed from Libya. UNHCR noted that in
the first eight months of 2018, sea arrivals to Italy had dropped by more than 80 per
cent but the rate of casualties had increased: 1 death for every 19 arrivals was
recorded, compared with 1 death for every 41 crossed the central Mediterranean Sea
during the corresponding period in 2017.
4.
The European Union military operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean
(EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA) estimates that, from October 2017 to 31 July
2018, roughly 29,785 persons were rescued by various vessels in the central
Mediterranean Sea, a substantial reduction from the previous reporting period. Of
those, 4,665 were rescued by the operation. According to the operation, vessels
operated by international non-governmental organizations still conduct search and
rescue operations in the high seas off the coast of western Libya, but in reduced

18-14065 (E)

050918

*1814065*

S/2018/807

numbers in contrast to previous reporting periods. However, rescues by
non-governmental organizations still accounted for 34 per cent of all persons saved
and taken to Italy in the first six months of 2018.
5.
According to the International Maritime Organization (IMO), large -scale
migration by sea presents a range of challenges to the maritime sector and seafarers.
More than 80 per cent of global trade moves by sea, so that any disruption to the
maritime part of the supply chain constitutes a risk to national and regional
economies. Despite the welcome increase in Government-funded resources, and the
continued activity of vessels from non-governmental organizations, the number of
merchant ships involved in rescue operations has remained relatively constant since
2015. In 2017, a total of 416 merchant ships were diverted; of those, 119 were
involved in the rescue of 11,350 people and the average number of persons rescued
by each merchant ship was 95. In the first six months of 2018, merchant ships rescued
1,329 people. Merchant seafarers continue to bravely perform their duties of rescue,
although the presence of untrained and distressed persons on board presents risks to
both the seafarers and those they rescue.
6.
EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA reported an increase in the use of wooden
boats by migrant smugglers during the reporting period. As at 1 August, IOM and
UNHCR noted that close to 12,945 persons had been rescued or intercepted by the
Libyan coastguard, coastal security and fishermen in the first eight months of 2018.
Notwithstanding capacity-building efforts on the ground, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) documented the use of firearms, physical
violence and threatening language by the Libyan coastguar d during search and rescue
operations in Libyan and international waters. Conditions also remain inadequate to
receive and respond to the needs of large numbers of those disembarked in line with
international human rights protection standards. At present, people who are
disembarked in Libya are automatically detained without due process and face serious
human rights violations. As the numbers of disembarked persons in detention in Libya
continue to mount, the pressure on those facilities has increased while conditions have
deteriorated. The Panel of Experts established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1973 (2011) has previously reported on the involvement of armed groups and criminal
networks in migrant smuggling in Libya, and its next report on the subject will be
transmitted to the Council no later than 15 September 2018. Mali is another country
where armed groups are involved with and benefit financially from the smuggling of
migrants. The final report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2374 (2017) on Mali (see S/2018/581) details the Panel’s findings
on that issue.
7.
According to data from Eurostat for persons arriving in Italy in 2017 from the
seven most common origin countries in West Africa (Nigeria, Guinea, Côte d ’Ivoire,
Mali, Senegal, the Gambia and Ghana), the granting of some form of protection in
European Union member States averaged 25 per cent, and among those arriving from
Eritrea, Somalia and the Sudan the average was 74 per cent. The routes and the
composition of arriving groups remain in flux and include persons in vulnerable
situations, and also include high numbers of survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence and victims of trafficking. The majority of children arrive unaccompanied.
8.
States have taken measures to counter smuggling and trafficking off the coast
of Libya and to strengthen search and rescue efforts in the Mediterranean Sea. The
measures include the strengthening of border control agencies and border
management through capacity-building and training, along with the targeted
deployment of naval assets and operations in the Mediterranean Sea and targeted
sanctions against six traffickers in Libya. However, it remains difficult to ascertain
the combined impact of those measures.
2/12

18-14065

S/2018/807

III. Inspection and seizure of vessels off the coast of Libya and
related efforts
9.
Within the framework of its Common Security and Defence Policy, the
European Union carries out the naval operation EUNAVFOR MED operation
SOPHIA in the central part of the southern Mediterranean Sea to identify, capture and
dispose of vessels and assets used by migrant smugglers. The operation reports that
it has disposed of 551 vessels used by suspected smugglers since the beginning of its
operations. As of 2018, all European Union member States except Denmark, which
has opted out of all cooperation with the Common Security and Defence Policy by
default, contribute to the operation by providing naval units, air assets and personnel.
10. The European Union has entrusted the operation, which runs until 31 December
2018, with additional tasks: to set up a monitoring mechani sm of trainees to ensure
the long-term efficiency of the Libyan coastguard training; to enhance the
possibilities for sharing information on trafficking in persons with European Union
member States’ law enforcement agencies, Frontex and Europol; and to conduct new
surveillance activities and gather information on illicit exports of petroleum,
including crude oil and refined petroleum products, from Libya, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 2146 (2014) and 2362 (2017). Council resolution 2362
(2017) extended the measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of crude oil from
Libya to include refined petroleum products, the smuggling of which also facilitates
migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons.
11. Although the operation’s mandate does not comprise a search and rescue
operation, all of its assets are bound by international law to respond to incidents
pertaining to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea and have the
duty to disembark survivors and deliver them to a place of safety. The operation
reports that it complies with the principle of non-refoulement, as contained in the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, as well as international human rights
and humanitarian law. Therefore, no person rescued or apprehended by the operation
has been handed over to the authorities of non-European Union member States or
disembarked in non-European Union member States.
12. On 14 December 2017, Libyan authorities issued a communication to IMO
informing it that the Libyan Government of National Accord had declared the Tripoli
flight information region, which had been communicated to and approved by the
International Civil Aviation Organization, to be the “Libyan Search and Rescue
Region”. Moreover, the Region was publicized by IMO on the Global Integrated
Shipping Information System website in June 2018. The Italian c oastguard is leading,
within the framework of the European Union Emergency Trust Fund for stability and
addressing root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons in Africa, a
European Union project to assist the Libyan authorities in establishing a fully
operational Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre in order to efficiently coordinate
search and rescue operations within the Libyan Search and Rescue Region. The full
operational capability of the Libyan Centre is expected to be achieved by 2020.

IV. Support to Libya and related efforts to combat smuggling
and trafficking
13. EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA has helped to apprehend more than
151 suspected migrant smugglers and human traffickers since the beginning of its
operations. On 14 May 2018, the Council of the European Union adopted a decision
allowing for the establishment of a pilot crime information cell within the operation
to facilitate information-sharing among agencies that are part of the European
18-14065

3/12

S/2018/807

Union’s Justice and Home Affairs network, European Union member States, Frontex
and Europol on human smuggling and trafficking, the implementation of the United
Nations arms embargo on Libya and crimes relevant to the security of the operation
itself. The aim is to optimize the use of information collected in order to prevent,
investigate and prosecute crime.
14. On the margins of the fifth African Union-European Union Summit, held in
Abidjan on 29 and 30 November 2017, a joint African Union, European Union and
United Nations task force on migration was established to save and protect the lives
of migrants and refugees along migration routes, and in particular inside Libya, by
accelerating the assisted voluntary returns to countries of origin and the resettlement
of those in need of international protection. The task force has facilitated, with
support from the European Union, 26,000 voluntary humanitarian returns through
IOM, and 1,600 people in need of international protection have been evacuated from
detention through the UNHCR emergency transit mechanism in the Niger and to other
countries for other solutions, including resettlement.
15. On 29 May 2018, the European Commission announced new programmes and
projects worth €467 million under the Emergency Trust Fund for Africa in the Sahel/
Lake Chad region and the Horn of Africa to assist vulnerable migrants and refugees
and address the root causes of irregular migration. Funds were to be dedicated towards
improving employment opportunities, especially for youth. Some €10 million would
support accelerating resettlements under the UNHCR emergency transit mechanism
and €60 million would go to support voluntary return and reintegration assistance
provided by IOM.
16. The current mandate of the European Union Integrated Border Management
Assistance Mission in Libya runs until 31 December 2018. The Mission and
specialized agencies of the United Nations are now established in Tripoli and engage
in law enforcement, criminal justice and border management in support and at the
request of the Libyan Government of National Accord. The Mission, with support
from EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, is assisting in the drafting of a white
paper on border security and management reform in Libya, which is being led by the
Libyan authorities. A European Union maritime sub-working group on Libya will help
shape the objectives, needs and requirements of the Libyan coastguard and navy,
while the Libyan General Administration for Coastal Security is currently receiving
capacity-building support from the Mission.
17. Cooperation has also been enhanced between EUNAVFOR MED operation
SOPHIA and several European Union agencies, such as Frontex, Europol and
Eurojust, as well as international and regional organizations such as UNSMIL,
UNHCR, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), IOM, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Italian
National Anti-Mafia and Counter-Terrorism Prosecutor’s Office and the International
Criminal Court. Dedicated projects under the European Union Emergency Trust Fund
for Africa focus on providing support to both civilian and military coastguards of
Libya in several areas of border management. The whole package is managed b y a
steering committee tasked with managing a programme of support to integrated
border and migration management in Libya. The programme, which is led by the
European Commission and the Italian Ministry of Interior, aims to find synergies
through various European Union actors and member States and to coordinate all
efforts by European Union and national institutions involved in capacity -building
efforts in alignment with Security Council resolution 2380 (2017).
18. The prosecution of smugglers and traffickers is ensured by the Italian judicial
authority ashore, once rescue operations have been completed and following the
4/12

18-14065

S/2018/807

return to a port of safety. To consolidate that process further, EUNAVFOR MED
operation SOPHIA and the Italian Anti-Mafia and Counter-Terrorism Prosecutor’s
Office have set up the first European Observatory on migrant smuggling and human
trafficking. The project is aimed at sharing data and information in order to achieve a
deeper understanding of the smugglers’ business model through a joint analysis of
documents provided by military intelligence and judicial authorities. The Observatory
has made it possible to match information collected within the operation with more
than 600 records collected by Italian prosecutors. The initial analysis of data up to
30 September 2017 concerning 28 suspected smugglers/traffickers apprehended by
the operation showed that 13 smugglers/traffickers were convicted and sentenced to
between 3 and 10 years in prison and fined a total of €24 million; 6 were brought to
trial; 1 case, in which the smuggler/trafficker was under the age of 18, was transferred
to the Italian Public Prosecutor’s Office at a court for minors in Catania, Italy; 3 were
discharged after their cases were dismissed; 1 was acquitted; and 4 were not entered
in the register of suspects. For the remaining smugglers/traffickers apprehended by
operation, information from the relevant competent prosecutors ’ offices was not
released owing to ongoing investigations.
19. EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA supports Libyan capacity-building
through training and monitoring to better tackle migrant smugglers and human
traffickers, and other criminal activities. The capacity of the Libyan coastguard and
navy is being strengthened through training coordinated and delivered by the
operation with the support of Greece, Italy, Malta and Spain, as well as the European
Union, UNHCR, IOM, UNSMIL and non-governmental organizations. The training
is focused on coastguard and law enforcement functions, and includes dedicated
modules on human and refugee rights and gender awareness. Since the beginning of
training at the end of 2016, the operation has trained 237 personnel.
20. The operation reports that it undertakes a vetting process of the Libyan trainees
with European Union member States and law enforcement agencies, and monitors
training provided to the Libyan coastguard and navy. The vetting process has been
agreed with the Libyan coastguard and navy, and is conducted with the cooperation
of Europol, the INTERPOL National Central Bureau in Rome, the International
Criminal Court, Frontex and State security agencies. The vetting partners carry out a
cross-checking of the information and data provided by the Libyan side with t he
information available in their databases. The cross-checking ensures that the selected
candidates fulfil the criteria required to participate in the training, including the
absence of any criminal records or suspicions of support to violent extremist
organizations. Monitoring of the Libyan coastguard and Navy focuses on
understanding their ability to perform their assigned missions with professionalism.
Monitoring does not include the observation of migrants’ conditions ashore, which is
not within the operation’s mandate.
21. According to EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, the Libyan coastguard and
navy have increasingly taken an active role in fighting illicit activities and saving
lives at sea as a result of the training and additional equipment provided b y the
European Union and the bilateral efforts of some States, in particular Italy, which
provided four patrol boats and maintenance support by the Italian Navy.
22. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) supported the development of
training materials for operation staff. On some ships containing migrants intercepted
at sea, UNICEF partners provided children with information, psychosocial support
and health and hygiene care. UNICEF recommends providing training on the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to border officials, police and military forces
who are in contact with migrant women and children.

18-14065

5/12

S/2018/807

23. UNSMIL continues to monitor human rights violations, including against
migrants and refugees in Libya, and raises its concerns with relevant Libya n
authorities, including the Libyan coastguard and navy and the Libyan Directorate for
Combating Illegal Migration. UNSMIL continues to strongly advocate for an end to
human rights violations, the dismantling of criminal networks and the pursuit of
accountability for all violations and crimes. The United Nations continued its efforts
towards the implementation of the human rights due diligence policy with a view to
mitigating the identified risks of grave violations of international humanitarian law,
human rights law or refugee law being committed by recipients of United Nations
support. To that end, the United Nations system in Libya has adopted risk assessments
and mitigating measures aimed at preventing human rights violations and increasing
its monitoring of compliance with international law and standards to strengthen
accountability for those responsible for violations.
24. UNHCR reports that there are 54,644 registered asylum seekers and refugees,
primarily from the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq and Eritr ea, living in Libya. Owing to
the limited access available to UNHCR, its ability to undertake actions to protect
refugees activities is restricted. UNHCR is working towards finding solutions outside
Libya for those who have international protection needs, and especially those who are
the most vulnerable, through resettlement. Requests for the resettlement of
482 refugees directly out of Libya have been submitted, 70 of whom have been
resettled to third countries. Some 1,536 refugees have been evacuated to t he UNHCR
evacuation transit mechanism in the Niger: 392 have been resettled to third countries
and 10 have been transferred to the emergency transit centre in Romania. In addition,
312 refugees were evacuated to Italy directly from Libya. UNHCR is also advocating
for humanitarian evacuations to additional countries. UNHCR, through community
development centres in Tripoli, registers asylum claims and provides documentation,
protection and humanitarian assistance to persons of concern.
25. UNHCR undertakes regular capacity-building activities with the Libyan
authorities on international refugee law. Together with IOM, a set of standard
operating procedures for the Libyan coastguard and navy has been developed to
respond to the needs of refugees and migrants upon disembarkation. UNHCR further
advocates for the establishment of a registration system by the Libyan authorities to
allow for the recording of the presence, including basic information, of those rescued
or intercepted by the Libyan coastguard and navy.
26. IOM is currently working closely with the Libyan ministries and other main
actors on two key components to counter trafficking in persons: the humanitarian
component aims at providing effective prevention and protection measures by
addressing the immediate and long-term humanitarian needs of victims of trafficking
and persons at risk and developing systematic and holistic measures through the
strengthening of humanitarian policy, programming and operational frameworks; the
development component aims to establish national mechanisms to address immediate
and long-term response needs through promoting the development of national legal
and policy frameworks, strengthening institutional capacities and structures and
mobilizing and empowering communities.
27. The Libya Humanitarian Response Plan for 2018 seeks $312.7 million to fund
its humanitarian and protection response. The Plan, which targets 940,000 people in
need across Libya, is only 22.3 per cent funded as of early August 2018.

6/12

18-14065

S/2018/807

V. International efforts to combat smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons
28. The United Nations cooperates with and supports the efforts of Member States
to counter the smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons. The General
Assembly has continued to provide policy guidance, in its annual resolutions on
oceans and the law of the sea, related to rescues at sea, the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons. The New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted
by the General Assembly on 19 September 2016, committed Member States to
developing a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration by 2018. The
global compact, which includes actions aimed at combating smuggling and
trafficking, will be adopted at an intergovernmental conference in Morocco on 10 and
11 December 2018.
29. The New York Declaration also invited UNHCR to engage with States and to
consult with all relevant stakeholders on the development of a global compact on
refugees. As requested by the General Assembly, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees submitted the proposed global compact on refugees
together with his annual report to the General Assembly in August 2018. The proposed
compact calls for a strengthening of international efforts to prevent and combat
smuggling and trafficking in persons, and for support to be provided to refugee
hosting States with regard to identifying and referring victims of trafficking to
appropriate processes and procedures, including for the identification of international
protection needs and/or victim support.
30. In its resolution 2388 (2017), the Security Council condemned in the strongest
terms human trafficking in areas affected by armed conflict and reiterated the
connection between trafficking in persons, sexual violence and terrorism and other
organized criminal activities, which can prolong and exacerbate conflict and
instability or intensify its impact on civilian populations. It called upon Member
States to enhance the capabilities of professionals interacting with persons forcibly
displaced by armed conflict, including refugees, such as law enforcement, border
officials and the criminal justice system personnel of refugee and displaced persons
reception facilities, to identify victims or persons vulnerable to trafficking and to
adopt gender- and age-sensitive assistance policies, including adequate psychosocial
support and health services, regardless of their participation in criminal investigations
and proceedings.
31. On 7 June 2018, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya listed six individuals as subject to the assets
freeze and travel ban measures under the Libya sanctions regime. The six individuals
were listed under the sanctions designation criteria contained in Council resolutions
1970 (2011), 2174 (2014) and 2213 (2015). It marked the first time that migrant
smugglers and human traffickers had been placed on a Security Council sanctions list.
32. In its decision of 27 June 2018, on the security and migration situation in Africa,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union condemned human trafficking
and the smuggling of migrants, transnational organized criminal networks and their
accomplices. It requested the member States of the African Union t o consolidate
efforts and to increasingly coordinate and cooperate towards fostering and
strengthening existing mechanisms for better migration governance and management.
It further requested that the African Union Commission accelerate the establishment
of a regional operational centre in Khartoum for the sharing of information on human
trafficking and migrant smuggling, as well as the establishment and
operationalization of a continental study centre for migration, research and data in
Mali and an observatory for migration in Morocco, in order to provide a platform for
18-14065

7/12

S/2018/807

sharing data and information among member States on migration in the continent to
enhance the governance and management of migration.
33. UNODC has supported the strengthening of the transnational response to the
smuggling of migrants and maritime crime in East, North and West Africa. In 2018,
14 law enforcement officers and 8 prosecutors from the Libyan Directorate for
Combating Illegal Migration and the Libyan Public Prosecutor’s Office were trained
on identifying, investigating and prosecuting cases of trafficking and smuggling of
migrants, while ensuring assistance and protection to trafficking victims and
smuggled migrants. The training involved advanced techniques and the use of
forensic tools relevant to the Libyan context during investigations. UNODC is
partnering with the European Union, in the context of the European Union Emergency
Trust Fund for Africa, on a regional intervention that aims to effectively address the
dismantling of criminal networks involved in migrant smuggling and human
trafficking in Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia. The comprehensive intervention is
aimed at helping relevant law enforcement agencies and criminal justice practitioners
in the North African countries to adopt a qualitative enforcement approach that
focuses on dismantling criminal networks beyond low-level criminal operatives.
34. Ongoing monitoring in detention centres by UNSMIL has documented
continued human rights violations and abuses and a lack of protection and assistance
for migrants, including those who have suffered abuses at the hands of smugglers and
traffickers. Using its limited capacity, UNSMIL is attempting to conduct fact -finding
and human rights monitoring missions in Libya and to countries of origin and transit
along the main routes through Libya. One such visit was conducted in June 2018, and
a report based on interviews with migrants who have been returned from Libya, or
who have continued their journeys after having encountered var ious violations of
their human rights while in the country, is forthcoming.
35. OHCHR has developed training modules on human rights-compliant border
governance and is currently rolling out a series of capacity-building activities in
collaboration with border authorities in various regions. OHCHR conducts factfinding and human rights monitoring missions on an ongoing basis and produces
reports based on interviews with migrants. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has in various statements denounced the practice of mandatory
detention of migrants. On 8 September 2017, he stressed that returning people to
detention centres where they are held arbitrarily, and face torture, rape and other
serious human rights violations is a clear breach of the international law principle of
non-refoulement.
36. IMO maintains that the international legal framework for the rescue of persons
at sea is sound, but it did not envisage, nor was it designed for, large movements of
refugees and migrants by sea. Although IMO, UNHCR and the International Chamber
of Shipping have developed guidance on rescue and on large -scale rescue operations
at sea, IMO member States maintain that it is critical to manage the situation ashore
before migrants are subjected to danger at sea, and to address the root causes of unsafe
mixed migration by focusing on creating conditions for increased employment,
prosperity and stability by enhancing the maritime sector and sustainable blue
economy in developing countries.
37. At the operational level, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA hosted two
editions of the Shared Awareness and Deconfliction in the Mediterranean forum. The
most recent forum was held in Rome on 19 and 20 June 2018 and attended by 242
representatives from 37 countries and 127 organizations, including UNHCR,
UNODC, IOM, OHCHR and non-governmental organizations. The premise of the
forum is to enhance understanding and share best practices on a biannual basis among

8/12

18-14065

S/2018/807

stakeholders that are directly involved in the situation in the centr al Mediterranean
Sea, irregular migration or stabilizing the situation in Libya.

VI. Key issues
38. Throughout their journey, men, women and children are at high risk of human
rights abuses, including trafficking, extortion, arbitrary detention, tort ure, forced
labour and sexual abuse. While trafficking and smuggling are both prevalent in the
context of migration, they constitute two distinct phenomena. Migrants and refugees
may become trafficked during their journey, and the particular circumstances in Libya
(including the criminalization of irregular entry, stay and exit without distinction
between migrants, refugees and victims of trafficking, the use of automatic detention
of undocumented migrants and refugees and the lack of access to justice, ass istance
and legal pathways) render many of them vulnerable to human rights violations,
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse. The risks are equally acute on land as at sea
throughout the journey across Libya, but they also exist in other countries, as re fugees
and migrants transit to Libya and Europe.
39. According to IOM, the Libyan Directorate for Combating Irregular Migration
runs 52 detention centres, but not all are functional. An estimated 16 centres are
currently considered operational after the Directorate recently reported the closing of
25 detention centres, while several others are currently non-functioning or under
maintenance. Around 8,000 individuals are currently held in those centres, roughly
half of whom are from the seven nationalities that UNHCR is authorized by the
Libyan authorities to register as “persons of concern” in Libya. More than 680,000
non-nationals reside outside the context of detention. Directorate-run detention
centres do not operate in line with Libyan law or internatio nal standards. According
to UNHCR, conditions are substandard in terms of shelter, nutrition and sanitation
and subject to further deterioration as a result of severe overcrowding linked to an
increase in the number of people being intercepted, rescued and disembarked in
Libya. Torture and other ill-treatment, sexual and gender-based violence, forced
labour and exploitation by guards are frequently documented. Women are held
without female guards and unaccompanied children are held with adults. Meaningful
access by international organizations is ad hoc and often difficult to obtain.
40. UNSMIL continued to observe and report on conditions of detention in centres
in Tripoli and surrounding areas. Directorate-run detention centres for migrants in the
east and south of the country could not be visited by UNSMIL owing to the prevailing
security situation and access restrictions in those areas. Since April 2018, the required
administrative procedures for the approval of visits have also limited UNSMIL access
to detention centres in the west. IOM, UNHCR and other humanitarian actors
advocate for the closure of all detention centres and for finding alternatives to
detention, including safe shelters.
41. The work of UNHCR in Directorate-run detention centres consists of the
provision of medical assistance and humanitarian relief to detainees and advocacy for
release from detention. UNHCR is in the process of finalizing arrangements for a
transit and departure facility in Tripoli for people in need of international pro tection.
The facility was developed with the Ministry of Interior and aims to facilitate and
accelerate the process of transferring vulnerable refugees to third countries through
resettlement, family reunification or evacuation to UNHCR -run emergency facilities
in other countries, or to facilitate voluntary repatriation. The facility is likely to host
1,000 such individuals by the end of 2018.
42. Many refugees and migrants face exploitation, abduction, forced labour,
extortion, torture, other violence or death while in Libya. Some have reported being
18-14065

9/12

S/2018/807

held for ransom, or being forced into bonded labour shortly after arrival in Libya by
persons working with the smuggler who transported them across the desert. Torture
is reportedly commonly used as a means of extracting payment from those held for
ransom. Similarly, others have reported being kidnapped for ransom while in Libya
and subjected to torture. Refugees and migrants have also reported sexual violence
against women and girls, and sometimes men and boys, by armed persons holding
them against their will. In addition, women have been reported to be forced into
prostitution and men forced into labour. An unknown number of migrants are killed
or left to die in the desert on the way to their destination. UNSMI L documented cases
of migrants who were attacked while travelling inside Libya, including by rival
smugglers or unidentified armed groups.
43. The precarious situation of migrants and refugees in Libya is aggravated by the
prevailing armed conflict and general insecurity, while efforts towards national
reconciliation continue. The lack of effective control by central Government
institutions over large swathes of Libyan territory curtails the ability of the State to
restore the rule of law, enforce border control and pursue and dismantle criminal
networks involved in smuggling or trafficking. Criminal networks and armed groups
are in a position to exploit the security situation to secure revenues from illegal
business. The fragile state of law enforcement agencies makes Libyan institutions
vulnerable to corruption, with private individuals enriching themselves during
various stages of the migrant and refugee journeys, and in particular when migrants
and refugees are held in detention. In the light of the vo latile security situation in
general and the particular protection risks for non-nationals, including detention in
substandard conditions, and the documented abuses against asylum seekers, refugees
and migrants, OHCHR, UNHCR, and UNSMIL do not consider tha t Libya meets the
criteria for being designated as a place of safety for the purpose of disembarkation
following rescue at sea. They have urged all States to suspend forcible returns to
Libya, including Tripoli, until the security and human rights situatio n improves
considerably.
44. As noted in my previous report (S/2017/761), Libya is still not party to the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. It is, however, a signatory to the 1969
Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa. Despite that, it has yet to adopt asylum legislation or establish
asylum procedures. Libya is also a party to the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,
although it has not reported to the Committee on Migrant Workers since ratification,
and its initial report has been due since 2005. Under Libyan law, all irregular entry,
stay or departure is criminalized.
45. The Committee against Torture has stressed that State parties to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
should take all necessary legal, political and diplomatic measures to ensure that any
cooperation and/or support that they may provide under bilateral or regional
migration management agreements to Libya is consistent with the purposes of the
Convention and the absolute prohibition of torture, as well as with their obligations
under international human rights and refugee law.

VII. Observations
46. I would like to commend the efforts of the brave men and women engaged in
search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean Sea, including the personnel of
EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, national navies and coastguards, merchant
vessels and vessels of non-governmental organizations. I note with concern that

10/12

18-14065

S/2018/807

although the absolute number of arrivals in Europe has decreased, the relative number
of deaths in the central Mediterranean Sea has gone up in the past year. Durable
solutions will necessitate continued efforts to engage with Libyan authorities as well
as greater solidarity at the European and international level. I am concerned that the
space for refugee protection might be shrinking as human rights protection is eroding.
While recognizing that Member States have the right to manage their borders and the
right to define their own migration policies, I strongly appeal to them to do so in a
way that is sensitive to the protection of migrants and refugees and that fully respects
applicable international law and best practices. I appeal to all States in the
Mediterranean region and beyond to cooperate in that regard.
47. I recall the 2004 amendments to the International Convention for the Saf ety of
Life at Sea and the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue
pertaining to the duty to coordinate and cooperate in order to disembark survivors and
deliver them to a place of safety as soon as reasonably practicable. Refusals and
delays of disembarkation may pose serious risks to the physical and mental health of
refugees and migrants, and also to the rescuers. I call upon all States concerned to
facilitate the rapid disembarkation of rescued people in a place of genuine safety, and
to develop more predictable cooperative arrangements for doing so. In that regard I
note the joint IOM/UNHCR proposal for a regional cooperative arrangement ensuring
predictable disembarkation and subsequent processing of persons rescued at sea. All
search and rescue activities, whether conducted by the Libyan authorities or other
actors, should have as their primary objective the saving of lives and the protection
of the safety of people in distress. There is a need to enhance mechanisms for adequate
and swift identification and the referral of rescued people upon disembarkation to
ensure that all protection needs under international refugee and international human
rights law are individually and adequately assessed. Disembarkation arrangements
need to ensure that rescued refugees and migrants are taken to a place where they will
be protected against serious human rights violations, and where those in need of
international protection will have access to it.
48. While the number of arrivals in Europe has decreased, the humanitarian and
human rights situation of refugees and migrants in Libya remains dire. It stands to
deteriorate further as an increasing number of people are held in detention, owing to
a greater number of interceptions at sea and the growing clos ure of the Mediterranean
Sea for migrant departures. I am concerned by the long-term psychological and
physical injuries inflicted on refugees and migrants subjected to harsh conditions and
ill-treatment. Children should never be detained for immigration p urposes, and no
one should be arbitrarily detained. Immigration detention should be a measure of last
resort. Given the practice of automatic detention of migrants, asylum seekers and
refugees after disembarkation, focus must also be placed on creating alt ernatives to
detention, as well as addressing the conditions in detention, which have been
documented as extremely difficult and must be significantly improved. A system of
registration, in accordance with recognized international principles and standards, to
account for the whereabouts of detained individuals must be put into place as a matter
of priority. At the same time, procedures should be developed that allow the detained
a right to a fair trial and access to justice.
49. I am deeply concerned about reports from UNHCR that many of those who
arrive by sea have experienced sexual and gender-based violence during their
journeys, including while in detention. Furthermore, the number of women and girls,
especially those who originated from Nigeria and other sub-Saharan countries, who
may be victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation increased significantly in 2016
and 2017. Guidelines for the identification and referral of victims and potential
victims of trafficking have been jointly developed by UNHC R and the Italian
authorities on asylum procedures. Human trafficking is a vile crime that feeds on
18-14065

11/12

S/2018/807

inequality, instability and conflict. The United Nations is committed to advancing
action to bring traffickers to justice while protecting and supporting th eir victims, and
to preventing sexual and gender-based violence in all its forms.
50. Support to Libya with regard to combating the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons is welcome and needs to ensure respect for human rights. All
actors, including the Libyan coastguard and navy, should comply with human rights
obligations, including in interactions with persons in need of assistance at sea and
cooperation with other vessels engaged in rescue operations. In that regard, I would
like to reiterate that States should refrain from handing over individuals in their
custody or control to State or non-State actors whenever such transfer entails a known
risk that the individual will likely be subjected to human rights violations by those
actors. States should refrain from returning to Libya any third-country nationals
intercepted at sea and should ensure that those in need of international protection are
able to access fair and effective asylum procedures under international human rights
law upon disembarkation. Likewise, States should not — through their search and
rescue coordination efforts, their provision of material support or otherwise —
contribute to bringing about a course of events by which individuals are transferred
to places where they face risks of torture, ill-treatment or other serious human rights
violations or are denied access to international protection if needed. Protection and
human rights monitoring mechanisms for refugees and migrants need to be further
reinforced.
51. The United Nations system, through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and a focus on prevention, is contributing to addressing
root causes that compel people to move on a large scale. A global compact on refugees
and a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration, to be adopted in 2018,
are the result of broad support among Member States on the importance of finding
human rights-based and gender-responsive sustainable solutions to the challenges
posed by human movements and of reaping the benefits of those solutions. Some of
the objectives of the compacts are to strengthen international cooperation against
smugglers and human traffickers, to prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in
persons in the context of international migration and to protect the victims. I therefore
appeal to all Member States and regional organizations to continue their cooperation
in pursuit of those efforts.

12/12

18-14065
