UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWELFTH

767

YEAR

th MEETING: 8 FEBRUARY 1957
~me SEANCE: 8 FEVRIER 1957

DOUZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/767).

.

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

.

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •

1

The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January 1957 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan addressed to the
President of the .Security Council (S/3767, S/3779) (continued)

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/767)

.

1

Remerciements au Pr~sident sortant

.

1

Adoption de l' ordre du jour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question Inde-Pakista.11: lettre, en date du 2 janvier 1957, adress~e
au Pr~sidentdu Conseil de s~curit~ par le Ministre des affaires
~trang~res du Pakistan (S/3767, S/3779) [suite]
.

. 1

( 70 p, )
S/PV.767

President:

!

Present: Th
tries: Austral
Philippines,
publics, Unite
Ireland, Unite

.'

Pro

Relevant documents not reproduced in full hi the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

1. Adoption {

2. The India
'I

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

~

i
I
}

*

*

1957 frot
Pakistan ~
Council.
ExpreSl
1. The PRE~

*

'I

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des s~ances du Conseilde s~curit~ sont publi~s dans des suppl~­
ments trimestriels aux Documents officiels.

f

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
signifie qU'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

!
!
\
;.

~

,~

should like to
R6mulo of thE
he conducted
His very hig
perience in
eminently qu:
qUished.
The agenda
The India-Pc
1957 from
klstan add
Council (5/
At the invit
Menon. repr
Noon, repre
~ouncil table

"

.'
~'

ti

j

2. The PRE
has asked to
tive of India.
3. Mr. Kris
a member of
I am the firs
to speak herE
I wish to te
esteem of m'

4. I should ~
our tribute b
R6mulo, a g
valued repre

~

~ ~-~._~

..

-~-,~_.~~-~-

~-

.- --

SEVEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY -SEVENTH MEETING
Held In New York, on Friday, 8 February 1957, at 3 p.m.
SEPT CENT SOIXANTE-SEPTIEME SEANCE
Tenue ci New-York, le vendredi 8 fevrlei' 1957, ci 15 heures.

..
'

",

't

,l

.~
;

President: Mr. Gunnar JARRING (Sweden).

President: M. Gunnar JARRING (SuMe).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, China, Colombia Cuba, France, Iraq,
philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak,
Phillippines, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Provisional agenda (S/AgendaI767)

Ordre du jour provisolre (S/AgendaI767)

L Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January
1957 from the Minister for Foreign Aifairs of
Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
CounCil.
Expression of thanks to retiring President

2. Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 janvier 1957, adressee au President du Conseil de
securite par le Ministre des affaires etrang~res
du Pakistan.
Remerclements au President sortant

1. The PRESIDENT: In taking over the Presidency, I
should like to pay tribute to the retiring President, Mr.
R6mulo of the Philippines, for the able manner in which
he conducted our meetings during the month of January.
His very high qualities in diplomacy and his long experience in United Nations affairs have made him
eminently qualified for the post that he has just relinquished.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January
1957 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/3767, S/3779) (continued)

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): En prenant
la pr~sidence, je voudrais rendre hommage:\ monpr~­
decesseur, M. R6mulo, representant des Pliilippines,
pour la maftrise avec laquelle il a dirige nos travaux
pendant le mois fe janvier. Ses hautes qualites de
diplomate et sa longue experience des affaires des
Nations Unies le qualifiaient tout particulierement
pou!' le poste qu'il vient de quitter.
Adoption de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.
Question Inde-Paklstar.: lettre, en date du 2 janvier
1957, adressee au President du Conseil de securlte
par le Mlnlstre des affaires et:-angeres du Pakistan
(S/3767, S/3779) [SUite]

At the invitation of the President, Mr. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representative of India, and Mr. Firoz Khan
Noon, representative of Pakistan, took places at the
~ouncil table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representant de l'Inde, et M. Firoz Khan Noon,
representant du Pakistan, prennent place a la table du
Conseil.

2. The PRESIDENT: Since no member of the Council
has asked to speak, I give the floor to the representative of India.
3. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): Altl~ough India is not
a member of the Security Council, nevertheless, since
I am the first representative other than the President
to speak here since his assumption of that high office,
I Wish to tender to him the congratulations and the
esteem of my delegation and my country.

2. Le PRESIDENT (traduitdel'anglais): Aucunmembre du Conseil n'ayant demande a intervenir, je donne
la parole au representant de l'Inde.
3. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'anglais]:
L'Inde n'est pas membre du Conseil de securite,
mais, puisque je suis le premier representant apres
le President a prendre la parole depuis son entree
en fonctions, je tiens a lui exprimer les felicitations
de ma delegation et de mon pays, ainsi que notre
estime.
4. J'aimerais egalement saisir cette occasion pour
rendre hommage a notre distingue collegue M. Carlos
R6mulo, grande personnalite d' Asie qui siege depuis
longtemps a l'Organisation des Nations Unies et qui
a toute notre confiance et toute n'. 'Te estime.

4. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our tribute to our distinguished colleague, Mr. Carlos
R6mulo, a great Asian and a very old and trusted and
valued representative here at the United Nations.
1

~

---'~-----'-'-'-"'-~_c",----· .. ~~,
._.. _

-... __ -=...

".~_,

··<r:-·-., ..
- .

P
.

5. Before I address myself to the tasks which are
before me this afternoon, I should like to ask the indulgence of the Council if I refer to a matter which, although not directly connected with the subject of Kashmir, arises from the proceedings last Thursday. 24
January, before this Council. On that occasion, the
representative of the United Kingdom, in expressing
his gratification with regard to the relations between
his country and Pakistan and India, said:

5. Avant d'entrer dans le vif du sujet que je vais
traiter cet apres-midi, je voudrais, avec la permission du Conseil, soulever une question qui, bien que
ne se rapportant pas directement au probleme du
Cachemire, concerne la seance du jeudi 24 janvier.
Ce jour-la, le representant du Royaume- Dni exprimant sa satisfaction au sujet des relations entre son
pays et le Pakistan et l'Inde, a declare:

"Only the voice of envy would, I think, deny that the
Englishmen, the Scots, the Welsh and the Irish-for,
on a small scuc, we too have our diversity-all those
who served the Crown in the old imperialIndia and in
the transitional period came to feel a deep devotion
to the peoples among whom they passed their
lives ... " [765th meeting, para. 5.]

"Si ce n'est la voix de l'envie, qui pourrait COntester le profond attachement qu' eprouvent, pour les
peuples au milieu desquels ils ont vecu et auxquels
ils ont donne le meilleur d' eux-mem(;s, tous les
Anglais, les Ecossais, les Gallois et les Irlandais
- car, sur une petite echelle, nous aussi avons notre
diversite - qui ont servi la CourDnne dans l'ancienne Inde imperiale et pendant la periode transitoire." [765eme seance, par. 5.]
6. Je suis en complet accord avec ceUe declaration,
mais j'ai tenu a la citeI' aujourd'hui parce que. dans
l' exemplaire mimeographie du compte rendu stenographique que j'ai sous les yeux, on lit "la voix de
l'Inde" au lieu de "la voix de l'envie". Je n'ignore
pas que mon collegue du Royaume-Uni et son puissant
empire savent prendre soin de leurs affaires. Neanmoins, puisque ces mots ont ete telegraphies en tous
les points du globe, puisque le monde est deja aux
prises avec tant d'amertume et de difficultes, et
puisque cette question particuliere, en raison de la
virulence des opinions exprimees dans la presse
britannique, suscitera une fois de plus d'inutiles reactions en Inde, je voudrais saisir ceUe occasion - si
mon collegue du Royaume- Uni me le permet, car ce
serait plut6t a lui de le faire - pour dire que la version exacte, celle que la plupart des delegations ont
entendue, bien que d'autres aient entendu le contraire,
etait "la voix de l' envie". J' espere que cette rectification sera diffusee aussi largement que les mots
malheureux qui figurent dans le compte rendu mimeographie.
7. Cet apres-midi, pour faciliter la tache du Conseil,
j'aimerais esquisser dans ses grandes lignes lathese
qCle mon gouvernement a 1'intention de soutenir.
D'autre part, le Conseil se montrera peut-etre plus
patient - non P'l.S qu'il ne l'ait pas ete jusqu'ici - si
je dis tout de suite que j'entends terminer mon intervention cet apres-midi.

6. Not only do I agree with this statement, but I wish
to refer to it now because, in the copy of the verbatim
record which I have before me, the reference is to the
t'voice of India" rather than the "voice of envy". I am
quite aware of the fact that my colleague from the
United Kingdom a..lld his mighty empire can take care of
themselves. Nevertheless, since these words have been
telegraphed all over the world, since there is so much
bitterness and difficulty in the world as it is, and since
this particular issue, in view of the virulent expressions of opinion in the British press, will create further
and unnecessary reactions in India, as it has already
done, I should like to take this opportunity, if my colleague from the United Kingdom does not mind, since
it is really his prerogative, to say that the correct
version, and the version that most delegations heardalthough some people heard it the other way-was "the
voice of envy". I say this because I hope that this correction will go around the world in the same way in
which the unfortunate other phrase did.

7. This afternoon, for the convenience of the Security
Council, I should like to outline roughly what my Government intends to submit. And in order that the Security Council may be in a more patient mood-not that
it was otherwise before-I should like to say at once
that we hope and intend that this particular intervention
of ours will be concluded this aftemoon.

:.;

8. Je me propose de repondre brievement a quelques-unes des declarations de mon collegue le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan. Je n'essaierai pas de repondre a son discours paragraphe
par paragraphe ou ligne par ligne, car ce serait un
processus laborieux et fastidieux, qui gaspillerait le
temps du Conseil. J'ajoute qu'il n'entre pas dans mes
intentions, ni dans celles du Gouvernement indien,
de repondre aux allusions desobligeantes et insinuations personnelles que l'on trouve dans ce discours,
car cela ne presenterait aucun interet pour les Etats
Membres ici representes; au surplus, nous sommes
voisins, et il faut bien nous resigner. Je me propose
par consequent de m' en tenir au sujet qui nous occupe
et de ne corriger 1'impression qu'ont pu laisser certaines citations relatives aux conditions qui regneraient dans l'Inde que pour autant qu' eHes se rapportent a l' examen du probleme du Cachemire, notamment en ce qui concerne la discrimination.

8. It is my intention within a brief compass to answer
some of the statements made by my distinguished colleague the Foreign Minister of Pakistan. In doing so I
shall not attempt to answer his statement paragraph by
paragraph or line by line because that would be a very
laborious and tiresome process and it would take the
time of the Council unnecessarily. I also want to S2.y
that it is not my intention, nor the desire of the Government of India, to refer to the personal aspersions and
insinuations in that speech because that would be of no
interest to the Member States here and, since we are
neighbours, I suppose we can take it. I therefore only
propose to deal with those aspects of the matter which
are directly related to this problem and it is only where
the alleged conditions in India are cited as being relevant to the consideration of Kashmir in regard to discrimination and so forth that I propose to correct the
impressions that have been created.
2

.

9. I said la
in the Forei
their proper
or section
majority of
purpose of t
try to make

li

10. The fir
and contenti
in relation t
by accessio
Britain as t
of internati
India. It is t
sometimes
contention i
us by force
this is not
remain unc
eration of th
our two co

i

.~

,.
I~

-i!,

~

I,;

t,.~
\

~

I
,

~

H

~

1

:.~

11. First 0
India used fo
roil', but to
which broug
process of a
vacillation 0
spoken of by
Mountbatten,
been brough
from the tri
responsible.
12. As far
would invite
roind are: f
got in there
bouring are
submission
sion, even a
dum and eve
to particula
country was
our country
other circu
particular c
that the Pow
cessor State
Indian Princ
kind or anot

,I

~

if

I

13. Over a
fact of acce
contended t
want theref
and fraud.
India becam
was the hur
standstill
that on 12
between Ind

ais
islue
du
er.
riSon

9. I said last time [766th meeting] that many quotations
in the Foreign Minister's statement, if either placed in
their proper context or read with the whole paragraph
or section of which it is part, would probably in the
majority of cases bear a different meaning. That is the
purpose of the first part of my intervention and I will
try to make it as brief as possible.

9. J'ai indique au cours de ma derniere intervention
[766eme seance] que beaucoup des citations figurant
dans la declaration du Ministre des affaires etrangeres, si elles etaiE>nt placees dans leur veritable
contexte ou lues avec l' ensemble du paragraphe ou
chapitre dont elles sont extrqites, prendraient probablement un sens different dans la plupart des cas.
Tel est le but de lapremierepartie de ma declaration,
et je vais essayer de la rend re aussi breve que possible.

10. The first of the series of allegations, arguments
and contentions is with regard to the position of India
in relation to Kashmir. As is well knuwn Kashmir isby accession, by the constitutional law of India, of
Britain as things were then, and the recognized process
of international law-an integral part of the Union of
India. It is the contention of the Pakistan Government
sometimes that this is not the case. Sometimes the
contention is that this relationship was brought about by
us by force and by fraud, and the purpose of refuting
this is not merely that this mis-statement should not
remain uncorrected but that it is basic to the consideration of the whole question, because it explains how
our two countries got into the present position.

10 La premiere serie d'allegations, d'arguments et
d'affj=mations a trait a la situation de l'Indea 1'egard
du Cachemi.re. On sait que le Cachemire fait partie
integrante de l'Union indienne par accession, en vertu
du droit constitutionnel de l'Inde, de la Grande-Bretagne, les choses etant alors ce qu'elles etaient, et
erl vertu du droit international. Le Gouvernement du
Pakistan soutient parfois qu'il n' en est pas ainsi.
Parfois, il pretend que les liens entre le Cachemire
et 1'Inde ont ete crees par nous, par la force et par
la fraude, et si je tiens a refuter liOette allegation, ce
n' est pas seulement parce qu'il convient de retablir
la verite, mais parce que cette question est fondamentale pour la comprehension de tout le probleme,
car elle explique comment nos deux pays en sont
arrives la.

11. First of all, therewastheuseofforce in Kashmir.
India used force in Kashmir, on the territory of Kashmir, but to repel the invaders. The element of force
which brought about or even perhaps speeded up the
process of accession and necessitated the ending of the
vacillation of the Maharaja of Kashmir has been rightly
spoken of by the then Governor-General of India, Lord
Mountbatten, who said that the accession had indeed
been brought about by violence, but the violence came
from the tribes, for whom Pakistan and not India was
responsible.

11. Considerons d'abord l'argument du recours a la
force au Cachemire. L'Inde a employe la force sur le
territoire du Cachemire, mais c'etait pour repousser
les envahisseur. Ce recours a la force, qui a amene
ou peut-etre meme accelere le rattachement et oblige
le maharajah de Cachemire a mettre un terme a ses
hesitations, a ete fort bien dec rit pas lord Mountbatten,
alors Gouverneur general de l'Iude, qui a declare que
l'accession avait effectiv~ment eu lieu par la violence,
mais par la violence de tribus qui relevaient du Pakistan et non de l'Inde.

12. As far as we are concerned, the facts which I
would invite Member States around this table to bear in
mind are: first of all, to see how we got in there. We
got in there for two reasons: first to protect a neighbouring area which was invaded; and it is my humble
submission that even apart from any question of accession, even apart from the Cabinet Mission Memorandum and even the partition ofIndia-and I will not refer
to particular countries-if another small neighbouring
country was similarly invaded it would be the duty of
our country to go to its protection if asked; even if no
other circumstances existed. What is more, in this
particular case, the history of the last 100 years shows
that the Power which ruled India-and we are the successor State-had always gone to the protection of the
Indian Princely States when they were in trouble of one
kind or another.

12. De mon cote, je voudrais rappeler les faits suivants aux membres du Conseil: tout d'abord, comment
sommes-nous entres au Cachemire? Nous y sommes
entres pour deux raisons: en premier lieu, pour proteger une region voisine qui etait envahie. A mon
humble avis, independamment de toute question d'accession, independamment meme du memorandum de la
mission du Cabinet et meme du partage de 1'Inde - et
je ne veux faire allusion a aucun pays en particulier
- si un autre petit pays voisin se trouvait envahi d'une
maniere analogue, notre pays aurait le devoir, si on
l'appelait, de se porter a sa defense, meme en l'absence d'autres motifs. Qui plus est, dans ce cas particulier, l'histoire des 100 dernieres annees montre
que la puissance qui gouvernait l'Inde - et dont notre
Etat est le successeur - s'est toujours portee au
secours des principautes de l'lnde lorsque celles-ci
se trouvaient en difficulte.

13. Over and above that, in this matter there was the
fact of accession to which I have referred. It has been
contended that this was brought about fraudulently. I
want therefore to refer to the circumstances of force
and fraud. It was contended on the last occasion that
India became independent on 15 August 1947. Then what
was the hurry for the Maharaja of Kashmir to ask for a
standstill agreement on 12 August? The implications is
that on 12 August there was already a conspiracy
between India and the Maharaja in order to establish

13. Mais le fait dominant dans cette affaire etait
1'accession, dont je viens de parler. On a pretendu
qu'elle avait ete obtenue de maniere frauduleuse. Je
traiterai done de ces allegations concernant un recours
a la force et a la fraude. A la derniere seance, on a
tenu le propos suivant: l'Inde etant devenue independante le 15 aout 1947, pourquoi le maharajah de
Cachemire a-t-il mis tant de hate a demander un
accord de statu quo le 12 aout? On voudrait donner
a entendre que, le 12 aout, l'Inde et le maharajah

)U-

les
els
les
ais
ire
an.si-

lon,
ans
no, de
ore
;ant
anous
aux
et
l la
sse
re- si
~ ce
·erant
ire,

:ifi-

lOts

leo-

,eH,

lE~lSe

nir.
plus
- si
ter-

uelMi'esl.phe
It un
itle
mes
lien,

lua-

urs,
:tats
mes

~ose

~upe

~er­

gnepor.am-

3

~j

.1

some relations. I am surprised, as the Council would
be if it looked into the documents, at this particular
statement. A document was circulated to members of
the Security Council containing the telegrams that went
from the Government of Kashmir to the Government of
Pakistan and the Government of India, and in this
document these telegrams bear identical dates, thatis
to say, they were sent on the same day. So if it can be
questioned why the Maharaja asked for a standstill
agreement with India three days before the independence, we could equally ask why the Maharaja had asked
for a standstill agreement with Pakistan two and a half
days before its independence-Pakistan was born half
a day before us.

complotaient deja d' etablir certaines relations. Cette
affirmation me surprend, comme elle surprendrait le
Conseil s'il examinait les documents. Les membres
du Conseil de securite ont rec;u le texte des telegrammes adresses par le Gouvernement du Cachemire au Gouvernement pakistanais et au Gouvernement indien. Ces telegrammes portent la meme date;
ils ont donc ete envoyes le meme jour. Par consequent,
s'il est permis de demander pourquoi le maharajah
s' est adresse a 1'Inde trois jours avant son independance pour obtenir un accord de statu quo, nous pourrions egalement demander pourquoi le maharajah a
fait la meme demarche aupres du Pakistan deuxjours
et demi avant son independance - car le Pakistan
est ne 12 heures avant nous.

14. So there was here no attempt to ferce any position.
Indeed, even if it had been the desire of India to bring
about that act of accession, there would have been
plenty of time before then to get things done. Indian
troops could have been there on the same day as our
independence was declarerl; there would have been a
new Indian Government installed with the capacity to
give orders without any British authority. So far as
this is concerned I do not want to ask the Council
merely to take note of the assertions and statements I
make, but there is plenty of au.thority on this matter
relating to the fact that India had made no preparation
for armed intervention-and that authority is British
authority.

14. Ainsi donc, il n'y a pas eu tentative pour forcer
la decision. En verite, meme si l'Inde avait voulu
consommer l'accession, elle aurait pu passer a l'action beaucoup plus tot. Les troupes indiennes auraient
pu se trouver sur place le jour meme de notre independance; le Cachemire aurait eu un nouveau gouvernE::ment indien, habilite a donner des ordres en dehors
de l'autorite britannique. Je ne veux pas, sur ce point,
demander au Conseil de me croire Sur parole. Il
existe nombre de temoignages autorises qui etablissent que l'Inde ne s'etait pas preparee a une intervention armee - et il s'agit de ternoignages britanniques.

15. There are published works on Kashmir, in the
main hostile to us, being largely based on ignorance of
basic facts, from which I propose to quote on this
particular question. One of these is a book called
Danger in Kashmir written by JosefKorbel, aCzechoslovak writer who was at one time Chairman of
the United Nations Commission. Generally speaking his
conclusions are not those which bring the matter up to
date, but in this particular case he says:

15. Je me prOjJuse de citer des ouvrages publiees "11
sur le Cachemire, dont la plupart nous sont hostiles, \1
de faits .fonKdamhen~aux. L:u~
Pechant par l'ignOr~ncl; D
anger In as mu, a et.:,
d e ces livres, intltu ~
ecrit par Josef Korbel, auteur tchecoslovaque qui fut r
quelque temps president de la Commission des Nations t
Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan. Ses conclusions sont
dans l'ensemble depassees par les evenements, mais
dans ce cas particulier, yoici ce qu'il dit:

"Though there is here no direct evidence concerning the conversation between Mountbatten and the
Maharaja, there is reason to believe that the Pakistanis are mistaken in their conviction that Mountbatten from the beginning connived with the Government of India to force the Maharaja and with him the
State of Jammu and Kashmir into accession.

"Quoique l'on ne dispose d'aucun temoignage direct
au sujet de la conversation entre lord Mountbatten ,
et le maharajah, il y a lieu de croire que les Pakis- "
tanais se trompent lorsqu'ils pensent que, des le
debut, Mountbatten s'est entendu avec le Gouvernement de l'Inde pour forcer le maharajah et, avec
I
lui, l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, a accepter 1
l'accession.
'
I,

Lord Mountbatten was very anxious to dispel any
doubt about his own position. Speaking before the
East India Association in London shortly after ... he
repeated, 'In the case of Kashmir I went up personally and saw the Maharaja. I spent four days with
him in July [sic], on every one of those four days I
persisted with the same advice: "Ascertain the will
of your people by any means and join whichever
Dominion your people wish to join by 14 August this
year." . . . Had he acceeded to Pakistan before 14
August the future Government of India had allowed
me to give His Highness an assurance that no
objection whatever would be raised by them. I " l! -In
fact the phrase we used was that we would not regard
it as an act of unfriendliness.

"Lord Mountbatten etait tr~s desireux de dis- ,R
siper tous les doutes qui auraient pu subsister quant
a Son attitude. Prenant la parole peu de temps
apres (... ), devant l'East India Association, a Londres, il repetait: "En ce qui concerne le Cachemire,
je me suis rendu personnellement aupres du maharajah. J'ai passe en juillet [sic] quatre jours avec
lui, et char"me jour, j'ai repete le meme conseil:
"Assurez-vous par tous les moyens possibles de
la volonte de votre peuple, et accedez au dominion
pour lequel votre peuple manifeste sa preference
avant le 14 aout de cette annee" (... ). S'il avait
accede au Pakistan avant le 14 aout, le futur ~ou­
vernement de l'Inde m'avait auto rise a donner a
r
Son Altesse l'assurance qu'il n'eleverait aucune
objection1/." - En fait, nous avions dit que nouS

.J

16. The
written by
British-In
of you kilo
on the who

17. Lord

" accepted t

,

~

rl

there was
wood to th
refuse the
form of d'
G:)Vernme
precipitat
these docu
ings. I sh
Birdwood,
Hons and
previous p

(1

do
j, 18.joint Astate

I
r

~"

Army, Na
when the
General L
was anoth
The Navy
Rear Ad
Navy, as
categoric
the followi
r

"1. Th
regards
and mov

"2. On
Army,
seized
the raid.

J

!I Josef Korbel, Danger in Kashmir, Princeton (N.-J.),
Princeton University Press, edit., 1954, p. 57 et58.

11 Josef Korbel, Danger in Kashmir, (Princeton, New
Jersey, Princeton University Press, 1954) pp. 57 and 58.
4

I

"3. Pr
ing Indi
or even
were dir
ing troo
should b
This wa
this sub
meeting,

"4. On
officer
Air For
of the
contact
officers
sending

s. Cette
Idrait le
lembres
es teHiCacheuvernene date;
sequent,
lharajah
.ndepenIS pourtrajah a
~uxjours

"

Pakistan

I

r forcer
lit voulu
r a l'acauraient
re indelUVernE:] dehors
~e point,
Hole. Il
etablisle inter; britan-

publiees
hostiles,
lUX. L'un
~, a ete
le qui fut
s Nations
ions sont
ItS, mais

.ge direct
untbatten
,s Pakis, des le
"
ouverneet, avec
accepter

I

I

~

!i

16. The same thing appears in another work, again
written by an Englishman who formerly belonged to the
British-Indian Army and was on the frontier-and most
of you know the views of officers of that time. The book
on the whole is not favourable to us.

ne considererions pas cette accession comme un
acte inamical.
16. Meme son de cloche dans un autre ouvrage d'un
auteur anglais qui a autrefois appartenu a l' armee
britannique de l'Inde et a sejourne dans la region
frontiere - et la plupart d'entre vous connaissent
les opinions que les officiers nourrissaient a cette
epoque. Dans l'ensemble, le livre ne nous est pas
favorable .

17. Lord Birdwood, a British writer on Kashmir,
accepted the truth of this position, that is to say, that
there was no fraud. Mr. Korbel has quoted Lord Birdwood to the effect that if we accept this, then we must
refuse the Pakistan contention that there was some
form of diabolical plot between the Maharaja and the
G::Jvernment of India to stage a situation which would
precipitate accession to India. I shall not read out all
these documents, because it will prolong the proceedings. I shall, however, read a quotation from Lord
Birdwood, which is on page 59 of his iJook, Two Nations and Kashmir: "I stressed that there was no
previous plot. "

17. Lord Birdwood, auteur brit,mnique, dans un
ouvrage traitant du Cachemire, a reconnu le bienfonde de cette opinion, cl savoir qu'il n'y avait pas
eu fraude. M. Korbel, citant lord Birdwood, a dit que
si l'on accepte ce fait, il faut rejeter 1'affirmation
du Pakistan selon laquelle il y a eu une sorte de
complot diabolique entre le maharajah etle Gouvernement de 1'Inde pour precipiter l'accession du Cachemire cl l'Inde. Je ne donnerai pas lecture de taus ces
documents, afin de ne pas prolonger les debats. Cependant, voici une d~claration de lord Birdwood,
qui se trouve cl la page 59 de son livre Two Nations
and Kashmir: "J'insistai sur le fait qu'il n'y avait
pas eu complot."

,\

~ontaining

A document has been circulated
the
I, 18.
joint statement by the Chiefs of the Indian Staff of the

:I
.'1

l'
i

~
~'

l
I
I:'1

de dis- ~"
Iter quant
ie temps
n, cl Lonchemire,
iu mahalUrs avec I~,
conseil:
sibles de
dominion
reference
S'il avait
utur I!0udonner a
It aucune
que nous

on (N.-J.),

,8.

I

18. On a diffuse un document reproduisant la declaration commune des chefs d'etat-major de 1'armee,
de la marine et de l'aviation indienne8. Cette declaration remonte au mois d'aoiit 1947, epoque cl laquelle
le commandant en chef de l'armee indienne etait le
general Lockhart, officier britannique. Le commandant en chef de l'aviation etait un autre officer britannique, le general Elmhirst. La marine etait commandee par un autre officier britannique, le contreamiral Hall, detache aupres de la marine royale
indienne. Ces officiers ant categoriquement nie que
des preparatifs aient ete faits, et ant declare ce qui
suit:

Army, Navy and Air Force. This was in August 1947,
when the Commander-in-Chief of the Indian Army was
Deneral Lockhart, a British officer. The Air 'Marshal
was another British officer, Air MarShal Elmhirst.
The Navy was commanded by another British officer,
Rear Admiral Hall, who was lent to the Royal Indian
Navy, as it then was. All of these people have
categoriclilly denied prior arrangements and made
the following statement:

"1. The following is a true time-table of events, as
regards decisions taken, plans made, orders given
and movements started in this matter:

"1. Ce qui suit constitue une chronologie exacte
des evenements, en ce qui concerne les decisions
prises, les preparatifs faits, les ordres donnes ~t
les mouvements de troupes effectues dans cette
affaire.

"2. On 24 October the Commander-in-Chief, Indian
Army, received information that tribesmen had
seized Muzaffarabad. This was the first indication of
the raid.

"2. Le 24 octobre, le commandant en chef de 1'armee indienne a ete informe que des tribus s' etaient
emparees de Muzaffarabad. C' etait le premier renseignement que l' on recevait au sujet de 1'incursion.

"3. Prior to th~s date, no plans of any sort for sending Indian forces into Kashmir had been formulated
or even considered. On the morning of 25 October we
were directed to examine and prepare plans for sending troops to Kashmir by air and road, in case this
should be necessary to stop the tribal incursions.
This was the first direction which we received on
this subject. No steps had been taken, prior to the
meeting, to examine or prepare such plans.

"3. Anterieurement cl cette date, aucun plan d'aucune sorte relatif cl l' envoi de forces indiennes au
Cachemire n'avait ete formuIe ni meme envisage.
Le 25 octobre au matin, nous avons ete charges
d'etudier et de preparer des plans relatifs cl l'envoi
de troupes au Cachemire par la route et par la voie
des airs, au cas ou de telles mesures deviendraient
necessaires pour mettre fin aux incursions des tribus. C'est le premier ordre que nous avons rec;u
cl ce sujet. Anterieurement cl cette reunion, aucune
mesure n'avait ete prise en vue de l' etude ou de la
preparation de plans de cette sorte.

"4. On the afternoon of 25 October we sent one staff
officer of the Indian Army and one ofthe Royal Indian
Air Force by air to Srinagar. There they saw officers
of the Kashmir State Forces. This was the first
contact between officers of our Headquarters and
officers of the Kashmir State Forces OIl the subject of
sending Indian troops to Kashmir.

"4. Dans 1'apres-midi du 25 octobre, nous avons
envoye cl Srinagar, par la voie des airs, un officier
d'etat-major de l'armee indienne et un officier
d' etat-major de l'aviation royale indienne. Ces personnalites y ont recontre des officiers des forces
armees de l'Etat du Cachemire. C'etait lapremiere
fois que des offciers de notre etat-major et des

5

I

officiers des forces armees duCachemireprenaient
contact au sujet de 1'envoi de troupes indiennes au
Cachemire.
"5. Dans 1'apr~s-midi du 25 octobre, nous avons
egalement donne l'ordre a un bataillon d'infanterie
de se preparer a etre transporte par la voie des
airs, a bref delai, ~ Srinagar, au cas ou le Gouvernement de 1'Inde deciderait d'accepter le rattachement du Cachemire et de lui porter secours.

"5. On the afternoon of 25 October we also issued
orders to an infantry battalion to prepare itself to be
flown, at short notice, to Srinagar, in the event of the
Government of India deciding to accept the accession
of Kashmir and to send help.

I

"6. On the morning of 26 October the staff officers
mentioned in paragraph 4 above returned from
Srinagar and reported on their meetings with officers
of the Kashmir State Forces.

"6. Le matin du 26 octobre, les officiers d'etatmajor mentionnes au paragraphe 4 ci-dessus sont
revenus de Srinagar et ont rendu compte de leur
rencontre avec les officiers des forces armees de
l' Etat du Cachemire.

"7. On the afternoon of 26 October we finalized our
plans for the dispatch by air of troops to Kashmir.

"7. L'apr.~s-midi du 26 octobre, nous avons paracheve nos plans relatifs a l' envoi de troupes au
Cachemire par la voie des airs.

"8. At first light on the morning of 27 October with
Kashmir's Instrument of Accession signed, the
movement by air of Indian forces to Kashmir began.
No plans were made for sending these forces, nor
were such plans even considered before 25 October
three days after the tribal incursions began." 2,1

"8. Le matin du 27 octobre, a 1'aube, l'instrument
de rattachement du Cachemire ayant ate sigae, le
trans~ort par la voie des airs des troupes indiennes
au Cachemire a commence. Aucun plan n'avait ete
fait relativement a 1'envoi de ees' forces, et aucun
pl[;.n de cette sorte n'avait ete meme envisage avant
le 25 octobre, trois jours apres le debut des incursions des tribusy"

19. It is true, as I have said, that we used force. But
against whom did we use force? We used force against
the invaders-against those who committed rapine and
murder. The force on the other side was used against
the people of Kashmir, who were being aggressed against and who were being subjected to rapine and
plunder and loot and arson. There was force certainly
used by the two of us, parties who are now here. But
so far as our force was concerned, itwas used against
the invading people and the other force was used
against the population of Kashmir.

19. Il est done exad que nous avons eu recours a la
force. Mais contre qui 1'avons-nous employee? Contre
les envahisseurs, contre ceux qui se livraient an
pillage et au meurtre. Dam; l'autre camp, la force
a ete employee contre la population du Cachemire,
victime d'une agression, et dont les foyers ont ete
pilIes et incendies. Les deux parties ici presentes
ont certainement eu recours a la force, mais tandis
que nos forces armess ont ete uniquement utilisees
contre l'envahisseur, celles de l'autrc camp ont ete
employees contre la' population du Cachemire.

20. It does not reqUire much documentation to understand this position. If the tribal forces, which at first
numbered 20,000 and then increased to 73,000, according to the estimates, which came into Kashmir over
this vast expanse of Pakistan territory, well armed and
well equipped fo.r these purposes, were liberators and
were friends of the Kashmir people and if they had been
wanted by the people, they would have been welcomed
as liberators. The Indian Army was welcomed as an
army of liberation. These other forces, however, were
not so welcomed. They were regarded as enemies.
They subjected the population, as I stated the other day,
to cruelty. When the country was rid of the bulk of
them, the people were happier. It was not a question of
our using force or fraud of any kind.

20. Point n'est besoin d'une abondante documentation
pour comprendre la situation. Si les for.ces tribales
bien armees et bie,! equipees qui ont envahi le Cachemire apres avoir traverse une grande partie cl.u territoire du Pakistan et dont les effectifs, evalues
d'abord a 20.000 hommes, s'eleverent ensuite a
73.000 hommes, etaient entrees au Cachemire sur la
demande du peuple, comme des forces amies et liberatrices, elles auraient ete accueillies comme telles.
Or, ce ne sont pas ces forces qui ont ete accueillies
en liberateurs, mais bien1'armeeindienne. Lesforces
tribales ont ete considerees par la population comme
des forces enemies. Elles ont, comme je 1'ai dit,
l'autre jour, exerce des sevices sur la population,
qui a ete hel.ireuse d'en etre pratiquement debarrassee. Il ne saurait etre question lci de recours a la
force et cl la fraude.

21. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan, stated on 16
January [761st meeting] that eleven proposals had been
put forward each of which Pakistan accepted and each
of which India rejected.

21. Le 16 janvier [761eme seance], le Ministre des
affaires etrangeres du Pakistan a declare que 11 propositions avaient ete presentees et qu' elles avaient
toutes ete acceptees par le Pakistan et toutes rejetees
par 1'Inde.

22. It would be an imposition upon the Security Council
for me to repeat what I said about this matter the other

22. Je n'abuserai pas de la patience du Conseil en
repetant ce que j'ai dit 1'autre jour [764eme seance]

V Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year,

2J Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, troisieme annee, Nos 1-15, p. 222 et 223.

Nos. 1-15, pp. 222 and 223.

6

I .i

'r"
\.,
Jr:
I'

~\ -

•...

;

! c

da
ap
ex
to
re
th
76
be
gr
pa
we
the
be
wi
gr
ti
the
mi
23
ar
de
be
an
of
th
wh
co
is
24.
fro
de
on

Na
tai
wa
mi
wit
or
ne
de
re

1';.7

I

25.
ans
has
wo
of
cou
sec
Pa
be
all
Go

me
any
int
pas
im
day
tha
~

S/1

dOnneqU~::'n::::~'l

day [764th meeting]. However, shce no intelligent 'oft ce sujel, Cependanl, etanl
appreciation of the present situation can be a.rrived at
saire d'etudier cette question pour comprendre la
except by a study ofthese matters, I would merely like
. situation, je me bornerai a indiquer que la premiere
. declaration faite a ce sujetpar le Ministre des affaires
to say, to save the time of the Council, that the first
reference to this matter appears in the statement by
etrangeres du Pakistan figure aux paragraphes 47
a 58 du document S/PV.761 et que la reponse que j'ai
the Foreign Minister of Pakistan in document S/PV.
761, paragraphs 47 to 58, and that the answer made on
donnee au nom de l'Inde figure aux paragraphe 13
a 76 du document S/PV.764. Ainsi done, en un expose
behalf of India appears in document S/PV.764, parad'unG trentaine de pages, soit a peu pres en 8.000
graphs 13 to 76. Therefore, in approximately thirty
ou 9.000 mots, nous avons examine et refute chacune
pages, which must run to about 8,000 or 9,000 words,
de ct's allegations, sauf une qui - d'aucuns le prewe have examined and refuted and rebutted each of
tendront - a fait l'objet de certaines reserves: c'est
these allegations. There is only one on which it might
celle qui a trait a l'arbitrage. Nous avons longuement
be claimed that there is a qualified rebuttal, and that is
parle de cette question et, pour ne pas retarder le
with regard to the issue of arbitration. We spoke at
Conseil, je prie celui-ci de se reporter a l'annexe 36
great length on that question, and, so as to save the
du troisieme rapport provisoire de la Commission
time of the Council, I refer the Council to annex 36 of
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et la Pakistan.Y
the third interim report of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan. Y

.re prenaient
indiennes au

, nous avons
d'infanterie
la voie des
~ Gouverne.f:! rattache>urs.

iers d' etatdessus sont
pte de leur
, armees de

lVons paratroupes au

J
I

'.r

} .,

ecours a la
vee?Contre
ivraient au
p, la force
::achemire,
~rs ant ete
. presentes
nais tandis
nt utilisees
lmp ant ete
ire.
umentation
es tribales
ile Cacheie du terris, evalues
ensuite a
nire sur la
.es et libeIme telles.
accueillies
Lesforces
ion comme
je l'ai dit,
population,
debarraslcours a la
lnistre des
[ue 11 proes avaient
es rejetees
Conseil en
ne seance]
mrite, troi-

1:>'

I -r

If

L.
1:;7

I

23. Nous etions disposes a accepter l'arbitrage, mais
nouS n'entendions pas laisser a l'arbitre le soin de
decider des questions a sQumettre a l'arbitrage. Ce
serait la une parodie d'" justice et une atteinte a tous
les principes et a toutes les regles du droit. Tuut
homme de loi, quel que soit le systeme juridique dont
il se reclame, dira qU'il n'appartient pas au juge de
decider par avance des questions sur lesquelles il
doit se prononcer, si ce n'est dans le contexte de
l'affaire qui lui est soumise. C'est a cela que nous
nouS opposons.

23. The position was that we were willing to go to
arbitration, but we were not willing to let the arbitrator
decide on what was going to be arbitrated. That would
be a travesty of justice and a denial of all the principles
and rules of law. A lawyer, no matter to what system
of jurisprudence he belongs, will say that it is not for
the judge to decide beforehand what are the issues on
which he is going to try the case except within the
context of a case that is presented. That, therefore,
is what we objected to.

'instrument
te sigae, le
~s indiennes
I n'avait ete
lS, et aucun
isage avant
des incur-

~

24. The Government of India has all along, that is,
from the beginning of this dispute when my predecessor, Mr. Gopalaswami AYy2.ngar, spoke here and
on the last occasion when we met with the United
Nations Representative, Mr. Graham, always maintained that it does not subscribC' to any position which
was ultra vires of the two resolutions of the Commission. We were prepared to examine any proposal
within that ambit. However, it is not for a commission
or a representative to go beyond that and form some
new principle. That is why the use of arbitration was
declined by us. I believe that a fair examination
requires an understanding of the situation.

24. Tout au long de ce differend, c' est-a-dire depuis
que mon prede~esseur M. Gopalaswami Ayyangar a
pris la parole devant le Conseil jusqu' a notre derniere
entrevue avec M. G"raham, representant des Nations
Unies, ·le Gouvernement indien n'a cesse d'affirmer
Qu'il ne pouvait souscrire a aucune solution qui sorte
ctu cadre des deux resolutions de la Commission.
Nous sommes prets a examiner toute proposition qui
reste dans ce cadre. Mais une commission ou un
representant ne peut pas aller all-dela. et formuler
de nouveaux principes. C'est pourquoi nous n'avons
pas consenti a l'arbitrage. Si l'on veut examint::r la
question d'une mati~re equitable, il faut connaitre la
situation.

25. I am happy that, with regard to several of the
answers I have given, my friend from Pakistan either
has accepted what we have said or does not think it
worth while pursuing. This first relates to the massing
of troops by the Union of India. It is not possible in our
country, even in defence matters, to deal with things in
secrecy. There is Parliament, there are questio'ls in
Parliament, there are newspapers, there are monies to
be provided by budgetary drafts; but on a definite
allegation that was made, I replied, on behalf of my
Government, of which I have the privilege to be a
member, with a categorical denial that there has been
any massing of troops or any importation of new troops
into Kashmir. Indeed, on the day when we were supposed to be preparing for this adventure, the more
impo:r;tant generals of our army, as I said the other
day, were playing a polo match in Calcutta. It may be
that ;,.. seme cases generals are not thought to be an

25. Je suis heureux que mon ami le representant
du Pakistan ait accepte plusieurs de mes reponses
ou ait juge inutile d'insister. Considerons d'abord
l'allegation relative a des concentrations de troupes
indiennes. Mon pays ne peut rien faire secretement,
meme en matiere de derense nationale: le Parlement
et ses interpellations, les journaux, la discussion des
credits budgetaires, tout s'y oppose. Cependant, au
nom du gouvernement auquel j'ai l'honneur d'appartenir, j'ai categoriquement dementi l'allegation precise selon laquelle 110US aurions masse des troupes
ou envoye des remorts au Cachemire. En fait, le jour
ou l'on pretend que nous nousappretionsanous lancer
dans cette aventure, nos principaux generaux, comme
je l'ai dit l'autre jour, disputaient un mtach de polo
a Calcutta. Il est possible que les generaux ne soient
pas juges essentiels dans certaines armees, mais
ils le sont dans la notre. Aussi n'a-t-on pas insist~.

,Q/ Ibid., Fourth Year, Special Supplement No. 7, document
S/143QTAdd.l.

.:i/ Ibid., quatrieme annee, Supplement special No 7. document S/1430/Add.!.

r"

,.
;,
'.
~. ,
~
~
~.

r

~

~.

~.!

it
~

~

(
~

I
~

[
~

~

~

t)
cr.

(~~

,

r~

~'"
,~} ,
IP.;

k"

~..'

i.
~
~

~.

I
~
~.

I

!
~<.

~.~.
iZ

~
If' .
~
~.

~~

...

~

7

•

essential part of an army, but our army requires them.
So that has not been pursued.
26. My Government asserts-not alleges, but asserts
-that in the area under Pakistan occupation, which
Pakistan has illegally, contrary to its own law, contrary
to our law, contrary to international law, contrary to
the decisions of the Council and contrary to the provisions of the Charter, incorporated in its Dominion,
airfields capable of taking military planes have been
prepared. I gave the measurements of these airstrips
obtained from our own information-every Government
has its own way of discovering these things-and I said
that some of them had runways about 2,000yards long
which had been extended. The answer of my colleague
from Pakistan was that I was what I looked-an
ignoramus-and therefore did not know what I was
talking about. He said that it takes 3,500 yards for an
ordinary jet plane to take off. First of all, I was not
talking about luxury jet planes; I was speaking of
fighter planes. In any case quite recently-and I am
sure that the representative of the United Kingdom will
not mind my mentioning this-that very beautiful plane,
the Comet, arrived at Delhi at our airport there. We
have only a 2,100 yard runway, but the Comet landed
and took off again. There was no Indian rope trick about
it; the Comet just landed and took off again under its
own power.

26. Mon gouvernement affirme - et ce n' est pas une
simple allegation - que, dans la zone occupee par le
Pakistan apres un rattachement illegal, contraire au
droit pakistanais, au droit indien et au droit international, contraire aussi aux decisions du Conseil et
aux dispositions de la Charte, on a amenage des terrains d'aviation capables de recevoir des avions militaires. J'ai indique que, d'apres nos renseignements
- car tous les gouvernements ont des moyens de se
renseigner - certaines de ces pistes d'atterrissage
avaient ete agrandies et atteignaient 2.000 yards de
long. En rt3pOnse, mon collegue du Pakistan a laisse
entendre que j'etais ce que je paraissais - un ignorant - et que je ne savais pas ce que je disais. Il a
fait observer qu'un avion a reaction ordinaire a besoin de 3.500 yards pour decoller. D'abord, je ne
parlais pas d'avions a reaction de luxe, mais d'appareils de chasse. D'ailleurs - et je suis sur que le
representant du Royaume-Uni ne m'en voudra pas
de le signaler - un magnifique avian du type ComMe
s'est pos~ tout r~cemment sur l'aerodrome de Delhi.
La piste n'a que 2.100 yards, mais le ComMe n'en a
pas moins atterri et decolle. Et ce n' etait pas un tour
de fakir; l'appareil a bel et bien atterri et decolle par
ses prop res moyens.

27. We happen to know what the Pakistan air force
consists of; we happen to know what runways are
required for different purposes, and the strips of
2,000 yards they have there are capable of being used
for the fleet of Sabre jets that the Pakistan Government
is now possessed of. Therefore, I make this correction
for two reasons. First of all, one likes to be in the
right when one makes a quotation. Second, the fact does
remain that the area occupied by Pakistan is not administered by local authorities such as the United
Nations Commission envisaged. Although it is an area
where, de jure, the rights of defence and external affairs are vested in the Jammu and Kashmir Government
and, therefore, in the Union of India, it has become a
military outpost of Pakistan.

27. Il se trouve que nous connaissons l' equipement de
l'armee de l'air du Pakistan. Nous connaissons la
longueur requise des pistes suivant les types d'appareils, et les pistes de 2.000 yards que le Pakistan
a amenagees dans cet.te zone peuvent fort bien recevoir les escadrilles d'avions a reaction Sabre que
posst!lde actuellement le Gouvernement pakistanais.
J'apporte donc cette rectification pour deux raisons:
d'une part, on n'aime pas avoir tort lorsqu'on cite
des chiffres; d'autre part, le fait est que la region
occupee par le Pakistan n' est pas administree par des
auto rites locales, comme l'avait envisage la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan.
Bien qu'il s'agisse d'une region ou, en droit, la defense
nationale et les affaires etrangeres relevent du Gouvernement de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, donc
du Gouvernement de l'Union indienne, cette zone est
devenue un avant-poste militaire du Pakistan.

28. I shall not labour the point with regard to the
distance of Pakistan military concentrations-not
necessarily against us; but they are normally ones
which, when hostilities or the contingency of hostility
arise, become a matter that has to'be taken into consideration; and my submission in reply to the contradiction of my figures by Mr. Firoz Khan Noon is that
I am prepared-as I hope the Security Council will be
prepared, and as I am sure Her Majesty's Government
will be prepared-to rely on the ordnance survey maps
of India, which are supposed to be very good. In fact,
they are borrowed by a great many geography libraries
in the world, arid I am told that the British Government
started them 100 years ago. The distances are indicated
in air miles in the majority of cases, and sometimes
they are the distanc~~ by military roads.

28. Je n'insisterai pas sur la proximite des concentrations de troupes pakistanaises; ces troupes ne sont
pas necessairement massees contre nous, mais c'est
une question qu'on doit normalement prendre en consicieration pour se premunir contre des hostilites
eventuelles. Aussi dirai-je en reponse a M. Firoz
Khan Noon, qui a conteste les chiffres que j'avais
cites, que je suis tout dispose - comme le seront
aussi, je l' espere, le Conseil de securite et le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste - a m'en remettre aux
cartes d'etat-major de l'Inde, qui sont censees etre
tres bonnes. En fait, un grand nombre de bibliotheques
geographiques s'en servent dans le monde entier, et
je me suis laisse dire que le Gouvernement britannique
a commence ales etablir il y a 100 ans. Les distances
y sont generalement indiquees a vol d'oiseau, mais
aussi, dans certains cas, d'apres les intineraires
routiers.

29. My colleague has argued that all the facts I gave
about the improved conditions in Kashmir were no

29. Mon collegue a soutenu que tous les faits que
j'ai cites concernant la situation au Cachemire ne
8

answer for s
the Kashmiri
more. It is an
in these days
is no substitu
issue here.
that, after h
cedures whic
Government
for the econ
its people, ha
that certain I'

I

..

......
ill

j

30. Those
the picture
biscite. For
assemblies,
what is mol'
while on the
is more, eve
tions, then, 0
rather differ
this forward,
submission,
States repre
matter woul
conditioned
Asia, by the f
side, and by
I do not clai
the represen
of guarding 0
31. There a
main matter
to the Consti
speech mad
taken up by t
tatives to lis
its 765th me
is thought tt
had adopted
same statem
Benegal N.
Constituent
new relation
and the Unio
what the int
rather than a
relationship.
long time.
32. I have s
to which I di
that-and he
1949 the Indi
to reserve f
Government
te sted to the
an action of
leged, antic
biscite. We t
under our Co
tion of Hum
the rights t
that way. P
this is what

..

.'~"'..,

--."

,
\

:'''

~""E

-

I
repondaient pas aux aspirations du peuple cachemirien, qui veut l'autonomie et le droit a disposer de
lui-meme. En principe, je suis d'accord: c'est une
vieille maxime, quelque peu desuete a notre epoque
d'Etats collectifs, qu'un ban gouvernement ne remplace pas le droit de se gouverner soi-meme. Mais
la n'est pas la question. Ce que nous faisions valoir,
c' est que, apres avoir ete paralyse par les procedures dilatoires qui ont empikM le plebiscite, le
Gouvernement indien, charge d'une manipre generale
d'assurer le developpement economique, social et.
politique de son peuple, a pris les mesures necessaires et obtenu certa1ns resultats.
30. Il faut tenir compte de ces faits et voir la situation des deux cotes lorsqu'on parle de plebiscite. Par
exemple, lorsque d'un cote on trouve la liberte de
reunion et de discussion, y compris la critique et
l'opposition, sans compter la presence de 70.000
touristes venus de l'exterieur, tandis que de l'autre
on :le trouve rien de pareil et que, au surplus, le
Pakistan lui-meme n'a pas organise d' elections generales, la situation n' est evidemment pas la meme des
deux cotes. Voila ce que je voulais faire ressortir.
D'autre part, il me semble qu'en examinant cette
question, les Etats Membres representes au Conseil
de securite devraient, comme je le montrerai plus
tard, tenir compte dans une large mesure des conditions crees dans l'Asie du SUd-Est, du sort du peuple
cachemirien dans les deux zones et de la situation
des p€Uples indien et pakistanais. Je ne pretends pas
parler en leur nom, comme le representant du Pakistan a parle de la necessite de sauver notre reputation.

answer for self-government o~~ self-determination for
the Kashmiri people. l'~s a principle, I could not agree
more. It is an old maxim-becoming somewhat worn out
in these days of collective States-that good government
is no substitute for self-government. But that is not the
issue here. What my Government was submitting was
that, after having been hung up by the dilatory procedures which did not bring about the plebiscite, the
Government of India, having the general responsibility
for the economic, social and political development of
its people, had introduced the necessary measures, and
that certain results had been achieved.

.

r

.,....
I

..

. t

,- IY

30. Those things have to be placed side by side with
the picture on the other side when we speak of a plebiscite. For example, if on one side there are open
assemblies, free discussion, criticism, opposition and,
what is more, 70,000 tourists going in from outside,
while on the other side there is no such thing and, what
is more, even Pakistan itself has had no general elections, then, of course, there are two pictures that are
rather different. That is the only purpose of my putting
this forward, apart from the fact that, in my humble
submission, the application of the minds of the Member
States represented in the Security Council to this
matter would, as I shall point out later, have to be
conditioned largely by the conditions in South-East
Asia, by the fortunes of the people of Kashmir on either
side, and by those of thepeoplesofIndia and Pakistan.
I do not claim to speak for them in the same way that
the representative of Pakistan spoke of the necessity
of guarding our reputation.
31. There are two other points before I go into the
main matter under this particular section. One relates
to the Constituent Assembly. That covers not only the
speech made by my colleague but also the position
taken up by the Security Council, and I beg representatives to listen to this very carefully. The Council, at
its 765th meeting, passed a resolution [S/3779], and it
is thought that it was repeating a resolution which it
had adopted some time ago. My Government made the
same statement that was made by my predecessor Sir
Benegal N. Rau from the seatofIndiaat that time. r~'he
Constituent Assembly of Kashmir did not establish any
new relations between the Constituent State of Kashmir
and the Union ofIndia. It did not create anything. It was
what the international lawyer calls a declaratory act
rather than a creative act. As I say, it created no new
relationship. That relationship had existed for a very
long time.

3!. Je voudrais encore appeler votre attention sur
deux points avant d'aborder la question principale.
Il s'agit d'abord de l'AssembIee constituante, et mes
observations porteront, non seulement sur le discours
de mon collegue, mais aussi sur lapositionqu'a prise
le Conseil de securite; je demande donc aux representants d' ecouter tres attentivement ce que je vais
dire. Le Conseil a adopte a sa 765eme seance une
resolution [S/3779], et 1'on considere qu'il confirmait
par la une resolution anterieure. Mon gouvernement
a repete ce que mon predecesseur sir Benegal N.
Hau avait declare a l'epoque. L'Assemblee constituante n'a pas etabli de nouvelles relations entre
l'Etat du Cachemire et l'Union indienne. Elle n'a rien
crM. Il s'agit plutot de ce que les juristes internationaux appellent un acte declaratoire. L'Assemblee
constituante n'a donc pas cree de relations nouvelles;
ces relations existaient depuis fort longtemps.

32. I have said all this before, but there are two facts
to which I did not draw the Council's attention. One is
that-and here I speak from memory - somewhere about
1949 the Indian National Constituent Assembly decided
to reserve four seats for the representatives of the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan protested to the Commission that it was an illegal action,
an action of our jumping the gun. We were, it was alleged, anticipating what was to be done by the plebiscite. We took the view, however, that we could not,
under our Constitution, or, indeed, under the Declaration of Human Rights, deprive any part of a people of
the rights that it enjoyed otherwise. So we went on in
that way. Pakistan protested to the Commission, and
this is what the Commission said:

32. J'ai deja expose tout cela, mais il y a deux faits
sur lesquels je n'ai pas attire l'attention du Consei!.
Vers 1949, je crois, l'AssembIee nationale constituante de l'Inde a decide de reserver quatre sieges
aux representants du Gouvernement du Jammu et
Cachemire. Le Pakistan a adresse a la Commission
une protestation, pretendant qu'il s'agissait d'un acte
illegal et que nous avions en quelque sorte "vole le
depart." Nous anticipions, pretendait-on, sur les
resultats du plebisciste. De notre cote, nous avons
fait valoir que notre Constitution, et meme la Declaration universelle des droits de l'homme, nous interdisaient de priver une partie d'un peuple des droits
dont il jouissait par ailleurs. Nous sommes donc alles
de l'avant. Le Pakistan a donc proteste devant la
9

*,~i
';c!

Commission, qui a repondu:
"In the Commission's view, it is difficult to oppose
this measure of the Indian Government on purely legal
grounds. The Commission did not consider there was
any useful purpose to be served in approaching the
India Government on this matter." Y

"De l'avis de la Commission, il est difficile de
s'opposer, en invoquant des arguments purement
juridiques, a cette decision du Gouvernement de
l'Inde. La Commission n'a pas juge utile d'obtenir
a cet egard des pourparlers avec le Gouvernement
de l'Inde 1/."

33. If this had been an illegality the Commissionwhich had meticulously gone into every point and had
been very careful to remind us whenever we even suggested something that it thought was straying from the
path-would have told us it was wrong. That was four
or five years ago. There were no protests at the time,
and therefore the relationship of a union to a constituent
state was made.

33. Si l'initiative de rInde avait ete ilIegale, laCommission, qui ne laissait echapper aucun detail et prenait grand soin de nous rappeler a l' ordre chaque fois
que, a son avis, nous semblions nOus ecarter du droit
chemin, nous aurait dit que nous avions tort. Cela se
passait il y a quatre ou cinq anS. A l' epoque, il n'y
a pas eu de protestation, et nous avons etabli avec
le Cachemire les relations qui sont de regIe entre une
union et un Btat adherent.

34. In this connexion, may I say with all respect that,
in our submission, the Security Council was misled
into believing that on 26 January 1957 some act of
annexation was going to be carried out. No annexation
was contemplated. It could not have been contemplated
or carried out, because, as the Prime Minister of
Kashmir asked: "How can you annex your own country?"
This territory has already been part ofIndia for a long
time. I have before me the various dates in the progress of this Constituent Assembly, from 1944 onwards
-in other words, long before there was a dispute over
this matter. As I have already pointed out, the present
phase arose from the proclamation of the Maharaja.

34. A ce propos, qU'il me soit permis de dire qu'a
not re avis on a induit le Conseil de securite en erreur
en lui faisant croire qu'une annexion aurait lieu le
26 janvier 1957. Aucune annexion n'etait et ne pouvait
etre envisagee. En effet, comme l'a indique le Premier Ministre du Cachemire: "comment peut-on annexer son propre pays?". Il y avait longtemps que ce
territoire faisait partie de 1'Inde. J'ai sous les yeux
la chronologie des evenements interessant l'Assemblee constituante depuis 1944, c'est-a-dire longtemps
avant qu'un differend n'ait surgi. Comme je l'ai deja
fait remarquer, la phase actuelle du differend remonte
a la proclamation du maharajah.

35. The Prime Minister of India has pointed out in a
speech, :md I believe has brought to the attention of the
United Kingdom Government, that the challenging of the
position of the Constituent Assembly was in fact the
challenging of an act of Parliament-I said that myself
here, but, of course, my voice does not carry the same
weight as that of my Prime Minister. Thus, there was
no crisis; no annexation took place; and the Security
Council has again been misled. As the Council is aware,
it has also been misled with regard to Pakistan's
intervention; in fact, it is because ofthatfact that this
whole matter has arisen. And this is another occasion
on which the Council has been misled. All that happened
on 26 January 1957 was that the Constituent Assembly
was dissolvect.

35. Le Premier Ministre de l'Inde a souligne dans
un discours - et je crois qU'il a appele 1'attention du
Gouvernement britannique sur ce point - que meUre
en doute l'attitude de I' Assemblee constituante equivalait a mettre en doute une decision du Parlement; je
l'ai moi-meme signale au Conseil, mais, bienentendu,
mes declarations n'ont pas le meme poids que celles
du Premier Ministre. Ainsi donc, il n'y avait pas de
crise. Aucune annexion n'a eu lieu. Une fois de plus, le
Conseil de securite a ete induit en erreur. Comme il
le sait, le Conseil a egalement ete induit en erreur
en ce qui concerne 1'intervention du Pakistan. Enfait,
c'est hi 1'origine de toute l'affaire. La aussi, le Conseil a ete induit en erreur. Un seul evenement s' est
produit le 26 janvier 1957: la dissolution de l'Assemblee const!tuante.

36. I have been asked by my Government to submit the
following to the Security Counc ~l. Let us assume, for
the sake of argument, that the Government of India had
undone the processes of the Constituent Assembly and
had undone the work which that Assembly had carried
out for a period of five years. What would have
happened? The entire financial integration of this State
with India, the functioning of the Controller and
Auditor-General of India, would have been thrown out of
gear. The authority of the Controller and Auditor-General of India in respect to financing applies not only to
Kashmir, but to every State in India. Every State in
India survives financially by means of subsidies from
the centre; that is our taxation system. The States have
certain local rights oftaxation, buttheir main expenditure is covered by subventions from the central revenues. In addition to the financial system, the entire

36. Mon gouvernement m'a charge de dire ce qui
suit. S'lpposons un instant que le Gouvernementindien
ait annule les decisions de l' Assemblee constituante
et reduit a neant l' (Euvre qu' elle a accomplie pendant
cinq ans. Que serait-il arrive? Tout le processus
d'integration financiere de l'Etatdans l'Inde et les services du Controleur-Verificateur general des comptes
de I'Inde auraient ete bouleverses. L'autorite duContr61eur-Verificateur general des comptes de l'Inde en
matiere de finances s'ei...md non seulement au Cachemire, mais a tous les Etats de l'Inde. Chacun de ces
Etats subsiste grace aux subventions du gouvernement central. Notre systeme fiscal est le suivant: les
Etats ont le droit de percevoir certains impots locaux,
mais la majeure partie de leurs depenses sont financees au moyen de subvention pre:Ievees BUl' les recettes du gouvernement central. Outre les finances,

..1/ Ibid., document 8/1,30, appendix, para. 37.

jJ Illli!.., document 8/1430, appendice, par. 37•

10

-r.

i ,,' judicial syale

:'
,

~
~~

~
,

\il

r

~

There would
the judges a
There would
Court, in whi
damental rig
every citizen
which had be
to the prosp
stUuted. In v
been thrown i
37. Now, I h
to defend ou
defence, beca
terms of the
travened any
to this questi
say this to t
resolution, th
we had been f
thrown the ar
who live the
ways of expr
mU to the Co

.y
!

t,

38. Mr. Fir
meeting] to t
tions, saying
proved his ca
or revealed
Council may
was then Pre
my observati
been cited b
fully quoted
picture would
39. One of t
connexion wa
"In rospo
of 15 April
tire Pakist
to withdra
According
considerab
Commissio
in no case
of the India
40. Now, I s
of the Comm
the above-m

:.

"In respo
April, the I
the presenc
mir forces
India had
phasing of .
the sevenPakistan t
with due re
Governmen
of the Stat
and to the
ranted infil
ions. (This
been sugg

"
f
'I

(I

There would have heen nn courls, no high court judges;

J

the judges are appointed by the President of India.
There would have been no jurisdiction in the Supreme
Court, in which is vested the power to enforce the fundamental rights of every citizen of India and from which
every citizen can obtain a writ. The customs barriers
which had been abolished, thereby contributing so much
to the prosperity of Kashmir, would have been rejnstituted. In various other respects the State would have
been thrown into chaos.

~...

~
:
~

r

~

~~~ns:::,~l:e:e:rS~~'::~f.r~d~;~~h~,~~~;~CC"l

judicial system in Kashmir would have gone to pieces.

'! .',

r1

I

tribunaux nt juges d'instances superieures; en effet,
les juges sont nommes par le President de l'Inde. Il
n'aurait plus existe de juridictioll de laCour supreme,
qui a pour tache de faire respecter les droits fondamentaux de tous les citoyens de l'Inde et a laquelle
chaque citoyen peut s'adresser. Les barri~res douani~res, dont la suppression a favoris~ dans une si large
mesure la prosperite du Cachemire, auraient ete
retablies. A plusieurs autres egards, l'Etat aurait
ete precipite dans le chaos.
37. Je n'ai pas formuM toutes ces observations pour
d~fendre notre attitude. Nous n'avons pas besoin de
nous defendre parce que nous avons agi constitutionnellement et confo:rmement a. la Charte des Nations
Unies. Nous' n'avons enfreint aucune resolution du
Conseil de securite. Je reviendrai plus tard sur ce
point. Nous voudrions seulement, en toute hUmilite,
dire au Conseil qu'en adoptant sa dernH~re resolution
il a pris une decision qui, si nous avions eu l'impru<;lence de la mettre en ceuvre, aurait precipite dans
le chaos le territoire en question et ses 3.500.000
habitants. Il y a peut-etre d'autres fac:;ons d'exprimer
cette idee, mais c 'est ce que je voulais dire au Conseil.

37. Now, I have not made those observations in order
to defend our attitude in this matter. We need no
defence, because we have acted constitutionally and in
terms of the United Nations Charter; we have not contravened any Security Council resolution. I shall revert
to this question later. We only wish, in all humility, to
say this to the Council: in adopting the most recent
Tesolution, the Council was takiilg a decision which, if
we had been foolish enough to implement it, would have
thrown the area in question and the 3.5 million people
who live there into chaos. There are various popular
ways of expressing this, but that is what I Wish to submit to the Council.

.
:

••
"

I

t

I

38. Dans sa derni~re declaration [766~me seance],
M. Firoz Khan Noon a fait un grand nombre de citations qui, selon lui, confirment sa th~se, infirment
nos arguments ou rev~lent que nous avons altere les
faits. Le Conseil se souviendra peut-etre que lorsque
M. Romulo, qui presidait alors, m'a invite·~formuler
mes observations, j'ai dit que lorsque les passages
cites par le Ministre des affaires etrang~resdu Pakistan auraient ete cites int~gralement et plac~s dans
leur contexte, ils auraient un tout autre sens.

38. Mr. Firoz Khan Noon, in his last statement [766th
meeting] to the Council, made a large number of quotations, saying in each case that the quotation either
proved his case, refuted something that had been said,
or revealed that we had mis-stated the facts. The
Council may remember that, when Mr. Romulo, who
was then President, was kind enough to ask me to offer
my observations, I said that when the extracts that had
been cited by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan were
fully quoted and placed in their proper context, the
picture would be rather different.
39. One of the quotations which Mr. Noon made in this
connexion was the following:

39. Voici une des citations faites par M. Noon:

"In rosponse to the Commission's truce proposals
of 15 April 1949 providing for withdrawal of the entire Pakistan Army, the Government of India agreed
to withdraw a very small number of its forces.
According to the Commission: 'This reduction was
considerably less than had been suggested in the
Commission's plan for the three-months period and
in no case could be considered to constitute the bulk
of the Indian forces'." [766th meeting, para. 19, (~).]
40. Now, I should like to read out the entire paragraph
of the Commission's report from which Mr. Noon took
the above-mentioned extract:

"En reponse aux propositions de treve du 15 avril
1949, prevoyant le retrait de la totalite de l'armee
pakistanaise, le Gouvernement de l'Inde a accepte
de retirer une tr~s petite partie de ses forces.
D'apr~s la Commission, "cette reduction etait bien
inferieure :l celle qui avait ete proposee dans le
plan que la Commission avait etabli pour la periode
de trois mois; elle ne pouvait, en aucun cas, etre
consideree comme s'appliquant au gros des forces
de l'Inde". [766~me seance, par. 19, alin. e.]
40. Je voudrais maintenant lire l'ensemble du paragraphe du rapport de la Commission d'ml M. Noon a
tire le passage dont je viens de donner lecture:

"In response to the Commission's proposals of 15
April, the Indian representative (annex 20) said that
the presence of thirty-two battalions of 'Azad' Kashmir forces was a factor which the Government of
India had to take into account in determining the
phasing of its withdrawals. He pointed out that during
the seven-weeks period for the withdrawal of
Pakistan troops, the Government of India could not,
with due regard to the security ofthe State" -and the
Government of India was responsible for the security
of the State- "to the maintenance of law and order,
and to the sealing-off of ~he bord( c against unwarranted infiltration, withdraw more than twelve battalions. (This reduction was considerably less than had
been suggested in the Commission's plan for the

"En reponse aux propositions que la Comm:.ssion
a faites le 15 avril, le representant de l'Inde a
declare (annexe 20) que la presence de 32 bataillons
des forces du Cachemire "azad" constituait un facteur dont le Gouvernement de l'Inde devait tenir
compte lorsqu'il fixerait les etapes de ces retraits.
Il a fait remaquer que, pendant les sept semaines
accordees pour le retrait des troupes du Pakistan,
le Gouvernement de l'Inde, s'il voulait assurer la
securite de l'Etat - et le Gouvernement de l'Inde
etait responsable de la securite de l'Etat - le maintien de l'ordre public et la fermeture rigoureuse
de la fronti~re pour empecher des infiltrations
injustifiees, ne pouvait retirer plus de 12 bataillons.
(Cette reduction etait bien inferieure it celle qui
11

[.

li~"

:

~

l~

I~

~.
;~
!~
:ot..

!~

~1·::e~_~o~:perIOd" -fue perloo referred nowI,
ro

~

~
'1

~

avait t1tt1 propos(!e dans le plan que la Commission
avait t1tabli pour la pt1riode de trois mois; - la
pt1riode dont il est question maintenant est de sept
semaines - elle ne pouvait, en aucun cas, etre considt1rt1e comme s'appliquant au gros des forces de
l'lnde.) Le reprt1sentant de l'lnde a fait savoir par
~crit que les autres retraits dt1pendraient du licenciement et du d~sarmement effectifs des forces du
Cachemire "azad" et qu'lls devraient etre r~gl~s
sur ce licenciement et ce dt1sarmement Q/."

seven weeks-"and in no case could be considered to
constitute the bulk of the Indian forces.) He wrote
that further withdrawals would depend upon and would
have to be regulated according to the actual disbandment and disarming ofthe 'Azad' Kashmirforces.".w

B

~.j
,.]
~\

:~

~

rt

!
4
"1

J
.'

'-:1

41. Thus, Mr. Noon's quotation gave only part of what
had actually been said. I have before me a number of
similar quotations by Mr. Noon, but I shall deal with
only one other.

41. Par cons~quent, M. Noon n'a cit~ qu'une partie
de ce qui a ~t~ dit. J'ai SCllS les yeux un certain nombre d'autres citations faites par M. Noon, mais je
n'en examinerai qu'une seule.

42. Mr. Noon said:

42. M. Noon a dit:

"The Prime Minister oflndia rejected all proposals
for the demilitarization of the State that were put
forward by Sir Owen Dixon, the United Nations Representative for India and Pakistan. In his report to the
Security Council dated 15 September 1950, SirOwen
Dixon said:

"Le Premier Ministre de l'lnde a rejet~ toutes
les propositions de d~militarisationde l'Etat faites
par sir Owen Dixon, repr~sentant des Nation Unies
pour l'lnde et le Pakistan. Ce dernier a d~clar~ ce
qui suit dans son rapport, en date du 15 septembre
1950, au Conseil de s~curit~:

" 'In the end I became convinced thatlndia's agreement would never be obtained to demilitarization in
any such form, or to provisions governing the period
of the plebiscite of any such character, as would in
my opinion permit the plebiscite being conducted in
conditions sufficiently guarding against intimidation
and other forme of influence and abuse by which the
freedom and fairness of the plebiscite might be
imperilled'." [766th meeting, para. 19, (g).]

"A la fin, j'ai acquis la conviction que l'on n'obtiendrait Jamais l'assentiment de l'lnde a une d~­
militarisation telle que je la concevais, ni la mise
en vigueur, pendant la p~riode du pMbiscite, des
dispositions que je regardais comme indispensables
pour permettre l'organisation du pl~biscite dans
des conditions offrant une protection suffisante
contre l'intimidation et toutes autres formes d'influence et d'abus de nature :l compromettre la libert~ et l'impartialit~ de la consultation populaire."
[766~me s~ance, par. 19, alin. g.1

43. Standing alone, this is a very stark statement. But
the fact is that the whole of the discussion in question
took place in the context of Sir Owen Dixon' s s'l.ying:
"If the plebiscite is not the method, we must try and
find something else." That was not quoted by Mr. Noon,
but it is what Sir Owen Dixon was saying. The fact
remains that, according to Sir Owen Dixon, under the
resolutions, India's agreement to the course to be
pursued in these matters is a prior condition to the
carrying out of the plebiscite [S/1791, para. 98]. It is
therefore not as if something reasonable and intra
vires had been put to us and we had rejected it.

43. C'est 1:1 une affirmation tr~s cat~gorique. Mais
en r~alit~, l'ensemble de la discussion a port~ sur
la d~claratiun su.ivante de sir Owen Dixon: "Si le
pl~biscite n'est )las la mMhode qui convient, nous
devons essayer de trouver autre chose." Cette d~cla­
ration n'a pas t1t~ cit~e par M. Noon, pourtant ce sont
bien 1:1 les paroles de sir Owen Dixon. Il n'en reste
pas moins que selon sir Owen Dixon, aux termes des
r~solutions, l'assentiment de l'lnde :l la proc~dure
:l suivre en l'occurrence constitue une condition
pr~alable a la conduite du pl~biscite [S/1791,par. 98].
On ne saurait donc pr~tendre que l'on nous a pr~sent~
une proposition raisonnable et pertinente et que nous
l'avons rejet~e.

44. I shall refer to only one more quotation, because,
while I said I would not go into any matters of personal
insinuations, the Foreign Minister did refer to a part
of my statement in which I was supposed to have misquoted him. Had I done so deliberately, it would have
been an offence for which I should apologize not only
to him, but to the Council and to my Government. This
is what Mr. Noon said:

44. Je ne pr~senterai qu 'une seule autre citation, car,
bien que j'aie d~clar~ que je ne voulais pas m'occuper
de questions relatives ades insinuations personnelles,
le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res s'est r~f~r~ :l
une partie de mon discours OU je l'aurais cit~ d'une
mani~re erron~e. Si je l'avais fait deproposd~liMr~,
j'aurais commis une faute dont je m'excuserais non
seulement aupr~s de lui, mais aupr~s du Conseil et
de mon gouvernement. Voici ce qu'a dit M. Noon:

"Before I close my remarks I should like to refer
very briefly to the incident which occurred at the
763rd meeting when I interrupted Mr. Krishna
Menon's speech, for which I am very sorry. I was not
aware of the practice of the Security Council. But the
Council will recall Mr. Menon said that! had said in
my statement that Pakistan was not bound by any

"Avant de conclure, je voudrais revenir tr~s bri~­
vement sur l'incident qui s'est produit :l la 763~me
s~ance, au moment ott j'ai interrompu le disc ours
de M. Menon. Je regrette tr~s vivement cet incident, dti :l ce que les usages du Conseil ne m'~taient
pas encore familiers. Toutefois, comme le Conseil
se le rappelle, M. Menon avait dit que, selon ma

Q/ Ibid., document .;/1430, para. 236.

.li/ Ibid., document 8/1430, par. 236.

,.

i

12

,

>,

"

J

interna
interru
remar
I am gr
interru
the eff
nationa
two res
India
second
resolut
India
"That
man wl
mosque
young
Koran t
was ast
The yo
priest,
not go
you rea
"when
[766th

.. '....

45. I wi
read wha
"

... ~:

,

.

-

"The
that in
other i
be foun
a limit
this ag
to whic
interna
Nations
am pre
that in
ular d
resoluti
I have
far as \\
that the
-That i
for eve
these 0
ings of
our bou
selves
meeting
46. Whe
sorry, bu
The Pres'
I continue

"I wil
doing so
that my
run. Th
para. 19
.",

47. I the

he has m
this quota

ion
. la
ept
Dnde
par
endu
Ms

tie
m-

.,

~,

je

tes
tes
ies
ce
Dre

..

Db-

i~­

ise
ies
les

illS

nte
inli-

e. "
ais

3ur

le

DUS

laont
ste
:Ies
He

ion
18].
nt~

DUS

ar,
Der
es,
~

a.

me
r~,
10n

. et
i~­

me
Irs
cient
:eil
ma

international obligations-and there he stopped. I
interrupted and said that that was not the whole of my
remark, and that he had quoted only half the sentence.
I am grateful to Mr. Menon for the fact that, upon that
interruption, he read the whole remark, which was to
the effect that Pakistan is not bound by any international obligations regarding this case, except the
two resolutions of the United Nations Commission for
India and Pakistan. Thus, he had omitted to read the
second part of the sentence: 'except by the two
resolutions of the United Nations Commission for
India and Pakistan' .

propre dt1claration, le Pakistan n'avait pas d'obligations internationales. Comme M. Menon arretait
1;1 sa citation je l'ai interrompu pour lui faire observer qu'il n'avait citt1 que la moiti~de ma phrase.
Je suis reconnaissant a. M. Menon d'avoir compl~tt1
la citation de ma phrase apr~s mon interruption.
J'avais dit que le Pakistan ne se reconnaissait
d'autres obligations internationales que celles qu'il
a accept~es dans les deux rt1s01utions de la Commission des Nations Unies pour PInde etle Pakistan.
M. Menon avait passt1 sous silence cette deuxi~me
partie de la phrase: "que celles qu'il a acceptt1es
dans les deux r~solutions de la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan". Cela m'a
rappelt1 l'histoire du jeune musulman, a. qui l'iman
reproche de ne pas faire r~guli~rementses pri~res,
et qui lui r~pond: "Le Coran dit: "Yous ne devez
pas vous approcher de la pri~re." L'iman, ~tonn~,
ouvre le Coran et dlt au jeune musulman: "Sans
doute, mais tu n'as pas lu l'autre moiti~ de la
phrase: "lorsque vous etres en ~tat d'ivresse".
[766~me s~ance, par. 87.]

"That reminded me of the story of a young Mussulman who was one day chided by his priest in the
mosque that he did not say his prayers regularly. The
young man said, 'But, Sir, it is written in the Holy
Koran that one should not go near prayer. ' The priest
was astounded, and said, 'Bring me the Holy Koran. '
The young man quickly brought the Holy Koran to the
priest, and showed him where it is said 'Thou shalt
not go near prayer.' But the priest said: 'Why don't
you read the other half of the sentence, which says
"when thou art in a condition of drunkenness"?'"
[766th meeting, para. 87.]
45. I will come to that in a moment, but let me just
read what I said:

45. Je reviendrai sur ce point dans un moment, mais
permettez-moi de vous lire ce que j'avais dit:

"The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan said
that in regard to this Kashmir matter, he had no
other international obligations than those that are to
be found in the resolutions. I agree with that, but to
a limited extent in the sense that we have to interpret
this agreement in the terms of these two resolutions
to which I have referred, but if it means that the
international obligations of the Charter ofthe United
Nations are not binding, then I join issue with him. I
am prepared to confirm that I subscribe to the view
that in the discussion of any procedure, of any particular decision, of any agreement reached, these
resolutions are what are binding in the circumstances
I have submitted to you. But it would be wrong, so
far as we are concerned, for a Member State to argue
that there are no other international commitments."
-That is a truism.-"The Charter is a commitment
for every State, and when the time comes to sum up
these observations at the conclusion of these meetings of the Security Council, we shall fall back upon
our bounden duty to ask all of you to address yourselves to the provisions of the Charter." [763rd
meeting, para. 196.]

"Le Ministre des affaires Hrang~res du Pakistan
a d~clar~ que, en ce qui cone erne la question du
Cachemire, il n'avait pas d'autresobligationsinternationales que celles qui sont ~nonc~es dans les
r~solutions. Je suis d'accord avec lUi, mais dans
une certaine mesure seulement, en ce sens que nous
devons interprt1ter cet accord eu ~gard aux dispositions des deux r~solutionsque j'ai rappeMe ,mais,
si cela signifie que les obligations internationales
prt1vues par la Charte des Nations Unies n'ont pas
un caract~re obligatoire, alors je ne puis l'approuver. Je reconnais - et je suis pret a le confirmer
- que lorsqu'il s'agit d'examiner une proc~dure,
une d~cision ou un accord quelconques, ces r~solu­
tions sont ce qui nous lie dans les circonstances
que j'ai rappel~es. Mais un Etat Membre ne saurait, a. notre avis, pr~tendre qu'il n'y apas d'autres
obligations internationales. La Charte constitue un
engagement pour chaque Etat, et lorsque le moment
sera venu de r~sumer ces observations, :l la fin du
d~bat que le Conseil de s~curit~ consacm a la question, nous serons tenus, une vouvelle fois, de prier
chacun d'entre vous de se reporter aux dispositions
de la Charte." [763~me s~ance, par. 196.]

46. When the interruption came, Mr. Noon said, "lam
sorry, but that is a misinterpretation of my statement."
The President said that he had no right to interrupt, and
I continued:

46. Lorsque M. Noon m'a interrompu, il a dit: "Je
regrette de devoir dire que c'est la. une interpr~tation
erron~e de ma d~claration." Le Pr~sident a d~clar~
qU'il n'avait pas le droit d'interrompre l'orateur et
j'ai poursuivi:

"I will read out the quotation. I thought that by not
doing so before I could save time, but it will be seen
that my slow procedure is the quickest in the long
run. The representative of Pakistan said ... " [Ibid.,
para. 199.]

"Je vais donner lecture de cette d~claration. Je
pensais qu'en ne le faisant pas je pourrais gagner
du temps, mais on constatera que ma mani~re de
proc~der avec lenteur est, en fin de compte, la
m~thode la plus rapide. Yoici ce qu'a dit le repr~­
sentant du Pakistan ... " [Ibid., par. 199.]

47. I then read out the whole of the paragraph to which
he has made very generous reference. Now we come to
this quotation from the Holy Koran. The Holy Koran is

47. J'ai alors donn~ lecture de l'ensemble du paragraphe auquel il s'est amplement rM~r~. Nous en
arrivons maintenant <'l. cette citation extraite du Coran.
13

the scripture for a very considerable part of our population, and it is held in respect by the remainder, and
I regret that the quotation from it invited the degree of
levity it did. What was the gravamen of the charge? It
was stated that I had quoted only a part of the sentence,
but let us look at the Holy Koran itself. The representative of Pakistan said:

Le Coran est le livre sacr~ d'in~ments tr~s importants de notre population, et il est consid~r~ avec
respect par les autres, et je regrette que l'on ait fait
preuve de tant de l~g~ret~ :l propos de cette citation.
Quel ~tait le fondement de l'accusation? Il ~tait
dit que j'avais cit~ seulement une partie de la phrase,
mais voyons le Coran lUi-meme. Le repr~sentant du
Pakistan a dit:

"The young man said, 'But, Sir, it is written in the
Holy Koran that one should not go near prayer.' The
priest was astounded, and said, 'Bring me the Holy
Koran.' The young man quickly brou;ht the Holy
Koran to the priest, and showed him where it is said
'Thou shalt not go near prayer.' But the priest said:
'Why don't you read the other half of the sentence,
which says, "when thou art in a condition of drunkenness"?' " [766th meeting, para. 87.]
413. May I follow the example of this distinguished
priest and read the whole of the sentence from the Holy
Koran? It states:

"rLe jeune musulman] ... lui r~pond: "Le Coran
dit: "Vous ne devez pas vous approcher de la pri~re."
L'iman, ~tonn~, ouvre le Coran et dit au jeune musulman: "Sans doute, mais tu n'as pas lu l'autre
moiti~ de la phrase: "lorsque vous etes en ~tat
d'ivresse". [766~me s~ances, par. 87]

51. I
questio
the fac
could n
hope th
lished
which'
for exa
very co
had a b
math of
various
Council
150], th
A

48. Puis-je suivre l'exemple de ce pretre et lire la
phrase enti~re du Coran? Il est dit:

"0 ye true believers, come not to prayer when ye
are drunken"-that is as far as it went in Mr. Noon's
citation-"but wait till ye can understand what ye
utter, nor when ye are polluted, unless ye be travelling on the road, until ye have washed ye."

"0 vrais croyants, ne venez pas :lla pri~re 10Fsque
vous etes en ~tat d'ivresse (c'est jusque-!:l que
M. Noon a cit~), mais attendez de pouvoir comprendre ce que vous dites, ni lorsque vous etes
souill~s, sauf si vous voyagez sur la route, avant
de vous etre iav~s."

.,

That is to say, let us not invoke moral laws unless we
are prepared to use them ourselves, so that even in this
quotation from the Holy Koran we have support of our
position.

En d'autres termes, n'invoquons pas les principes
moraux si nous ne sommes pas dispos~s :l les mettre
nous-memes en pratique; de sorte que meme cette
citation du Coran vient :ll'appui de notre position.

.,
....-,

49. Now I come to the most important part nf the
statement made. I am not going to refer to the quotations and documents I have before me-I am going to
put them all to one side-but I wish to deal with the
alleged question of discrimination against the Moslem
minority in India. Of course, this minority numbers
nearly 50 million. In regard to this minority, various
allegations have been made. It has been said there is
no civil liberty in.lndia, there are frequent communal
riots, and there is discrimination against the people of
Moslem faith in regard to our public services. In fact,
it is what may be called a captive or police State. I
would not have referred to this, but for two reasons.

49. J'en arrive :l pr~sent au passage le plus important de la d~claration. Je ne vais pas me reporter
aux citations et aux documents dont je dispose - j'ai
1'intention de les laisser de cot~ - mais je voudrais
traiter la question de la discrimination qui serait
exerc~e cl l'encontre de la minorit~ musulmane ce
l'Inde. Bien entendu, cette minorit~ compte pr~s de
50 millions d'individus. Au sujet cette minorit~, on a
avanc~ diverses affirmations. On a dit qu'il n'y av:lit
pas de libert~ civique dans l'Inde, qu'il y avait de
fr~quentes ~meutes religieuses, et des pratiques discriminatoires a. l'encontre de la population de religion
musulmane dans nos services publics. En fait, l'Inde
serait ce que l'on pourrait appeler un Etat captif ou
policier. ;re n'aurais pas rappel~ c~s d~clarations, si
je n'avais eu deux raisons de le faire.

50. First of all, it is of some importance, not only to
my country but to the world, that we maintain a high
level of parliamentary democracy, and to be told before
the Security Council that these are the conditions is not
so much a slur upon us as .it is a disservice to this
cause, particularly in our p'art of the world. In a
country where, in the next month an electorate of
193,129,924 people are entitled to vote to elect 494
people to the Lower House of .Parliament and 3,102
people to our provincial legislatures, using 200,000
polling stations and 2,960,000 ballot boxes for exercising their secret ballot, such a picture of a police State
is far from the facts, but it is not so much in defence
of our democracy that I raise this, but to point out that
the argument was based on the statement that all these
people in Kashmir are under our "occupation".

50. En premier lieu, i1 est assez important, non seulement pour mon pays mais aussi pour le monde, que
nous maintenions un niveau ~lev~ de d~mocratie parlementaire; venir dire au Conseil de s~curit~ que
telle est la situation en Inde n'est pastant une calomnie :l note ~gard qu'un mauvais service rendu :l cette
cause, notamment dans cette partie du monde qui est
la notre. Ce tableau de l'Inde pr~sent~e comme un
Etat policier est bien ~loign~ de la .r~alit~, puisqu'il
s'agit d'un pays 011, le mois prochain, 193.129.924
~lecteurs pourront voter pour ~lire 494 repr~sentants
:l la Chambre basse du Parlement et 3.102 repr~sen­
tants aux assembMes l~gislatives provinciales, et
utiliseront 200.000 centres de vote et 2.960.000 urnes
pour le vote au scrutin secret. Ce n'est pas tellement
pour d~fendre notre d~mocratie que je fais cette
14

"

man

he can
If the t
have to
the rig
courts
certior
is for t

52. B
legisla
ordin
that tw
some s
into ex
politic
trial.
East
Prime
Minist
veter
Minist
ister 0
etc.,Minist
Mr. Ab
"Red S
without
friendl
minist

53. B
presen
Sardar
Khan,
of Mir
numbe
who, a
to the
after t
numbe
leader
stl.ll in
54. I
any pi

I

remarque, que pour souligner que l'argument ~tait
fond~ sur l'affirmation que la population du Cachemire se trouverait plac~e sous notre "occupation".

mpor~ avec
lit fait
tation.

51. I was very pained to listen to two aspects of this
question. I did not conceal from the Security Council
the fact that we have a public security act, indeed, I
could not, because it is discussed in Parliament. We
hope that when our democracy becomes more established this law will become merely one ofthose things
which do not operate, as it is in the United Kingdom,
for example, under the emergency powers. But we have
very considerable problems of a social order. We have
had a background in our independence and in the aftermath of independence of communal friction. There are
various other cases of subversion, but, as I said to the
Council the other day [764th meeting, paras. 149 and
150], this act is exercised under very strict safeguards.
A man has to be told what he has been arrested for, and
he can go before a tribunal and make a representation.
If the tribunal says that he must be released, then we
have to release him. Over and above that, he can invoke
the right of habeas corpus. Butwecannotdictate to the
courts that the high power writs such as mandamus,
certiorari or habeas corpus should not be given. That
is for the court to decide.

~tait

hrase,
:ant du
Coran
i~re. "

.e mu.'autre
n ~tat

lire la

)Fsque
1:1 que

coms etes
avant

51. Deux aspects de la question m'ont particuli~re­
ment pein~. Je n'ai pas cach~ au Conseil de s~curite
le fait que nous avons une loi de securite publique;
d'ailleurs, je n'aurais pas pu le faire, car on en discute au Parlement. Nous esp~rons qU'une fois notre
democratie mieux etablie, cette loi, comme d'autres,
cessera simplement d'etre appliquee, comme c'est
le cas par exemple au Royaume-Uni pour les pouvoirs
speciaux. Cependant, nous avons :l faire face a d'importants probl~mes d'ordre social. Il y a eu des frictions sur le plan des communautes religieuses, au moment oil notre independance a et~ proclam~e et dans
la p~riode qui a suivi. Il y a encore d'autres causes
de trouble, mais, comme je l'ai dit l'autre jour au
Conseil [764~me seance, par. 14getl50], l'application
de cette loi est assortie de garanties tr~s strictes.
Toute personne arretee doit etre inform~e du motif
de son arrestation et peut demander a etre entendue
par un tribunal. Si le tribunal ordonne sa mise en
liberte, elle ~oit etre liMr~e. De plus, elle peut invoquer la loi d'habeas corpus. Il ne nous appartient pas
d'enjoindre aux tribunaux de ne pas rendre d'ordonnance de mandamus, de certiorari, ou d'habeas corpus.
Il appartient au tribunal de decider.
52. Bien entendu, nos amis ont une legislation - j'hesite :l dire une legislation sembiable - ou des ordonnances dans le meme but. Loin de moil'idee que deux
torts font un droit, mais je crois qu'il faut garder le
sens des proportions. Dep"is la naissance du Pakistan,
meme si l'on tient compte de l'impr~cision de nos
renseignements, 251 chefs politiques ont ete arretes
et detenus sans jugement. Ce nombre comprend
M. A. K. Fazlul Huq, gouverneur duPakistanoriental;
M. H. S. Suhrawardy, le premier ministre actuel;
M. Ataur Rahman, le ministre principal actuel du
Pakistan oriental; M. Khan Sahib, grand veteran du
mouvement national, actuellement ministre principal
du Pakistan occidental; M. Khuro, ancien ministre
principal du Si.nd; M. Kazi Fazl-ullah, ::ncien ministre
du Sind, etc" - une liste enti~re de ministres ou
d'anciens ministres. Il y a aussi, bien entendu, le fameux M. Abdul Ghaffer Khan, v~teran bien connudans
le monde sous le nom de "chef 11 la chemise rouge",
qui a ~t~ d~tenu pendant des annees sans jugement,
en dEipit de toutes les repr~sentations que nous avons
formulees dans un esprit amical. En outre, les renvois
de titulaires de fonctions ministerielles n'ont pas ete
des faits inhabituels.
53. Dans la r~gion du Cachemire occup~e par le
Pakistan, le chef actuel du Gouvernement du Cachemire "azad", le sardar Abdul QayumKhan, Chaudhury
Hamidullah Khan, ancien ministre, Chaudhri Mohammed Akbar Naqqi, de Mirpur - ont tous fait de la pri-'
son. Il y a un grand nombre d'autres cas semblables,
notamment 340 travailleurs politiques qui, d'apr~s le
m~morandum adresse par la Conference musulmane
11 l'AssembIee constituante du Pakistan, ont ete emprisonnes :l la suite des premiers troubles au cours desqueIs de nombreux Poonchis ont ete tues. Selon le chef
du mouvement "azad" a cette epoque, 130 seraientencore detenus sans jugement.

J

ncipes
mettre
i cette
on.

mporporter
- j'ai
udrais
serait
me ce
r~s de
~, on a
r av:ilt
Tait de
s dislligion
l'Inde
ptif ou
ms, si

seule·le, que
e part~ que
alomcette
lui est
me un
isqu'il
9.924
ntants

"

!

.'¥,

i

'~sen­

as, et
urnes
ement
cette

52. But, of course, our friends on the other side have
legislation-I hesitate to say similar legislation-or
ordinances for this purpose. Far be it from me to say
that two wrongs make a right, but I think we must get
some sense of proportion on this. Since Pakistan came
into existence, imperfect as our information is, 251
political leaders have been arrested or detained without
trial. These included Mr. A. K. Fazlul Huq, Governor of
East Pakistan; Mr. H. S. Suhrawardy, the present
Prime Minister; Mr. Ataur Rahman, the present Chief
Minister of East Pakistan; Mr. Khan Sahib, a great
veteran of the national movement and now Chief
Minister of West Pakistan; Mr. Khuro, ex-Chief Minister of Sind;.Mr. Kazi Fazi-ullah, ex-Minister of Sind,
etc.,-a whole list of Cabinet Ministers or ex-Cabinet
Ministers. Then, of course, there is the great veteran
Mr. Abdul GhafferKhan, well-known to the world as the
"Red Shirt Leader", who had been detained for years
without trial in spite of all the representations in
friendliness that \\7e made. In addition, dismissalfrom
ministerial office has not been an unusual occurrence.

53. But in the Pakistan-occupied area of Kashmir, the
present President of the"Azad" Kashmir Government,
Sardar Abdul Qayum Khan, Chaudhury Hamidullah
Khan, ex-Minister, Chaudhri Mohammed Akbar Naqqi
of Mirpur-all these have been detained. There are a
number of other cases, including 340 political vrorkers
who, according to the Moslem Conference memorandum
to the Pakistan Constituent Assembly, were detained
after the preliminary disturbances during which a large
number of Poonchis were killed. According to the
leader of the "Azad" Movement at that time, 130 are
stUl in detention without trial.

54. J'ai donne ces precisions non pour le plaisir de le
faire, mais parce qu'il est necessaire de voir la situa-

54. I have read this out, not with any gusto, not with
any pleasure, but it is necessary to see the perspective

I

15

I

~ li i& . ",,#§Si>:;;;:~ ..,~;i.:o::.;:;.; ... :~ _

--~ '--""'.~.-

-"-~'--'

-----_._-

.-'--_...•..._.. ,..'-- ..._._>-... -

i

of the picture, and I confess that in infant democracies
a degree of limitation on freedom, academically reprehensible, is sometimes inevitable, but there are
considerable safeguards in our case because the law
has to be re-passed by Parliament every six months.

tion dans son ensemble; je reconnais que, pour de
jeunes d~mocraties, un certain degr~ de limitation de
la libert~, r~pr~hensible en tMorie, estparfoisin~vi­
table, mais, dans notre cas, il y a des garanties consid~rables, parce que la loi doit etre vot~e ~ nouveau
par le Parlement tous les six mois.

55. But what grieved my delegation most was Pakistan
telling the world that in our public services, in our
Army and our various other public avenues of expression, religion was a bar. That would be unconstitutional
and, what is more, under our law, would be punishable
by imprisonment.

55. Ce qui a le plus attrist~ ma d~l~gation, c'est que
le Pakistan dise au monde que, dans nos services
publics, notre arm~e' et les diff~rentes autres carri~res publiques, la religion constituait un obstacle.
Cela serait contraire ~ la Constitution et, qui plus est,
repr~senterait un d~lit passible de prison en vertu de
nos lois.
56. Le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res du Pakistan
a par16 des examens de recrutement des fonctionnaires.
Pendant tr~s longtemps, le Commission des services
publics de l'Inde, qui correspond it la Civil Service
Commission du Royaume-Uni, a ~t~' dirig~e par un
~minent musulman. Il a dii d~missionner pour raison
de sant~. Il est vrai, comme on l'a dit, qu'aucun candidat musulman n'a ~t~ rec;u ~ux examens de l'Acad~mie militai~e qui ont eu lieu en ~uin 1954 pour 1'entr~e dans les forces a~riennes non plus qu'aux examens du United Provinces Civil Service en 1955. Je
pr~tends qU'il n'y a la. qu'unenouvellepreuveque nous
n'intervenons pas dans le fonctionnement de ces organismes, qUi sont en dehors de 1'administration dans
l'int~ret de la communaut~, meme si notre intervention devait etre agr~able au Ciel. Nous ne pouvons pas
intervenir et dire qu'un candidat qui n'a pas les qualit~s requises, parce qu'il est musulman, hindou ou
brahmane, doit etre accept~. Les examens sont des
concours, et ils ont lieu sous le contr61e de la Commission des services publics int~ress~e, dans le cas
de l'administration civile, et sous le controle de
l!Union Public Service Commission et du Service
Selection Board lorsqu'il s'agit de l'entr~e ~ l'acad~­
mie militaire. En 1954, un candidat musulman a ~t6
choisi par le United Provinces Civil Service.

56. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan referred to the
Public Service examinations. For a ·considerable time
the head of the Public Service Commission in Indiacorresponding to the Civil Service Commission in the
United Kingdom-was a distinguished Moslem. On
account of ill-health he resigned.ltis quite true, as has
been stated, that no Moslem candidate was successful
in the Defence Academy examinations for the Air
Force held in June 1954, and in the United Provinces
Civil Service examinations in 1955. I submit that that
is only another proof that we do not interfere with
these bodies that are placed outside the administration
in the interests of the community, even if our intervention is on the side of the angels. We could not go in
and say, if a candidate is not according to the standard,
that he is either a Moslem or a Hindu or a Brahmin
and, therefore, he must be taken. The examinations,
however, are on a competitive basis under the control
of the Public Service Commission concerned, in the
case of civil applicants, and under the control of the
Union Public Service Commission and the SerVice
Selection Board for entry in the National Defence
Academy. A Moslem candidate was selected by the
United Provinces Civil Service in 1954.

57. When we come to the armed forces, the follOWing
number of Moslems were commissioned in the armed
forces in the last four years-and the number of commissions in each year is very small: in 1953, siX; in
1954, eleven; in 1955, three; in 1956, seven. So this
does not show discrimination on the grounds of religion.
But the most important thing in this matter is this. The
results of the National Defence Academy examinations
in 1954 have been mentioned and it is pertinent, therefore, to mention that the Commandant of the Academy
is Major General Habib Ullah. That is not the name of
a high class Brahmin; it is a Moslem name. He is a
Major Geheral in the Indian Army and he is the head of
the Academy, and there are plenty of Moslems holding
comparatively high offices in the Indian Air Force,
considering that it is a young air force-we have group
captains, wing commanders, squadron leaders, all
occupying high offices. The same applies in the Navy.

57. Venons-en aux forces armees. Le nombre des
musulmans promus officiers au cours des quatre derni~res ann~es est le suivant - et le nombre annuel
des promotions est tr~s faible - en 1953, 6; en 1954,
11; en 1955, 3; en 1956, 7. Ce n'est pas a l'indice
d'une discrimination fond~e sur la religion. Mais voici
le fait le plus important dans ce domaine. On a cit~
les r~sultats des examens d'entr~e itl'acad~miemilitaire en 1954; il convient donc de rappeler que le .commandant de cette acad~mie est le g~n~ral Habib Ullah.
Ce n'est pas a le nom d'un brahmanede haute classe;
c'est un nom musulman. Il est g~n~ral de division de
l'arm~e indienne et commandant de l'acad6mie. Il y a
un grand nombre de musulmans qui d~tiennent des
postes relativement ~lev~s dans les forces a~riennes
de l'lnde, dont il ne faut pas oublier qu'elles sont de
cr~ation r~cente: il y a des colonels, des lieutenantscolonels et des commandants qui, tous, occupent des
postes ~lev~s. Il en va de meme pour la marine.

58. Reference was made to communal riots, and I
think it is important that we should give the facts in
connexion with this. I believe that the facts given by
the Foreign Minister of Pakistan are probably correct.
Even it :hey are not accurate, we are prepared to
accept. al. There have been communal riots in India.
n is to our lasting shame that the passions of our

58. On a par16 d'~meutes religieuses. Je pense qu'il
importe de pr~ciser les faits dans ce domaine. Je
crois que les faits avanc~s par le Ministre des affaires
~trang~res du Pakistan sont prohablement exacts.
Meme s'ils ne le sont pas enti~rement, nous sommes
prets it les accepter. Il y a eu des ~meutes religieuses
dans l'lnde. Je dois reconnaftre, itnotrehonte, que les

16

rj

peop
Thei
natio
for
ques
jzati
have
inde

59.
abou
Paki
erab

Paki
-'

,"

y,

their
othe
agre
case
cam
brou
As
wom
leavi
India
conc
ing a
came
home
1956,
Augu
of t
milli
over
we h
60.

time,
exod
finis
camp
flick
of th
fury
I reg

say
say
stand
peopl
penal1
is COl
the ca

half 0
than

61.
I tho

how f

may
the ti

matte
Pakis

I

".~'

pour de
ation de

Isin~vi­

les connouveau

'est que
;ervices
es carbstacle.
llus est,
vertu de

Pakistan
mnaires.
services
Service
l par un
,r raison
~un can,e l'AcalUr l'enaux exa1955. Je
que nous
:esorga:ion dans
ntervenvons pas
les qualindou ou
sont des
la ComlS le cas
trOle de
Service

fJ

-'

y,

l'acad~­
nan a ~t~
I:)

nbre des
atreder'e annuel
en 1954,
~ l'indice
lais voici
On a cit~
mie milille,combibUllah.
:e classe;
,vision de
lie. n y a
ment des

!l

people are inflamed in the name of race and religion.
Their guilt of the assassination of the founder of our
nation casts its shadow on our history and will do so
for a considerable time, We accept this guilt; but the
question is whether it is due to the state of our organization ap.d our administration. The fact is that there
have probably been 350 communal riots in India since
independence.

passions de notre peuple se sont enflamm~es au nom
de la race etde la religion. Saculpabilit~ dans l'assassinat du fondateur de notre pays jette une ombre sur
notre histoire, et cette tache persistera pendantlongtemps encore. Nous reconnaissons notre culpabilit~;
mais H s'agit de savoir si celaestdil a l'~tat de notre
organisation et a notre administration. Le fait est
qu'H y a eu probablement 350 ~meutes religieuses
dans l'Inde depuis la proclamation de l'ind~pendance.

59. What is the position in Pakistan? I amnot talking
about the whole of Pakistan, but only of Eastern
Pakistan, where there is a Hindu minority of a considerable size. In 1950 the Prime Ministers of India and
Pakistan signed an agreement for the protection of
their respective minorities. They decided to help each
other and appealed to people on either side. Since that
agreement was signed in 1950, there have been 8,021
cases of communal incidents in which the minority
community were the victims, and these have been
brought to the notice of the East Pakistan Government.
As many as 1,762 of these involve offences against
women. Members of the minority community have been
leaving their hearths and homes and migrating into
India after being discriminated against and seriously
concerned about their honour and security. The following are the migration figures: in 1955, 239,031 people
came from Pakistan into India, leaving their Pakistan
homes-and I have the figures here month by month; in
1956, beginning'in January, there were 19,206, and in
August, 47,065. I have not the figures for the latter part
of the year but, since India became independent, 4
million members of the minority community have come
over from East Pakistan to seek refuge in India; and
we have given them asylum.

59. Quelle est la situation au Pakistan? Je ne parle
pas de l'ensemble du Pakistan, mais seulement du
Pakistan oriental, oil. la minorit~ hindoue est assez importante. En 1950, les Premiers Ministres de l'Inde
et du Pakistan ont sign~ un accord pour la protection
de leurs minorit~s respectives. Us ont d~cid~ de
s'aider mutuellement et ont fait appel a la population
de chacun des pays. Depuis la signature de cet accord
en 1950, il Y a eu 8.021 incidents religieux dans lesquels des membres de la minorit~ ~taient les victimes,
et ces cas ont ~t~ port~s a la connaissance du Gouvernement du Pakistan oriental. Dans ce nombre, Hn'y a
pas moins de 1.762 cas de violence contre des femmes.
Des membres de la minorit~ ont quitt~ leur foyer et
leur pays pour ~migrer en Inde apr~s avoir ~t~ victimes de discrimination et de menaces graves contre
leur honneur et leur s~curit~. Voiciles chiffres de ces
migrations: en 1955, 2390031 personnes ont quitt~ le
Pakistan pour l'Inde, abandonnant leur maison - j'ai
ici les chiffres mois par mois: en 1956, en janvier,
19.206, et, en aoiit, 47.065. Jen'aipasles chiffres relatifs a la derni~re partie de l'ann~e, mais, depuis que
l'Inde est un Etat ind~p6i1dant, quatre millions de personnes appartenant a la minorit~ ont quitt~ le Pakistan
oriental pour se rMugier en Inde, et nous leur avons
donn~ asile.

60. I propose, since I do not want to take too much
time, to circulate for information an account of this
exodus, publish(~d in the "Manchester Guardian" , which
finishes by saying: "Pakistan is playing with fire. By
comparison, Kashmir border incidents are not even
flickers." We regretthis. In India we do not make much
of this matter because one way to add to communal
fury is to give too much publicity to this information.
I regret that this has been drawn out of us. We do not
say this with any gusto. We take our share of guilt. We
say that our country is still not living up to its
standards either of non-violence or of respectfor other
people, religions, races or communities. But the
penalties imposed are severe; the vigilance exercised
is considerable, and the propaganda for eliminating
the cause of the friction is country-Wide. Now, this is
half of Pakistan-much less than half its area, but more
than half its population.

60. Je me propose, afin de ne pas etre trop long, de
distribuer a titre d'information un article relatif a cet
exode et publi~ dans le "Manchester Guardian", qui se
termine ainsi: "Le Pakistan joue avec le feu. En comparaison, les incidents de fronti~re du Cachemire ne
sont meme pas des ~tincelles." Nous d~plorons cette
situation. En Inde, nous ne parlons pas beaucoup de
cette question car nous estimons qu'endonnanttropde
publicit~ a ce genre d'information on ne fait qu'ajouter aux dissensions des communaut~s religieuses. Je
regrette qu'on nous ait oblig~ a parler de cette question. Nous n'~prouvons aucun plaisir a faire de telles
d~clarations. Nous acceptons notre part de responsabHit~. Nous reconnaissons que notre pays ne vit pas
encore en accord avec son id~al de non-violence ou de
respect de tous les peuples, de toutes les religions,
de toutes les races ou de toutes les communaut~s. Mais
les peines prononc~es sont s~v~res; nous faisons
preuve d'une grande vigilance, et nous nous livrons
dans tout le pays a une propagande intense pour ~limi­
ner les causes de d~saccord. Je pr~cise que les faits
que j'ai mentionn~s ci-dessus ne concernent que la
moiti~ du Pakistan - beaucoup moins de la moiti~ de
la superficie, mais plus de la moiti~ de la population.

l~riennes

is sont de
utenantsupent des
'ine.

61. Voila les faits, tels qu'ils ont ~t~ exposes. J'ai
de man devoir de faire connaftre au
Conseil de s~curit~ dans queUe mesure ils ~taient
exacts ou faux. On nous demandera peut-etre si le
Gouvernement de l'lnde a la droit de retenir liattention du Conseil de s~curit~ sur des questions qui rel~vent dans une tr~s large me sure de la comp~tence

61. Those are the facts that were put out and on which
I thought I should enlighten the Security Council as to
how far they are right or how far they are wrong. It
may be asked, why should the Government of India take
the time of the Security Council in order to deal with
matters that are largely the domestic concern either of
Pakistan or of India? The reason is very simple.

ense qu'il
naine. Je
s affaires
t exacts.
l sommes
lligieuses
,e, que les

I

pens~ qu'il ~tait

17

~i.

~

• . • .·•.'
...

.,.

:

j" . .

Because the basis ofthe Pakistan "claim" is that Kashmir is populated by Moslems and for some reason,
which is beyond the United Nations Charter, extraconstitutional, extra-legal, by some primordial rights,
these people really belong to the other side, irrespective of all legal and other arrange ments that are made.

interne du Pakistan ou de l'Inde. La raison qui nous a
pouss~ a. le faire est tr~s simple. Nous avons voulu
r~futer la "th~se" du Pakistan selon laquelle le Cael" ,mire serait peupl~ de musulmans qui, pour je ne sais
que1 obscur motif qui d~passe la Charte des Nations
Unies, les dispositions constitutionnelles et meme le
droit - en vertu de je ne sais quels droits primordiaux - appartiendraient r~ellement a. l'autre camp,
ind~pendamment de tout accord, juridique ou autre.

62. We are proud of the fact-a fact which my colleague described-that we are a secular State. We mfl,ke
no differences between different religions. There are
5 million Roman Catholics in India and we have had no
difficulties, and I hope that they have not had any. We
have not heard of any. And that is the position. That
completes my answer to the statements that have been
made.

62. Nous nous enorgueillissons du fait - soulign~
par mon coll~gue - que nous sommes un Etat lai'que.
Nous ne faisons aucune difMrence entre les diverses
religions. Cinq millions de catholiques vivent dans
f'Inde et cela ne nous a crM aucune difficult~, et
j' esp~re que cela ne leur en a pas occasionn~ non plus.
Du moins pas a. notre connaissance. Telle est la situation r~elle. Je crois avoir compl~tement r~pondu aux
d~clarations qui ont ~t~ faites ict

63. The next part of my intervention in this matter is
to deal with the situation we have before us. I said the
last time that the so-called Jammu and Kashmir problem that is before the Council has arisen as a result of
a complaint which in substance is of aggression or of
invasion, because 'abetting a crime is the same as a
crime or participating in it. You can be an accessory
before or after the fact-a description not known to
English law but known to other systems. So that was
where it began. Two answers have been given and two
thoughts are in the minds of the members of the Security Council.

63. Je me propose maintenant de traiter de la situation dans laquelle nous nous trouvons a l'heure actuelle.
J'ai dit, au cours de ma derni~re intervention, que si
le Conseil ~tait saisi du pr~tendu probl~me de Jammu
et Cachemire, c'~tait a. la suite d'une plainte d'agression oud'invasion, car encourager un crime ~quivaut
a le commettre O'U a y participer. On peut etre complice par instigation ou par assistance: c'est la. une
distinction que ne reconnaft pas le droit britannique,
mais que reconnaissent d'autres syst~mesjuridiques.
C'est donc ainsi que cela a commenc~. Les membres
du Conseil de s~curit~ ont maintenant re~u deux r~­
ponses et entendu deux tMses.

64. One is what Mr. Ts:.mg referred to the other day
[765th meeting, para. 66]: that the Council decided to
by-pass the question of agg·~ession. I have been at some
difficulty in trying to deal with this matter because we
have no desire to enter into controversies with members of the Council. We are invited here to state our
case and I hope that I will no~ say anything that infringes upon your status as members of this august
body. But I do not know what "by-pass" exactly is
intended to mean. By-passing means not traversing that
region. That does not mean that the region does not
exist. A by-pass is u~ually a short-cuttoyour goal. If
you cannot get to that goal because some trees are
across the road or because the road has fallen away,
then you have to go back to where you started from and
go along the norma] road. Therefore, even taking this
"by-passing", it does not constitute any kind of nonexistence of this fact.

64. Selon l'une de ces th~ses, a laquelle M. Tsiang
s'est r~f~r~ l'autre jour [765~me s~ance, par. 66], le
Conseil aurait d~cid~ denepastenircomptede l'accusation d'agression. J'~prouve quelque gene a vous exprimer mon sentiment en la mati~re, car je ne tiens
pas a engager de controverse avec les membres du
Conseil. Nous avons ~t~ invit~s a exposer notre cas
devant le Conseil, et j'esp~re ne rien dire qui puisse
porter atteinte a la dignit~ de cet auguste a~ropage.
Mais je ne comprends pas exactement ce que l'on entend signifier par "ne pas tenir compte", par "~viter".
Eviter une r~gion, c'est ne pas la traverser. Cela ne
veut pas dire que la r~gion n'existe pas. D'une mani~re
g~n~rale, on evite un lieu donn~ pour arriver plus rapidement au but. Si l'on ne peut pas atteindre le but
parce que la route est barr~e par des arbres ou parce
qu'elle a ~t~ d~truite, la meilleure solution consiste
a. revenir au point de d~part et a emprunter la voie
normale. Par cons~quent, a supposer meme que l'on
ait voulu "~viter" la question, cela ne veut pas dire
que le fait n'existe pas.

65. I refer the Council to the various statements that
have been made in the following order. First, there
was a set of statements at the beginning of this difficulty. Then Mr. Gopalaswami Ayyimgar, Sheikh Abdullah and others made statements before this Council,
and each time a proposal was put forward they entered
a caveat and said "our original complaint is this: we
do not move away from there; we are prepared to
consider other matters." This process has been
repeated in the wholeproceedingsofthe United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan. The sovereignty of
the Jammu and Kashmir Government has never been
questioned. That is why Pakistan has never been given

65. .re renvoie le Conseil aux diverses d~clarations
qui ont ~t~ formuMes ace sujet, dans l'ordre 011 elles
ont ~t~ faites. Il y a d'abord toute la s~rie des d~cla­
rations prononc~es au d~but de l'affaire. A l'~poque,
M. Gopalaswami. Ayyangar, le cheik Abdullah et
d'autres ont pris la parole devantle Conseil et, chaque
fois qu'une proposition leur ~tait soumise, ils s'y sont
oppos~s, en d~clarant: "Nous nous en tenons a notre
plainte initiale; mais nous sommes prets :lconsid~rer
d' autres questions." Il en a ~t~ de meme pendant toute
la dur~e des travaux de la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan. La souverainet~ du
Gouvernement du Jammu et Cachemire n'a jamais~M

18

by

ult
Co
re
co
it

I,

l

•

Q

J

66.

tio
Si
th
In
ha
ou
tio
in
int
la
th
qu
fri
If

f~;

no
su

67.

ab
is
an
in
wil
sa
we
ele
am
do
int
co
giv
on.

68.

it
cal
wis
for
sta

I

1 qui nous a

avons voulu
le le CacI', 'r je ne sais
des Nations
et meme le
its primormtre camp,
ou autre.

- soulign~
Etat lai'que.
es diverses
vivent dans
lifficult~, et
[J~ non plus.
~st la situar~pondu aux

de la situaIre actuelle.
ltion, que si
e de Jammu
lted'agresme ~quivaut
t etre comc'est lil une
Jritannique,
j juridiques.
is membres
gu deux r~~ M.

Tsiang
par. 66J, le
ede l'accu~ il vous ex· je ne tiens
nembres du
ir notre cas
~ qui puisse
e a~ropage.
1ue l'on enar "~viter".
ler. Cela ne
me mani1!re
verplus raindre le but
es ou parce
.on consiste
nter la voie
me que 1'on
mt pas dire
l~clarations

ire Oll elles
i des d~cla­
A l'~poque,
\bdullah et
.1 et, chaque
· Us s 'y sont
Ions i\. notre
· consid~rer
mdant toute
des Nations
'erainet~ du
l jamais~t~

. ,
t'

:

a place in either the plebiscite organization or anything
of that character, or indeed in the Government of the
occupied area, which was supposed to be given to the
local authorities. (Although I have the papers here, in
view of the time, if you will permit me, I will not read
them.) From the very day we brought this complaint
and on each subsequent occasion when Sir Benegal Rau,
a member of this Council, spoke on this matter several
times, we have emphasized this point. That was one of
the main difficulties in dealingwithGeneralMcNaughton, because we thought that the procedures suggested
-not adopted, suggested; they were only suggestionsby both General McNaughton and Sir Owen Dixon were
ultra vires of the resolutions of the United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan, because those
resolutions accepted something as basic. And we will
come to that in a moment, because I have to deal with
it fully according to the instructions of my Government.

mise en doute. Cela explique que le Pakistann'ait pas
~M invit~ il participer ill'organisation du pMbiscite
ni a. toute autre activit~ du meme ordre, ni meme a
l'administration de la r~gion occup~e, qui devait etre
I confMe aux autorit~s locales. (Eien que j'aie les docu;:ments sous la main, je m'abstiendrai, avec votrepermission, d'en donner lecture, en raison du peu de temps
dont nous disposons.) Nous avons attir~ l'attention sur
ce point d1!s le jour Oll ilOUS avons formul~ notre
plainte, et chaque fois que sir Benegal Rau, qui participait aux d~lib~rations du Conseil, a pris la parole il est intervenu a. plusieurs reprises sur la question.
Ce fut la du reste une des principales causes de nos
difficult~s avec le g~n~ralMcNaughton,parcequenous
avons estim~ que les m~thodes que le g~n(§ral
McNaughton et sir Owen Dixon avaient sugg~r~ d'adopter - je dis "sugg~r~ d'adopter" et non pas nadopt~",
car il ne s'agissait en fait que de suggestions - d~pas­
saient les pouvoirs pr~vus dans les r(§solutions adopt~es par la Commission des Nations Unies pour I'lude
et le Pakistan, car ces r~solutions (§noncaient des
principes fondamentaux. Nous reviendrons sur ce point
dans quelques instants, car je dois le traiter a fond,
conform~ment aux instructions de mon gouvernement.

66. Then came the period when we were in negotiations, and proposals of various kinds were made by
Sir Owen Dixon and, afterwards, by Mr. Graham.I ask
the Council to look at the five reports of Mr. Graham.
In each of these, there is mention of the position we
have reaffirmed and they are set forth categorically as
our position. We have never withdrawn from theposition that the problem before the Commission is one of
invasion. That arises from the fact that Kashmir is an
integral part of India and it became a part of India by
law, by the right of protection, and by the desires of
the people as far as we could ascertain them. The
question was asked of me yesterday, by a very good
friend, a person for whom I have a very great regard:
If this were so-he used some other words which are
not very parliamentary-then why in the world did you
suggest a plebiscite?

66. La p~riode des n~gociations est venue ensuite;
elle a ~t~ marqu~e pa.r les diverses propositions de
sir Owen Dixon et, ult(§rieurement, de M. Graham. Je
demande au Conseil de lire les cinq rapports de
M. Graham. Chacun de ces rapports fait mention de
1'attitude que nous maintenions et pr~cise de fa~on cat~gorique qu'il s'agit lilde notre position. Nousne nous
sommes jamais (§cart(§s de notre position, selon laquelle la question dont la Commission est saisie est
celle de l'invasion. Cela provient de ce que le Cachemire fait partie int~grante de l'Inde et de ce qu'il est
devenu une partie de ce pays sur le plan juridique, en
vertu du droit de protection et des souhaits de la population, dans la mesure ou nous avonspuIes constater.
Un excellent ami, une personne pour quij'~prouveune
tr1!s haute estime, m'a pos(§ hier la question: "S'H en
~tait ainsi - il s'est exprim(§ en un style moinsparlementaire - pourquoi donl:. avez-vous sugg~r~ un pMbiscite?" .

67. I want to make this very clear-it is a little bit
abstruse probably-: the accession is complete. Butit
is possible for any sovereign Government to terminate
an accession after the accession and the incorporation
in law and in fact of the territory acceded. And if you
will read the original complaint what does it say? It
says that if we are to meet this aggression effectively
we would have to invade Pakistan. That is an ordinary
elementary problem of military science, I am told-I
am not a military man-, and we said, this is what we
do not want to do; we do not want this to develop into an
international war between us, which may have other
consequences. We warned you to ask Pakistan not to
give succour and aid, not to assist the invaders, and so
on. Therefore, we came here.

67. Je d~sire que ce point soit bien pr~cis~; la question est probablement quelque peu obscure: l'accession
est compl1!te. Mais il est possible pour tout gouvernement souverain de mettre fin a l'accession, apr1!s l'accession et l'incorporation en droit et en fait du territoire qui a accM~. Et si vous lisez le texte de la
plainte initiale, que dit-il? Il dit que pour faire face
efficacement a l'agression, il nous faudrait envahir le
Pakistan. C'est la un simp~e probl1!me ~l~mentaire de
science militaire, me dit-on - je ne suis pas militaire - et nous avons dit aIors que nous ne voulions
pas agir ainsi; nous ne d~sirions pas que ce conflit
d~g~n1!re en une gue~'re internatim"!ale entre nous, qui
pourrait avoir d'autres constlquences. Nous vous avons
conseilM de demander au Pakistan de ne donner aucune
aide, de ne pas accorder d'assistance aux envahisseurs,
etc. C'est pourquoi nG-lS sommes venus ict

68. With regard to this whole question of a plebiscite,
it was not a plebiscite in the beginning; it was what is
called a reference to the people, ascertaining their
wishes or something of that character; no particular
form was gb 3n to it. It arose from our own voluntary
statement, 0riginally addressed to the Ruler, an en-

68. Pour ce qui est de toute cette question du pl~­
biscite, il ne s'agissait pas, au d~but, d'un pl~biscite;
il ~tait question de ce que l'on appelle une consultation
populaire, en vue de d~terminer les d~sirs de la population, ou de quelque chose de ce genre; aucune forme
particuli1!re ne lui a ~t~ donn~e. ElJ.e r~sultait de notre

19

•

~, ]

gagement between ourselves, our consciences, and the
peoples of Kashmir. But, at any rate, its relation to
accession is this: any discussion, any resolutions, any
statements here as our common desire to finally decide
this matter by plebiscite is not either in law or in fact
or in political argument, in reality or in truth, any
admission or any belief founded upon an idea that there
is such a thing as temporary accession. The accession,
it is true, can be terminated by our sovereign will. It
is possible for any sovereign State to cede territory.
If, as a result of a plebiscite, the people decided that
they did not want to stay with India, then our duty at
that time would be to adopt those constitutional procedures which would enable us to separate that
territory.

propre d~claration, destin~e a. l'origine au souverain.
un engagement entre nous-memes, nos
consciences, et le peuple duCachemire. Mais, detoute
fa<;on, le. rapport entre cette suggestion etl'accession
est le suivant: aucune discussion, aucune r~solution,
aucune d~claration faite ici et touchant notre d~sir
commun de r~gler d~finitivement cette question au
moyen d'un nl~biscite n'implique r~ellement, ni en
droit, ni en fait, ni sur le plan de la discussion politique, que l'on admette defa<;onquelconquel'existence
d'une accession temporaire. Il est possible, il est
vrai, de mettre fin a.l'accession: celapeut etre fait par
notre volont~ souveraine. Tout Etat souverain peut
c6der un territoire. Si, a. la suite d'un pl~biscite, le
peuple d~cidait de ne plus rester uni a. l'Inde, nous
aurions alors pour devoir d'appliquer une proc~dure
constitutionnelle permettant d'assurer la s~paration
de ce territoire.

69. That is what is likely to happen in regard to the
French possessions in India, where by friendly negotiations, these small territories have been transferred to
India de facto, under IndIan administration. Some day
they will be transferred de jure. We cannot ignore the
constitutional procedures of France. When the time
comes, there will be a treaty which cedes in law and
then it will no longer be French territory. And here I
am not revealing any secret, because it is part of
published news, but neither they nor we are rushing
this matter because there is no need to do so. It was
all done in a friendly way. Therefore, when we offered
a plebiscite, or rather suggested a plebiscite, we had
these things in mind. First of all, we wanted to find
ways and means where the spreading of this conflict
could be avoided and bloodshed could be done away with.
Secondly, we were prepared to accept a test. Now a test
does not in any way argue that the union does not exist.
But we were prepared to put the union to the test.

69. C'est probablement ce qui se produira pour les
possessions fran<;aises dans l'Inde. Grace a des n~go­
ciations men~es a. l'amiable, ces petits territoires ont
~t~ transf~r~s de facto a. l'Inde, qui les administre.
Un jour, ils seront transf~r~sde jure. Nous ne pouvons
pas ne pas tenir compte des r~gles constitutionnelles en
vigueur en France. Lorsque le moment sera venu, un
trait~ sera conclu, en vertu duquel cesterritoires seront c6d~s de jure, et alors il ne s'agira plus de territoires fran<;ais. Je ne r~vMe ici aucun seeret, car cela
a d~ja. ~t~ publi~. Ni les uns ni les autres ne montrent
de hate dans cette affaire, parcequ'iln'estpas n~ces­
saire de le faire. Tout s'est d~roul~ d'une mani~re
amicale. C'est pourquoi, lorsque nous avons offert,
ou plutot sugg~r~, d'organiser un pl~biscite, nous
avons pens~ a. cela. Tout d'aborci, nousd~sirionstrou­
vel' les voies et moyens permettant d'~viter que ce
conflit ne s'~tende etdemettrefina.l'effusion de sang.
Deuxi~mement, nous ~tions dispo.
3 a accepter que
l'on proc~de a. une ~preuve. Avoir recours a. ce proc~d~, cela ne signifie nullement que l'union n'existe
pas. Mais nous ~tions dispos~s a. mettre l'union a.

C'~tait

;r

I
\

;)

",
1

is the Counc
in the terms
ernor-Gener
-land? It co
States that
Kingdom list
ment at that
up to 15Augu
ing to the p
presented fo
Britain. So it
in this matte
maintain this
This fundam

72. It is no
in 1947. I req
every assur
maries mad
India on this
The Prime
this matter
definitely m
illegally, as
resolutions.
73. The sec
had a complai
told uS-"and
cels the othe
mind and his
our recogni
China. Perso
I have read p
ject. Much of

l'~preuve.

70. A member of Parliament or a government may be
safely in office. They may even have a comfortable
majority. They may be challenged in the country on a
particular issue. Then they may take it into their heads
to go to the country and ask for a mandate. There is no
obligation for them to do so. The fact that they appeal to
the electorate does not mean that it is an illegal government. It simply means that if the mandate goes
against that government, it ceases to be a government.
Therefore, it is wrong to argue that because a plebiscite was suggested this becomes disputed territoryand the word "dispute" occurs in no resolution of the
Security Council to which we are parties. I will come
to that later.

70. Un gouvernement ou un membre du parlement
peuvent occuper une position sure. Ils peuvent meme
s'appuyer sur une forte majorit~. Mais il se peut que,
sur un point particulier, ils cessent de b~nMicier de
l'appui des ~lecteurs. Us peuvent alors d~cider de
faire appel au pays pour demander le renouvelleYJ.ent
de leur mandat. Us ne sont pas oblig6s de le faire.
Qu'ils s'adressent au corps ~lectoral ne signifie pas
qu'il s'agit d'un gouvernementilMgitime. Celasignifie
simplement que si ce gouvernement ne jouitplusde la
confiance des ~lecteurs il cesse d'etre un gouvernement v~ritable. En cons6quence, il est faux de pr~­
tendre que, parce qu'on a propos~ d'organiser unpMbiscite dans un territoire, celui-ci devientun territoire
en litige - d'ailleurs, le mot "litige" ne figure dans
aucune des r~solutions du Conseil de s6curit~ qui nous
concernent. Je reviendrai plus tard sur ce point.

71. Therefore, what was possible, if there had been a
pIebiscite, would have been the termination of that state
of affairs. The termination of that state of affairs is
not to argue that it did not exist. Those are two widely
different propositions, and they go to the root of this
matter. If that were not so, then the action of Pakistan
would not be the invasion of our sovereign territory.
Then the Security Council would have to wonder: what

71. Par consequent, si un pl~biscite avait eu lieu, la
situation existant dans l'Etat aurait peut-Eltre cess~.
Que la situation cesse ne permet pas de conclure
qu'elle n'existait pas. Ce sont la. deux propositions enti~ement diff~rentes et qui touchent le fond m€lme du
probl~me. S'il en ~tait autrement, l'intervention du
Pakistan ne pour!"ait pas €ltre consid~r~e comme une
invasion de notTe territoire souverain. Le Conseil de

20

74. My GOVE
this state mer
Noel-Bakerknow better
of internatio
himself denie
or from one
stopped. Find
was his attitu
this particul
prosecution.
matter, it wo
very difficul
complaint of
the Security
position of a
that.

75. Let me l'

represents n
or unexpress
answered hi

is the Council considering?WhatwasKasl ,\i.r?Wasit,
in the terms of Mr. Rajagopalachari, a former Governor-General of India, an elder statesman, a no-man' s
-land? It could not be because it was among the 562
states that His Majesty's Government in the United
Kingdom listed, and with whom His Majesty's Government at that time had friendly treaties. Whatis more,
up to 15 August 1947, the Maharaja of Kashmir, according to the practice from the time of Queen Victoria,
presented four Kashmir shawls to the Sovereign of
Britain. So it was an integral State and, as you will see
in this matter all along, there had been great pains to
maintain this position. We came here for that reason.
This fundamental position has not altered.

s~curit~ devrait alors se demander: Quelle est la question a.l'examen? Qu'est-ce que le Cachemire? Est-ce,
comme l'a dit M. Rajagopalachari, ancien gouverneur
g~n~ral de PInde et homme d'Etat exp~riment~, un
"no-man's-land"? C'est im!)ossible puisqueleCachemire faisait partie des 562 Etats dontla liste avait ~t~
~tablie par le gouvernement de Sa Majest~ dans le
Royaume- Uni et avec lesquels ce gouvernement avait
sign~, a. cette ~poque, des traitas d'amiti~. En outre,
jusqu'au 15 aout 1947·, le maharajah de Cachemire,
selon un usage ~tabli au temps de la reine Victoria,
a offert quatre chales du Cachemire au roi d'Angleterre. Il s'agit donc d'un v~ritable Etat et, comme
vou's aurez maintes occasions de le constater, c'estla.
un fait que l' on a eu beaucoup de peine a. faire admettre.
C' est pour cette raison que nous nous sommes adress~s
au Conseil. Notre position initiale a. ce sujet n'a pas
chang~.

72. It is not as though we were the insurredionists
in 1947. I request the Security Council members to read

72. On ne saurait pr~tendre que c'est nous qui avons
provoqu~ l'insurrection de 1947. J'invite les membres
du Conseil de sacurit~ a. lire toutes les d~clarations,

every assurance, every resolution, even the summaries made by Mr. Graham, where the position of
India on this matter has been consistently maintained.
The Prime Minister himself, who has been dealing with
this matter as Minister of External Affairs, has
definitely maintained our position right along and not
illegally, as you will see when I come to discuss the
resolutions.

toutes les r~solutions, et meme les comptes rendus
r~digas par M. Graham, d'o]) il ressort que la position
de l'Inde sur cette question n'a jamais vari~. Le Premier Ministre lui-meme, qui s'est occupa de cette
question en qualit~ de Ministre des affaires ~trangllres,
a toujours maintenu notre position, et, ce faisant, il
n'agissait pas de fac;on ill~gale, ainsi que vous le
constaterez lorsque j'examinerai les r~solutions.

73. The second link or charge or rebuttal is: "Yes, you
had acomplaintofaggression"-thisiswhatMr. Tsiang
told us-"and they had a counter-complaint. One cancels the other."Ihaveagreatrespectfor Mr. Tsiang's
mind and his intelligence. This has nothing to do with
our recognition or non-recognition of Nationalist
China. Personal relations and regards must continue.
I have read practically everything he said on this subject. Much of it is extremely cautious.

73. Le second point, c'est-a.-dire la secondeaccusation ou le second grief qui a ~t~ formul~ centre nous
est le suivant: "C'est entendu, vous vous etes plaints
qu'il y avait eu une agression (c'est ce que M. Tsiang
nous a dit), et l'autre partie a formuM une contreaccusation. Ces deux accusations s'annulent." J'ai le
plus grand respect pour M. Tsiang et j 'admire son intelligence. Cela n'a aucun rapport avec la question de
la reconnaissance ou de la non-reconnaissance de la
Chine nationaliste. Les relations personnelles doivent
se poursuivre et l'estime doit subsister. J'ai lu a. peu
prlls tout ce qu'il a dit sur cette question. La plupart
de ses daclarations sont extremement prudentes.

74. My Government would not be prepared to accept
this statement or any argument put forward by Mr.
Noel-Baker-who was my teacher and who I probably
know better than anyone else in this room-as an axiom
of international law in this matter. Mr. Noel-Baker
himself denies it, because he starts from one principle
or from one objective. He says: "The fighting has to be
stopped. Find anything that will stop the fighting. " That
was his attitude. Secondly, to quote Mr. Noel-Baker in
this particular way is to quote the counsel for the
prosecution. Though we are not the defendants in this
matter, it would so look. You know, our people find it
very difficult to accept that. We come here with a
complaint of invasion as a complainant, and all along
the Security Council in its proceedings puts us into the
position of a defendant. We are not prepared to accept
that.

74. A cet agard, mon gouvernement n'er pasdispos~
a. accepter cette daclaration ni aucun des arguments
avancas par M. Noel-Baker - qui a ~t~ mon professeur
et que je connais sans doute mieux que personne dans
cette salle - comme un principe du droit international. M. Noel-Baker rafute lui-meme cet argument
parce qu'il part d'un principe ou d'un objectif: Il dit
en effet: "Il faut mettre fin aux combats. Trouvez
n'importe quel moyen de les faire cesser." Telle ~tait
son attitude. Citer ces paroles de M. Noel-Baker,
c'est citer le ministllre public. Bien que ce ne soit
pas le cas, on dirait que nous sommes les accus~s dans
cette affaire. Je ne vous cacherai pas que le peuple
indien a de la peine a. accepter cette situation. Nous
faisons appel au Consei.l en qualit~ de plaignants pour
formuler une accusation d'invasion et, au cours des
d~bats, le Conseil de s~curit~ n'a pas cessa de nous
faire jouer le role d'accus~s. Nous ne sommes pas
disposas a.l'accepter.

75. Let me return to Mr. Tsiangbecausewhathe said
represents not only his view but either the expressed
or unexpressed view of many others. I thought I had
answered him the last time, but my capacity for ex-

75. Je reviens a. M. Tsiang parce que ce qu'il a dit
repr~sente non seulement son opinion mais l'opinion
d~clar~e ou inexprimae de beaucoup d'autres. Je
croyais lui avoir rapondu la dernillre fois que j'ai

21

j1
"
j1

Ij

li

pression and for conveying ideas seems to be extremely
limited.

pris la parole, mais il semble que mes capacit~s
d'expression soient extremement limit~es.

76. There was our complaint of invasion. The answer
was: "Yes, you had a complaint of invasion. They had a
counter-claim, and that counter-claim washes this
out." Now anyone who is accustomed to reading documents and who examines this objectively will find that
this argument does not bear examination. What did we
complain about? We complained about what was
virtually the invasion of Kashmir, whatever words we
used. And after conciliation efforts on our partfailed,
we invoked Chapter VI of the Charter. What was
Pakistan's reply? It was a long document [S/1100,
annex 6] of three sections, the greater part of which
had nothing to do with Kashmir. It went so far as to
charge us with genocide and a lot of other things.
Pakistan charged us with not having proper economic
relations with it, and I suppose that, if the time had
been given, perhaps it might have been said even with
their survival. So the so-called counter-claim consists
of a very large number of other matters.

76. Nous nous sommes plaints d'une invasion. On nous
a r~pondu: "C'est entendu, vousvousetesplaintsd'une
invasion, mais l'autre partie a formul~ une contreaccusation qui annule votre plainte." Toute personne
habitu~e a. ~tudier des donn~es et qui consid~rerait
cet argument avec objectivit~ constaterait qu'il ne
r~siste pas a l'examen. De quoi nous sommes-nous
plaints? Nous nous sommes plaints que le Cachemire
ait, en fait, ~t~ envahi, quels que soient les termes
que nous avons utilis~s. Et, apr~s l'~chec de nos tentatives de conciliation, nous avons invoqu~ le Chapitre VI de la Charte. Quelle a ~t~ la r~poIlse du
Pakistan? Un long document [S/1100, annexe 6] divis~
en trois parties, dont les trois quarts n'avaient aucun
rapport avec le Cache mire. Dans ce document, le Pakistan allait jusqu'a nous accuser de g~nocide et de
bien d'autres crimes. Nous ~tions accus~s de ne pas
entretenir de bonnes relations ~conomiques avec le
Pakistan et je suppose que, si on lui en avait laiss~
le temps, le Pakistan nous aurait peut-etre meme
accus~s de vouloir l'empecher de survivre. Ainsi
donc, dans la pr~tendue contre-accusation, il entre
un grand nombre d'arguments ~trangers iUaquestion.

77. Let us assume for argument's sake that these
other matters might have some value. Apparently the
value of the document, so far as the Security Council is
concerned, is to be judged by the fact that the Council
decided to put it on the shelf. The Council has not
considered it since. But whatever that may be, with
regard to Kashmir, the only answer is contained in
paragraph 3 of the document which I quoted to the
Council before [S/1100, annex 6, document I]. It is in
the documents. What does it say? We alleged invasion
and Sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan denied it; that is,
he has said not that the invasion was right and not that
it was not an invasion. The Pakistanis did not say: "We
are going to our own territory." They did not say: "We
are not going to Indian territory." They did not say:
"We have notinvaded." The answer was not any of these
things, but that they were not there. Therefore, the
answer was a denial.

77 . Supposons un instant que ces arguments aient
quelque valeur. Il semble que le fait que le Conseil
ait d~cid~ de classer ce document - et le Conseil ne
l'a pas examint§ depuis lors - permette de juger de la
valeur qU'il revet il ses yeux. Quoi qu'il en soit, la
seule r~ponse valable en ce qui concerne le Cachemire
est contenue dans le paragraphe 3 dudocument que j'ai
d~ja. cit~ ici [S/1100, annexe 6, document I]. On la
trouve dans les textes. Qu'est-il dit dans ce paragraphe? Nous nous sommes plaints d'une invasion et
sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan a rejet~ notre plainte;
c'est-a.-dire qu'il n'a pas affirm~ que l'invasion ~tait
justifi~e ni qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une invasion. Les
Pakistanais n'ont pas dit: "Nous p~n~trons sur not re
propre territoire." Us n'ont pas dit: "Nous ne p~n~­
trons pas ~ r un territoire indien." Ils n' ont pas dit
non plus: "Nous n'avons envahi aucun territoire." Us
n'ont donn~ aucune de ces r~ponses; ils ont simplement dit qu'ils n'~taient pas au Cachemire. Leur r~­
pan se consistait donc a rejeter laplainte.

78. If that denial had been substantiated by factsnot by facts that we adduced but which the Commission
adduced, and therefore the Security Council adducedthen that denial would have had value. But the facts are
otherwise. Pakistanis were found there. We found them.
Our generals went to cocktail parties with them. They
were part of the same army. We soon found out they
were there. General Tariq, who was Akbar Khan of the
Army, had taken off his shoulder straps and had become
the leader of the commandos. Of course they denied
that there was an army. At any rate, later it was admitted. What is more, at earlier stages of the invasion,
starting from 10 October, during the period of Major
General Scott's diary and later up to October and
November, Pakistan was gUilty of invasion of our
country. It committed the crime of depredation upon
the sovereign territory of India, of a neighbour which
was trying very hard to liVE on good terms with it, a
neighbour which, for the price of our common independence, had admitted to the sundering of our territory. I
will come to our relations in the future.

78. Si ce rejet avait ~t~ fond~surdesfaits - non pas
sur les faits que nous avons ~tablis, mais sur ceux que
la Commission a ~tablis et que, par cons~quent, le
Conseil de s~curit~ a reconnus - il aurait eu quelque
valeur. Mais les faits sont diff~rents. On a constat~
qu'il y avait des Pakistanais au Cachemire. Nous les
avons vus. Nos g~n~raux les ont rencontr~s il des
cocktails. Us faisaient partie de la meme arm~e. Nous
nous sommes vite aper<;us de leur pr~sence. Le g~'1~ral
Tariq, qui dans l'arm~e s'appelait Akbar Khan, avait
retir~ ses ~paulettes pour se meUre a. la tete des
commandos. Bien entendu, ils ont ni~ qu'il exisHit une
arm~e. Quoi qU'il en soit, ils l'ont admispar la suite.
Bien plus, aux premiers stades de l'invasion, apartir
du 10 oetobre, durant la p~riode sur laquelle porte le
journal du g~n~ral ScoU et plus tard, jusqu'aoctobrenovembre, le Pakistan s'est rendu coupable d'invasion
de notre territoire. Il a commis des d~pr~dations sur
le territoire souverain de l'Inde, pays voisin qUi faisait
tout son possible pour vivre en bons termes avec lui,
pays qui, pour obtenir notre commune ind~pendance,
22

79. There
respect to
washes out
is a denial
Council, w
nothing els
to go there

80. An ar
of Pakist
am sorry t
did he say
only by ac
KashmirMarshal
Why? Beca
standstill
agreement,
accession
for the P
Khan, spe
this stands
cations an
say that it
affairs. Bu
concluded
offered the
What is mo
away in tho
cession. A
agreement,
COillltry to
marauders
was dead.
ment, that
is a super
higher leve
the standst
actions of J.Ii
General-at
by these p
mission by
more by t
with the in

81. For a
which was
bleeding, t
etc.-that h
remains is
Owen Dixo
Sir Owen
quote him
reasons.
82. The on
with Sir Ow
bad as it
DLxon depa
Council an

it~s

,
I

10US
tune
:remne
rait
l ne
lOUS
lire
mes
:enha~ du
ns~

lcun
Pat de
pas
: le
ss~

lme
insi
ltre
ion.

ient
seil
l ne
~ la
, la
lire
i'ai
1 la
ra1 et
lte;
t.ait
l..es
Itre

~

n~-

dit
Us

Iler~-

pas
que
le
que

a accept~ le morcellement de notre territoire. Je parlerai plus tard de nos rapports.
79. Therefore, the answer to the complaint, I say, with
respect to Mr. Tsiang, is not a counter-claim that
washes out the matter. It is not a plus and a minus. It
is a denial. If that denial is disproved by the Security
Council, what is the desideratum? The aggression,
nothing else. Pakistan's case was not "we have a right
to go there", but "we did not go there".

79. Je d~clare donc, en ce qui concerne M. Tsiang,
que la r~ponse a notre plainte n'est pas une contreaccusation qui r~gle la question. n ne s'agit pas de
compenser un plus par un moins. Il s'agit d'un rejet
de la plainte. Si le Conseil de s~curit~ ne consid~re
pas ce rejet comme valable, que lui reste-t-il a faire?
Il ne lui reste qu'a constater l'agression. Le Pakistan
n' a pas d~fini sa position de la mani~re suivante: "nous
avons le droit d'aller auCachemire", mais adit: "nous
n'y sommes pas all~s".

80. An argument was adduced by the Foreign Minister
of Pakistan at this stage in the Council on grounds, I
am sorry to say, that will not stand e:".amination. What
did he say? He said that the Government of India, not
only by accepting accession but by sending troops to
Kashmir-about which I rF.id General Lockhart and Air
Marshal Elmhirst's story-committed aggression.
Why? Because the Maharaja of Kashmir had made a
standstill agreement wit.h Pakistan and the standstill
agreement, according to Pakistan, is a kind of semiaccession which gave it sovereignty. But unfortunately
for the Pakistan argument, Sir Mohammed Zafrullah
Khan, speaking before the Security Council, said that
this standstill agreement was in regard to communications and 'post offices and what not, and he did not
say that it included the rights of defence and external
affairs. But assuming it did, it was the Maharaja who
concluded the standstill agreement; the Maharaja
offered the same standstill agreement to two countries.
What is more, what the Maharaja can give he can take
away in those circumstances-not the conditions of accession. And Pakistan, having violated that standstill
agreement, and the Maharaja having asked another
country to come to his defence against Pakistan-aided
marauders in his country-the standstill agreement
was dead. First, even if there was a standstill agreement, that would give no right to sovereignty; accession
is a superior document, it is a major right; it is a
higher level of right which kills the lower one. Secondly,
the standstill agreement has been violated by the
actions of Mr .Jinnah' s administration-then GovernorGeneral-and the supreme authority in Pakistan whereby these people were being sort of starved into submission by being denied salt, oil and food, and what is
more by the 73,000 Pathan raiders being· collected
with the invitation to loot the territory.

80. Un certain argument a ~t~ invoqu~ r~cemmentau
Conseil par le Ministre des affaires ~trang~resdu Pakistan, qui s'est fond~ sur des consid~rations qui, je
regrette de devoir le dire, ne r~sistentpas a l' examen.
Qu'a dit le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res? Il a dit
que le Gouvernement de l'Inde, non seulement en acceptant l'accession, mais ~galement en envoyant des
troupes au Cachemire - a ce sujet,j'aiparl~dug~n~­
ral Lockhart et du mar~chalElmhirst - a commis une
agression. Pourquoi? Parce que le maharajah de
Cachemire avait conclu avec le Pakistan un accordde
statu quo, qui, selon le Pakistan, repr~senteen quelque
sorte une semi-accession qui lui conf~re la souverainet~. Mais, malheureusement pour la th~se du Pakistan,
sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan a dit devant le Conseil
de s~curit~ que cet accord de statu quo concernait les
communications, les services postaux, etc.; il n'apas
dit qu'il s'appliquait a la d~fense nationale ou aux affaires ext~rieures. Mais, a supposer qu'il en ffit ainsi,
c'est le maharajah qUI a sign~ l'accordde statu quo et
qui a propos~ a deux pays de conclure le meme accord.
Qui plus est, ce que le maharajah peut donner, il peut
le retirer, mais il ne peut pas modifier les conditions
de l'accession. Et le Pakistan ayant viol~ cet accord
de statu quo, et le maharajah ayant demand~ a un autre
pays de le d~fendre contre les maraudeurs, soutenus
par le Pakistan, qui avaient envahi son pays, l'accord
de statu quo est devenu caduc. D'ailleurs, meme si
l'accord de statu quo ~tait demeur~ valable, cela ne
conf~rerait pas un droit de souverainet~. L'accession
est sup~rieure a l'accord, et elleconf~reundroitmajeur qui annule tout autre droit d~coulant de l'accord.
En second lieu, l'accord de statu quo a ~t~ viol~ par
les mesures prises par M. Jinnah - alors gouverneur
g~n~ral - et par l'autorit~ supreme au Pakistan, qui
avaient pour effet que la population ~tait oblig~e de se
soumettre (sous peine de se voir priver de sel, d'huile
et d'aliments), et, ce qui est pire encore, par le rassemblement de 73.000 Pathans que l'on invitait apiller
le territoire.

81. For all those reasons the standstill agreement
which was supposed to be a panacea to prevent
bleeding, to prevent the breaking of communications,
etc.-that has gone to pieces. Therefore, I submit what
remains is aggression-the action of Pakistan as Sir
Owen Dixon has said. You may sa! "why do you quote
Sir Owen Dixon when he is for you and why don't you
quote him when he is against you?" I gave you the
reasons.
82. The only time that we have not been able to agree
with Sir Owen Dixon, and the disagreements are not as
bad as it has been pointed out, was when Sir Owen
DLxon departed from his mandate from the Security
Council and tried to create a new situation. We have

81. Pour toutes ces raisons, l'accordde statu quo, qui
devait etre une panac~e destin~e a ~viter toute effusion
de sang, toute rupture des communications, etc., a~t~
r~duit a n~ant. Par cons~quent, je soutiens que ce qui
subsiste, c'est l'acte d'agression. Sir Owen Dixon a
d~clar~ que c'est le Pakistan qui estintenGnu. On me
dira: "Pourquoi ne citez-vous sir Owen Dixon que
lorsqu'il vous est favorable?" J'ai r~pondu a cela.

at~

les
des

DUS

ral
rait
des
line
lte.
~tir

lIe
reion
sur
;ait
lui,
ce,

I

I:

:l
1\

It

I

82. La seule fois ou nous n'avons pas ~t~ d'accord
avec sir Owen Dixon - et notre d~saccord n'~tait pas
aussi grave qu'on l'a pr~tendu - c'est lorsqu'il s'est
~cart~ du mandat qu~il avait regu du Conseil de s~cu­
rit~ et qu'il a voulu cr~er une situation nouvelle. Les

23

•

concessions que nous avons faites au cours des discussions pr~liminaires nous ont valu de nous entendre
dire, par la suite, qu'elles nous engageaient. Sir Owen
Dixon a voulu ensuite instituer au Cachemire une administration qUi aurait remplac~ le Gouvernement de
Jammu et Cachemire, seule autorit~ reconnue, comme
1'indiquent les r~solutions de la Commission des
Nations Unies. Qui plus est, la Commission a d~clarE§
que personne n'avait le droit de modifier la situation
juridique eXistant~ ou tout autre aspect de la situation.
C'est alors seulement que nous n'avons pas E§t~
d' accord avec sir Owen Dixon. En outre, sir Dwen Dixon
s'est efforc~ de trouver d'autres moyens de r~soudre
le probl~me, par des partages ou des pl~biscites 10caux, par exemple. Sir Owen Dixon est un juriste, et
c'ast pourquoi son opinion est pr~cieuse. C'est le
"Chief Justice" d'Australie, etl'on n'estpas le premier
magistrat d'un pays si l'on n'a pas une connaissance
~tendue du droit interne et du droit international. A cet
~gard, sir Owen Dixon est bien connu comme juriste
~minent. Qu'a dit sir Owen Dixon? Je vous at d~j~
donn~ lecture de ce paragraphe, aussi me contenteraije de le r~sumer: Que le Pakistan, en p~n~trant sur le
territoire du Cachemire, a commis une infraction au
droit international - autrement dit, il a port~ atteinte
~ notre souverainet~, il a commis un acte d'agression.
Aussi, quoi qu'il arrive, nous ne pouvon's pas, par respect pour la Charte et pour les membres du Conseil
qUi repr~sentent l'autorit~ des Nations Unies - non
pas en tantqu'individus, ni meme en tantque repr~sen­
tants de leur pays, mais du fait du mandat qu'ils d~­ l
tiennent - renoncer it dMendre le droit moral, juridique, politique et militaire que possMe tout pays de
dMendre sa propre souverainet~.

suffered enough by exploratory discussion pr') temnot considering positions-but to be told afterwards
that we committed ourselves to exploratory proposals.
Then, Sir Dwen Dixon tried to put into Kashmir an
administration in place of the Jammu and Kashmir
Government which, as you will see in the resolutions of
the United Nations Commission, was the only authority.
What is more, the Commission said nobody had the
right to change the status juris or any other status in
regard to this matter. It is only then that we disagreed
with Sir Dwen Dixon. What is more, Sir Dwen Dixon
was trying to find other methods of compartmental
plebiscites-of partitions-of various other ways of
settling this matter. But where Sir OwenDixon's opinion is of value is that Sir Dwen Dixon is a jurist. He
is now the Chief Justice of Australia-and they do not
make chief justices of people who do not understand
either municipal or international law; and that is not
a presumption-in this case he is well known. What did
Sir Owen Dixon say? He said that Pakistan-I q'-:>ted
the paragraph to you before so I will summarize itwhen Pakistan entered the Kashmir territory it committed an offence against international law-that is to
say, there was a breach of our sovereignty-and that
was aggression. And therefore we cannot, whatever
happens, we cannot in obedience to the Charter, out
of respect for you gentlemen who represent the Authority of the United Nations-not in your persons, not even
in your countries-but by the mandate that rests on
yau-we shall not at any time surrender the right to
defend the moral right, the legal right, the political
right and the military right of a country to defend its
own sovereignty.

.'

83. Kashmir is an integral part of India. It could
cease to be so only by an act of volition by the Government of India. Therefore, when we came here that was
the position. And in our desire to find settlements
we were prepared to consider various propositions. But
at no time was the sovereignty of the Jammu and
Kashmir Government ever abandoned or permitted to
be abandoned, or any phraseology used in any of the
documents t.lat permitted it. And if the Council, as it
is likely to be, is overwhelmed with alarge volume of
this material, it would be interesting if one could find
any document of the Security Council, of any authority
of the United Nations, which did not reaffirm this position. We have taken pains to see that that is not departed from. That was the position even in the last
meetings of Mr. Graham. We came here, andwhat did
we agree to? We agreed to what is common ground
between Pakistan and ourselves. We agreed, on the one
hand, to what is our position in this matter, namely,
that we believe every proposition is subject to negotiation, however difficult; every proposition is subject
to conciliation methods, even if the rights of one party
are beyond question. Therefore, we were prepared to
discuss these matters. I can understand the legitimate
feelings of satisfaction in the minds of the Security
Council members when they said that here was a
question on which the two parties were agreeing on a
method. But let us read the phraseology of it. The
Security Council records that both parties have expressed a desire to settle this matter in this way; but
that does not mean that there has been no invasion,
that does not mean there is no sovereignty, that does
not mean there was no aGcession. I might be the owner

83. Le Cachemire est une partie int~grantede l'Inde.

of a hous
prefer to

84. So '\\
at this s
it is not
the Secu
and forg
forget th
forget th
not sayil
nothing
issue bef
in order
the princ
one me
vasion
peoples
more pa
unfortun
that has
are such
exempli£"
"Azad"
stituent
that they
senger 0
powers
cerns us,
I believe
of the In
is why th
why we a
on trying

n ne peut cesser de l'etre que par une d~cision du
Gouvernement de l'Inde. Telle ~tait la situation lorsque nous avons saisi le Conseil de la question. D~si­
reux de trouver une solution ~ cette question, nous
~tions prets ~ examiner les diverses propositions qui
nous ~taient soumises. Mais, it aucun moment, l'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire n'a renonc~ ~ sa souverainet~; rien, dans toute la documentation relative :lcette
question, ne permet de le contester. n serait surprenant que l' on puisse tl~couvrir, dans l' abondante documentation qui menace de submerger le Conseil, un
seul document du Conseil de s~curit~ ou de tout autre
organe des Nations Unies qui contredise cette affirmation. Nous nous sommes donn~ beaucoup de peine pour
maintenir ce principe. Telle ~tait encore la situation
au moment de nos derni~res entrevues avec M. Graham.
Nous sommes venus devant le Conseil et qu'avons-nous
fait? Nousnous sommes mis d'accord avec le Pakistan
sur des points d'int~ret commun. Nous avons pr~cis~
notre position et reconnu que toute proposition peut
etre l'objet de n~gociations, si difficiles qu'elles
pUissent paraitre. Toute proposition peut etre examin~e dans un esprit de conciliation, meme si les droits
de l'une des parties sont indiscutables. C'est pourquoi
nous ~tions tout prets :l discuter ces questions. Je
comprends la satisfaction Mgitime qu'ont pu~prouver
les membres'du Conseil de s~curitE§ lorsqu'ils se sont
vus saisis d'une question dans laquelle les deux parties ~taient d'accord sur une m~thode de r~glement.
Mais voyons un peu les textes. Le Conseil de s~curit~
a constat~ que les deux parties avaient exprim~ le dE§sir de r~gler leur diff~rend d'une certaine fa15on. Cela
24

I

85. Sir
just rub
of the Se
attempt.
gravamer
Press of
is in the
Kingdom,
and its p
or has c
that we a
tions ag
most sol
this mee
people, t
time viol
deserve t
an equal
national
fore, let
the plebi
is before
real issu
the Com
remain
Security
being ag
sive, as
said: "Si

:~sen-

PInde.
don du
llorsDE:isi, nous
ms qui
l'Etat
verai:lcette
Ilrprelte doeil, un
t autre
Eirmale pour
tuation
raham.
s-nouS
lkistan

~curit~

lIe dE:iIn.Cela

w

-----------,...c. __--'-._-__ ~ __,.. _~:_:_.~:____'_ __.::"

._.:.••. ~." _":~-,,--,,-,">_"_"'_"--_.

ne signifie pasqu'iln'yapaseuinvasion, qu'il n'existe
pas de souverainetE:i sur le Cachemire, qu'il n'y a pas
eu accession. Le propri~taire d 'une maison peut, dans
certaines circonstances, prE:if~rer l'abandonner.
84. C' est dans ces conditions que nous sommes venus
devant le Conseil. Le d~bat a commencE:i. Bien entendu,
le Gouvernementde l'Inde ne prE:itendpas que le Conseil
de s~curit~ doive, a.l'instar de Rip Van Winkle, oublier
les neuf ann~es qui se sont ~coulE:ies. Ses propres rE:isoIutions le Iui interdisent, et le Conseilnepeut pas non
plus oublier les E:iv~nements survenus depuis cette
~poque. Ainsi nous ne disons pas: "Oublions tout cela
et revenons au point de d~part, comme si rien ne
s'~tait pass~." Ce n'est pas la.notre attitude. La question dont le Conseil est saisi est celle de l'agression,
et le Conseil doit d~cider des mesures qu'il doit
prendre, dans l'esprit de la Charte, pour mettre fin a.
cette agression. Cela fait, on pourraessayerdiverses
m~thodes de r~glement. Les cons~quences de l'invasion pour les populations du Cache mire - et notamment pour les populations des maIheureuses r~gions du
Cachemire occup~es par un Etat oj) il n'existe pas
d'~lections libres et oj) la population souffre cruellement de la mauvaise situation ~conomique - sont illustr{ies par le m~morandum adress~ a. l'AssembMe
constituante par les chefs du mouvement "azad",
[S/PV.762/Add.1, annexe rn, sect. 1], oj) ilsd~clarent
qu'ils ne peuvent mame pas d~signer un p~on, c'esta.-dire un commissionnaire ou un porteur. Les chefs
"azad" n'ont meme pas ce pouvoir. L'agression les
affecte, nous affecte, affecte toute la p~ninsule; elle
affecte toute la r~gion baign~e par l'oc{ian Indien, et
peut-etre meme le monde entier. C'est pourquoi la
question du Cachemire est si importante. C'est pourquoi nous sommes dispos~s a. poursuivre sans relache
nos efforts en vue de r~soudre cette question, comme
nous l'avons fait jusqu'ici.

of a house, but it may be that for many reasons I may
prefer to give it up if certain conditions happen.

'.

~

1

Ir~cis{i

mpeut
u'elles
3xamidroits
mrquoi
ms. Je
rouver
se sont
IX parement.

"'-'-'---'-"~-

.,

scusendre
Owen
admimt de
DIDme
n des
!clarE:i
llation
.ation.
.s E:itE:i
Dixon
,oudre
es 10,te, et
est le
emier
,sance
,A cet
uriste
cl dE:ija.
teraisur le
ion au
:teinte
ssion.
r resonseil
- non

Is dE:i, juriays de

-_._._.
____..c·_o.__

~-

f

84. So we came here and the proceedings started. Now
at this stage we would like to make it quite clear that
it is not the ~ontention of the Government of India that
the Security Council could be a sort of Rip Van Winkle
and forget the nine years that have passed. It cannot
forget them in terms of its own resolutions; nor can it
forget them in terms of subsequent events. So we are
not saying, "forget all this and go back as though
nothing had happened". That is not our position. The
issue before this Council is the question of aggression
in order to put an end to the aggression, according to
the principles of the Charter. When that is liquidated,
one method.or another method may be tried. The invasion and its consequences-its consequences to the
peoples of Kashmir and, in our humble submission,
IDore particularly to the peoples of Kashmir in these
unfortunate areas that are occupied by a Government
that has no free elections, where economic conditions
are such that the people are in a very bad way-are
exemplified by the statement of the leaders of the
"Azad" movement in their Memorandum to the Constituent Assembly [S/PV.762/Add.1, annex Ill, sect.1]
that they cannot appoint even a peon, meaning a messenger or a porter of some k.ind. They have no such
powers at all. The aggression concerns them, it concerns us, it concerns what is called the sub-continent.
I believe it ';oncerns the whole area that"lies in the lap
of the Indian Ocean; and it may concern the world. That
is why this Kashmir question is so important. That is
why we are prepared to go on trying, and we have kept
on trying.

85. Sir Firoz Khan Noon reminded methatIcould not
just rub out all that has happened since the last meeting
of the Security Council in 1952. I have made no such
attempt. Therefore, it comes to this question: the
gravamen of the charge, particularly if you read the
Press of the United Kingdom, is that my country, which
is in the closest fraternal relations with the United
Kingdom, which has a great regard for its traditions
and its powers even when it was ruling us, is about to
or has committed an act of international brigandage;
that we are about to COillmit or have committed violations against our international obligations. And I say
most solemnly, not only on behalf of my delegation in
this meeting but on behalf of my Government and my
people, that we have no intention and we shall at no
time violate an international obligation. If we do, we
deserve to stand convicted. But the Security Council has
an equal responsibility to see that these are international obligations, to examine their content. Therefore, let me take the fl'£'st step. The issue is said to be
the plebiscite-that is what we are talking about-that
is before the Security Council. In fact that is not the
real issue, because we are now talking in a vacuum. As
the Commission said, situations change but resolutions
remain unchanged. If I had said that, members of the
Security Council would tell me privately that I was
being aggressive. I am temperamentally not aggressive, as averybody knows. It is the Commission that
said: "Situations change; resolutions do not change."

85. Sir Firoz KhanNoonm'arappel~quejenepouvais
pas simplement tirer un trait sur tout ce qui est survenu depuis la derni~re fois que le Conseil de s~curit~
a examin~ la question, en 1952. Jen'aijamais eu l'intention de le faire. Si l'on en croit la presse britannique, on accuse mon pays, qui entretientdes relations
fraternelles avec le Royaume-Uni et qui a toujours
~prouvE:i le plus grand respect pour la tradition et la
puissance britannique - meme lorsqu'il se trouvait
sous la domination britannique - d'etre sur le point
de commettre, ou meme d'avoir commis, un acte de
brigandage international etde vouloir renier ou d'avoir
reni~ nos obligations internationales. Je le d~clare
solennellement, non seulement au nom de ma d~l~ga­
tion, mais aussi au nom du gouvernement etdu peuple
indiens, nous n'avons pas l'intention de renier etnous
ne renierons jamais nos obligations internationales.
Si nous le faisiolls, nous m~riterions d'etre d~clar~s
coupables. Mais le Conseil de s~curit~, de son cot~,
doit constater qu'il s'agitd'obligations internationales
et examiner ce que comportent ces obligations. En
cons~quence, laissez-moi faire le premier pas. Ondit
que la question dont est saisi le Conseil de s~curit~,
c'est celle du pMbiscite - et c'est effectivement de
cette question que nous parlons. En r~alit~, ce n'est
pas en cela que r~side le v~ritableprobl~me, car nous
discutons actuellement dans le vide. Comme la Commission l'a d~clar~, les situations changent, mais les
r~solutions restent sans changement. Si c' ~tait moi qui

..

~

I

' i

iJf.•. . . :.•
,.
~.

:

I!
I!o

il-

ip.
l§

*l

t;'f·:;

!~

~
'f,

25

•

,,:i

401
')

:j

avais dlt cela, les membres duConseilde s~curit~ me
diraient en priv~ que je deviens agressif. Par temp~­
rament, je ne suis pas agressif, comme chacun le
sait. C'est la Commission qui a dit: "Les situations
changent, les r~solutions ne changent pas. "

~

j
i

.1'J
-1

9
I

~- viously
i

j

86. Now let us take this question of the plebiscite. I
submit that the origin and the family tree of this
plebiscite arose from our desire notto take this territory of Kashmir, originally ruled by a rather wrong
kind of maharaja with whom we joined issue, where
there was a considerable popular movement, where
our national leaders were threatened; and we wanted to
settle that. Then Lord Mountbatten wrote to the
Maharaja. This letter is not part of the instrument of
accession, as I told you at a previous meeting [763rd
meeting, paras. 105 and 106]. The instrument of accession is complete with the offer and the acceptance.
This was a letter that went separately. Therefore, it
is an expression of a wish.

86. Venons-en maintenant a. laquestiondupMbiscite.
Je pr~tends que l'origine et "l'arbre g~n~alogique"
de ce pl~biscite s'expliquent par le d~sir que nous
avions de ne pas prendre ce territoire du Cachemire,
domin~ a. l'origine par un maharajah assez mauvais
avec lequel nous ~tions en d~saccord, oil. il existait
un ~mportant mouvement popula!re et oil. nos chefs nationaux ~taient menac~s; nous voulions r~gler cette
question. Lord Mountbatten a envoy~ alors une lettre
au maharajah. Cette lettre ne fait pas partie de
l'instrument d'accession, comme je l'a! expos~ a. une
s~ance ant~rieure [763~me s~ance, par. 105 et 106].
L'instrument d'accession ne comprend que l'offre et
l'acceptation. C'~tait une lettre qui a ~t~ envoy~e s~­
par~ment. Elle exprimait done un vceu.

87. That is one aspect of the plebiscite question, but
the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, as he is entitled to
do, has referred to various other statements made by
my Prime Minister to his then Prime Minister in
regard to various solutions of the problem. Here I
want to submit certain propositions of international
behaviour, which apply equally to municipal behaviour.
If an offer is made and it is rejected, that offer is no
longer alive. If an offer is made and it is accepted, it
becomes an engagement. It would be impossible to
function in any other way, since there would be so
many commitments floating about in the air.

87. C'est la un des aspects qe la question du pMbiscite, mais ~le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res du
Pakistan a fait allusion, comme il en avait le droit,
:l diverses autres d~clarations que mon Premier Ministre a faites a. son Premier Ministre d'alors au sujet
de diverses solutions duprobl~me.Je voudrais ~voquer
ici certains principes qui r~gissent les affaires in+.ernationales, tout comme ils r~gissent les affaires internes. Une offre faite et rejet~e devient caduque. Une
offre faite et accept~e devient un engagement. Il serait
impossible qu'il en soit autrement; sinoD, il y aurait
trop d'engagements en suspenso

88. It is quite true that Lord Mountbatten did ask
Mr. Jinnah, the Governor-General, "Why not arrange
this by a plebiscite and do it through the United Nations,
and this, that and the other?" His answer was not an'
acceptance but a counter-offer: "Let us two govern
this country. Let us supress the raiders"; and this,
that and the other. We rejected that. So that phase of
it was over. There were so many other phases of it.
The Foreign Minister read out the text of a document,
which was authentic as far as it went, but it looks different if you read the whole context. It was a telegram
from Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru to Mr. Liaquat Ali
Khan, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, in which he
said: "This is an offer we make to the people of Kashmir, to Pakistan and to the world." We do not deny
this. But it did not accept it at that time. What is
more, not only did it not accept it by words; it did not
accept it by conduct, because the other side of the
offer was that there should be a withdrawal of the
aggression, that there should be a stopping of force
and violence and hatred and things of that kind.

88. Il est tout a fait exact que 10rdMountbatten a deGouverneur g~n~ral, M. Jinnah: "Pourquoi
ne pas r~gler cette question par un pMbiscite sous
les auspices des Nations Unies, etc.?" La r~ponse de
M. Jinnah n' ~tait pas une acceptation, mais une contreproposition: "Gouvernons ce pays a. nous deux. Eliminons les envahisseurs, etc." Nous avons rejet~
cela. Cette phase ~tait donc termin~e. Il y a eu tant
d'autres phases; Le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res
du pakistan a lu le texte d'un document qui ~tait authentique en soi, mais qui apparait sous un jour diff~rent
si on lit l'ensemble du 'contexte. Il s'agissait d'un
t~Mgramme du pandit Jawaharlal Nehru a. M. Liaquat
Ali Khan, premier ministre du Pakistan, dans lequel
il disait: "C' est la. une offre que nous faisons au peuple
du Cachemire, au Pakistan et au monde." Nous· ne le
nious pas. Mais le Pakistan ne l'a pas accept~e a
cette ~poque. Qui plus est, non seulement Hne l'a pas
accept~e en paroles, mais il ne l'a pas accept~e par
ses actes, parce que la contrepartie de l'offre ~tait
qu'il devait y avoir un retrait de l'agression, qU'il
devait €ltre mis un terme a la force, la violence, la
haine et toutes choses de ce genre.

89. So we come to the date of 22 December 1947. I
would refer to the letter of 22 December 1947 from my
Prime Minister to the then Prime Minister of Pakistan.
I do not propose to read the whole of it but I beg the
members of the Security Council to read the whole of
it because it was written by my Prime Minister from.
the anguish of his heart whim all the suffering was
going on in our country, with the knowledge that only a
few days preViously this man had been his own Finance
Minister, and in a country that only a few days pre-

89. Nous en arrivons ainsi a la date du 22 d~cembre
1947. Je veux invoquer la lettre du 22 d~cembre 1947
adress~e par mon Premier Ministre a celui qui ~tait
alors le Premier Ministre du Pakistan. Je ne me
propose pas de le lire en entier, mais je prie les
membres du Conseil de s~curit~ de prendre connaissance de l'ensemble du texte, parce qu'il a ~t~ ~crit
par mon Premier Ministre sous le coup de la d~tresse
qu'il ressentait dans son cceur alors que notre pays
~tait en proie a. toutes ces souffrances, que, quelques

"Sinc
Govern
ment
are set
tary s
Govern
earnes
Pakist
that, in
in our
quest t
ceded t
Therefor
but of a t
is what
do not do

~

mand~ au

26

the par
shelter
we ter
that eve
an eng
22 Dece

"Fail"
to take
of the
necess
their 0
of Kash
90. I su
ment of I
practice
Nations,
Pakistan,
on 22 De
ended, thE
said and'
one else
the whol
over. We
the comp

91. I ha
I have sa"
denial ha
the comp
gagement
are only
that peri
internatio
general 0
engage me
reference
bear with
92. A nu
Security
a charact

l

it~ me

emp~­

cun le
:ations

.scite.
gique"
~ nous

viously had been part of our common homeland. All
the paragraphs hang together, but I do not wish to
shelter myself under that. However, on 22 December
we terminated this position. It is common knowledge
that even a treaty can be denounced; much more so
an engagement; and even more so an offer. So on
22 December my Prime Minister said this:

I

~mire,

auvais
xistait

~fsna­

, cette
lettre
tie de
i aune
t 106].
ffre et

~e s~-

lupMres du
droit,
~r Mi1 sujet
mquer
inter'es inle. Une
serait
aurait

la deurquoi
e sous
nse de
ontre!c. Elirejet~

eu tant
I1g~res

athenrf~rent

it d'un
Jiaquat
lequel
peuple
s·ne le
!pt~e

"Since protests have failed to bear fruit, the
Government of India now formally ask the Government of Pakistan to deny to the raiders... "-then
are set out, under numbers I, 2 and 3, access, military supplies and other kinds of assistance.-"The
Government of India have always desired and still
earnestly desire to live on terms of friendship with
Pakistan. "-That is the only subsisting engagement
that, in spite of everything that happens, will subsist
in our hearts.-"It is their sincere hope thatthe request that we have now formally made will be acceded to promptly ... "

"Puisque les protestations sont rest~es sans r~­
sultat, le Gouvernement de l'Inde demande formellement au Gouvernement du Pakistan de refuser aux
envahisseurs (... ) (Sont ensuite indiqu~s, sous les
num~ros 1, 2 et 3, l'acc~s du territoire, les fournitures militaires et les autres formes d'assistance.)
Le Gouvernement de l'Inde atoujoursvouluetd~sire
toujours entretenir des rapports d'amitM avec le
Pakistan. (C'est !:lIe seul engagement qui subsiste
et qui, en d~pit de tout ce qui est arriv~, subsistera
dans nos creurs.) "Il esp~re sincerement qu'il sera
promptement donn~ satisfaction a la requete qui
vient d' etre pr~sent~e de fac;on formelle ... "

Therefore, this is in the nature not of an ultimatum
but of a termination of the previous relationship. That
is what happens between countries. They say, "If you
do not do this, we will do something else."

Cette d~claration n'avait donc pas le caract~re d'un
ultimatum, mais elle mettait fin aux rapports qui
existaient auparavant. C'est une chose qui arrive entre
pays. On dit: "Si vous ne faites pas cela, nous ferons
autre chose."
"A d~faut d'une telle r~ponse, le Gouvernement
de l'Inde sera oblig~ de prendre telles mesures conformes aux dispositions de la Charte des Nations
Unies qu'il pourra estimer n~cessaires pour prot~­
gel' ses int~rets et pour remplir ses obligations a
l'~gard du gouvernement et du peuple du Cachemire."

"Failing such a response, they will be compelled
to take such action, consistent with the provisions
of the United Nations Charter, as they may consider
necessary to protect their interests and to discharge
their obligations to the Government and the people
of Kashmir."
90. I submit that this letter would entitle the Government of India, in accordance with international law and
practice and the observance of the Charter of the United
Nations, to take any step, including the invasion of
Pakistan, for the defence of that territory. Therefore,
on 22 December we concluded that that chapter was
ended, the chapter dealing with what Lord Mountbatten
said and what Campbell-Johnson said and what someone else said and what Mr. Jinnah said: "I will call
the whole thing off", or whatever it was. All that was
over. We came to a new chapter, and that chapter is
the complaint before the Security Council.

90. Je pr~tends que cette lettre permettait au Gouvernement de l'Inde, conform~ment au droitinternational
et a la pratique internationale, et en application de la
Charte des Nations Unies, de prendre toutes mesures
n~cessaires pour d~fendre ce territoire, y compris
l'invasion du Pakistan. Par cons~quent, le 22 d~c ~mbre,
nous avons conclu que ce chapitre ~tait termin6, qu'il
n'~tait plus question de ce que lord Mountbatten avait
dit, de ce que Campbell-Johnson avait dit, de ce que
quelqu'un d'autre avait dit et de ce que M. Jinnah avait
dit ("J'arreterai toute cette affaire", ("a toute autre
d~claration... ). Tout cela ~tait termin~. Nous ouvrions
un nouveau chapitre, et ce chapitre ~taitlaplainte devant le Conseil de s~curittl,.

91. I have dealt with the complaint as best I can, and

91. J'ai trait~ de cette plainte du mieuxquej'ai pu et
j'ai dit que la seule r~ponse avait ~t~ une d~n~gation.
La fausset~ de cette d~n~gation a ~t~ ~tablie par la
suite et, par cons~quent, la plainte demeure. En cons~quence, a l'exception des obligations g~n~rales d~­
coulant du droit international, les seules obligations
internationales par lesquelles le Gouvernement de
l'lnde est li~ sont celles qu'il a contract~es depuis
lors. Je rE§pMe. A I' exception des obligations g~n~rales
d~coulant de la Charte, les seules obligations particuli~res sont celles qui sont n~es du renvoi au Conseil
de sE§curit~, et je vous demande de bien vouloir procE§del' avec moi a un examen de cette question.
92. Le Conseil de s~curit~ a adopt~ un certain nombre
de r~solutions, et aucune de ces r~solutions n'a ce
qu'on pourrait appeler le caract~re d'une obligation

a

l'a pas
:~e par
'e ~tait
., qu'il
I1ce, la
embre
e 1947
li ~tait
ne me
rie les
nnais§ ~crit

tresse
e pays
elques

jours seulement auparavant, cet homme avait ~t~ son
Ministre des finances, et que ce pays faisait encore
partie quelques jours plus t6t de notre commune patrie.
Tous les paragraphes se tiennent, mais je ne veux pas
m'abriter derri~re ce fait. Quoi qu'il en soit, nous
avons mis fin a cette situation le 22 d~cembre. Tout
le monde sait que meme un trait~ peut etre d~nonc~,
a plus forte raison un engagement, et encore a plus
forte raison une offre. C'estainsi que, le 22 d~cembre,
mon Premier Ministre d~clarait:

I have said that the only answer has been a denial. That

denial has been subsequently disproved, and therefore
the complaint exists. It arises from this, that any engagements by which the Government of India is bound
are only the engagements to which it is a party since
that period, apart from the general obligations under
international law. I want to repeat that. Apart from the
general obligations under the Charter, the only specific
engagements are the engagements arising from the
reference to the Security Council, and I ask you to
bear with me on an examination of this.
92. A number of resolutions have been passed by the
Security Council, and none of these are resolutions of
a character which may be called that of international
27

,--

engagements except the two to whIch my distinguished
colleague has referred. The remainder are by way of
adjuration and, to the extent that they are under Chapter VI of the Charter, they are not binding upon the
people concerned. They are by way of recommendation.

internationale, sauf les deux r~solutions que mon distingu~ coll~gue a vis~es. Les autres sont plutot des
adjurations et, dans la mesure oil. elles ont ~t~ adopt~es en vertu du Chapitre VI de la Charte, elles ne
lient pas les parties interess~es. Ce sont des sortes
de recommandations.

93. What is the obligatory nature of actions taken
under Chapter VI of the Charter? This goes back to
San Francisco. In San Francisco this matter was discussed at great length, and the United States took a
very prominent part. The Belgian delegation at that
time wanted to place this matter beyond doubt and
therefore moved amendments to these provisions. The
Conference, however, agreed that an important stage
had been reached with Article 37. This Article states
that the Security Council may take up disputes where
the parties have failed to reach a settlement by the
other means indicated. It goes on to state:

93. En quoi consiste le caract~re obligatoire desd~­
cisions prises en vertu du Chapitre VI de la Charte?
Cela nous ram~ne a. San-Francisco. A San-FranCisco,
cette question a ~t~ discut~e tr~s longuement, et les
Etats-Unis d'Am~rique ont pris une tr~s grande part
au d~bat. La d~l~gation beIge voulait a. cette ~poque
qu'il n'y eiit aucun doute sur ce point, et elle a propos~
en cons~quence des amendements a. ces dispositions.
Toutefois, la Conference a ~te d'avis qu'une~tapeim­
portante avait ~t~ atteinte avec l'Article 37. Il est dit
dans cet article que, si les parties a. un differend ne
reussissent pas a. le regler par les autres moyens
indiques, elles le soumettent au Conseil de securite.
Il y est dit aussi:

"If the Security Council deems that the continuance
of the dispute is in fact likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, it shall
decide whether to take action under Article 36 or to
recommend such terms of settlement as it may consider appropriate."

"Si le Conseil de securite estime que laprolongation du differend semble, en fait, menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales, il
decide s'il doit agir en application de l'Article 36 ou
recommander tels termes de r~glement qu'il juge
appropries. "

The Council may recommend terms of settlement, but
it does not have the power to compel the parties to
accept the terms. It has the power to enforce its decisions only after it is determined under the provisions
of Chapter VII that a threat to the peace exists.

Le Conseil peut recommander des termes de r~gle­
ment, mais il n'a pas le pouvoir d'obliger les parties
a. accepter ces termes. Il n'a le pouvoir de faire appliquer ses decisions que lorsqu'il a ete etabli qu'il
existe une menace contre la paix aux termes des dispositions du Chapitre VII.

94. I would not have brought this up but for the fact
that my distinguished colleague, not only in this forum
but before his countrymen and mine, has said that we
were defying the decisions of the Security Council. The
only decisions the Security Council can make are the
decisions under Chapter VII. If you will refer to the
"Report to the President of the United States" on the
result of the San Francisco Conference from the
Chairman of the United States delegation, the Secretary
of state at that time-I think it was Mr. stettinius-on
26 June 1945 (It is a United States document) you will
find that on pages 85 and 86 the legal position is
clearly set out as regards the nature ofthe recommendations and the position of the Security C.ouncil in terms
of the Charter.

94. Je n'aurais pas souleve cette question si mon
distingue coll~gue n'avait pas declare, non seulement
dans cette enceinte mais aussi devant ses compatriotes et les miens, que nous opposions un defi aux
decisions du Conseil de securite. Les seulesdecisions
que le Conseil de securite puisse prendre sont celles
qui sont pr~vues au Chapitre VII. Si vous lisez le
"Rapport au President des Etats-Unis" sur les re sultats de la Conference de San-Francisco, etabli par le
Secretaire d'Etat, president de la delegation des
Etats-Unis - je pense qu'a. cette epoque c'etait
M. Stettinius - et date du 26 juin 1945 (il s' agit la. d'un
document des Etats-Unis, et cela figure aux pages 85
et 86), vous vous apercevrez que la situation juridique '
y est clairement exposee en ce qui concerne la nature
des recommandations etlapositionduConseilde securite aux termes de la Charte.

95. Therefore, recommendations are of that character. And if it is said that the Council has passed this
resolution and that it has that moralforce, the Government of India will go out of its way to pay every attention to it. But when, as in the case of the resolution of
21 April 1948 [S/726], it is not possible for us to accept
it, the position is rather different.

95. Par consequent, telle est la nature des recommandations. Et si l'on soutient que telle resolution a ete
adoptee par le Conseil et revet de ce fait une certaine
force morale, le Gouvernement de l'Inde fera tout ce
qui est en son pouvoir pour en tenir compte. Mais,
lorsqu'il ne nous estpas possible de l'accepter, comme
dans le cas de la resolution du 21 avril 1948 [S/726], la
position est assez differente.

96. We therefore come to the international engagement-with the observation that my Government stands
by every international commitment it has made. There
is no Member of the United Nations to which we yield
in our desire to carry out the spirit and the letter of
the Charter. But we are not to be placed in the position
where the attempts that we make for exploration, or

96. Nous en venons donc aux obligations internationales - et je tiens a dire que mon gouvernement respecte toutes les obligations internationales qu'il a contractees. Nul Etat Membre de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies ne desire plus que l'Inde agir conformement a. l' sprit et a. la lettre de la Charte. Mais nouS
n'accept· ons pas d'etre places dans une situation telle
28

l

to fin
at e
occas
ment
shoul
and I
this,
theb

97.
two r
dated
1949
for c
be in
the k
is ch
the C
with a
capab
eratio
acco
forma
rate,
the re

f

~

98.
pleme
meeti
call it
and I
mean
"ser .
menta
ally a
ment
it has
ment.
99. I
Securi
it is
timec
What t
taken
I ther
ask re
we ha
These
13 Aug
Every
perhap
lution
first i
1949 0
25 De
regard
ment
to its
conditi
thing.

e mondisplut6t des
~t~ adope, elles ne
ies sortes

~.

.re desd~­
la Charte?

to find ways and means, without arguing every question
at every time are turned against us. Even on this
occasion, some people have wondered why my Government has instructed me that the whole of the case
should be put at the first meeting, as far as possibleand I crave the indulgence of everyone for repeating
this, hecause, when we have not, we have suffered in
the bargain.

que les tentatives que nous faisons pour chercher une
solution, ou pour decouvrir des voies et moyens d'y
parvenir, sans remettre chaque fois tout en question,
sont retournees contre nous. Meme dans le cas present, certains se sont demande pourquoi mon gouvernement m'avait charge de presenter l'ensemble de
notre cause a. la premi~re seance, s'il etaitpossibleet je sollicite l'indulgence de tous ceuxquim'ecoutent
pour qu'ils me pardonnent de repeter ceci, car, toutes
les fois que nous n'avons pas suffisamment insiste,
nous avons eu a. en souffrir.

97. The only international engagements that exist are
two resolutions: the resolutions of the Commission
dated 13 August 1948 [S/1100, para. 75] and 5 January
1949 [S/1196, para. 15]. My delegation has arranged
for copies of these, which are official documents, to
be in front of you for ready reference, since these are
the key documents on which the honour of my country
is challenged and the position of India in relation to
the Charter has to be examined. What is more, I say
with all the seriousness and the gravity of which I am
capable that, when Member Governments give consideration to this, these matters have to be taken into
account. These are the engagements. If they were of a
formal character, they might be treaties, but, at any
rate, they are the engagements we have entered intothe resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949.

97. Les seules obligations internationales qui nous
lient sont done celles qU'entrafnent les deux resolutions de la Commission adoptees le 13 aoiit 1948 [SI
1100, par. 75] et le 5 janvier 1949 [S/1196, par. 15] .
Ma de16gation a fait en sorte que vous disposiez de
copies de ces resolutions, qui sont des documents officiels, afin que vous pui ssiez vous y reporter, car il
s'agit des documents clefs sur lesquels on se fonde
pour mettre en question l'honneur de mon pays et
d'apr~s lesquels il faut examiner la position de l'Inde
au regard de la Charte. Je declare de plus, avec tout
le serieux et toute la gravitedontje suis capable, que,
lorsque des Etats Membres examinent cette question,
ce sont ales textes qu'il faut prendre en consideration.
Voila. nos obligations. Si elles av::tient un caract~re
formel, elles pourraient etre enregistrees dans des
traites, mais, quoi qu'il en soit, voila. les obligations
que nous avons contractees - celles qU'entrafnentles
resolutions du 13 aoiit 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949.

98. The resolution of 5 January 1949 is of a supplementary and subsidiary character. (At the 766th
meeting the representative of Pakistan asked why I
call it "subsidiary". I looked up the Oxford dictionary,
and I found that "supplementary" and "subsidiary"
mean much the same thing. "Subsidiary" means
"serving to assist" or being "auxiliary". "Supplementary" means "added to supply deficiencies, especially a fuller treatment of a special subject".) The document of 5 January 1949 has no independent existence;
it has to be fitted into the framework of the first document.

98. La resolution du 5 janvier 1949 a un caract~re
complementaire et subsidiaire. (A la 766~me seance,
le representant du Pakistan a demande pourquoi je le
qualifie de "subsidiaire". J'ai consulte ledictionnaire
d'Oxford et j'ai trouve que les mots "supplementary"
(compIementaire) et "subsidiary" (subsidiaire) signifient a. peu pr~s la meme chose. "Subsidiary" signifie
"qui vient a. l' appui" ou "accessoire, auxiliaire".
"Supplementary" signifie "ajoute pour remedier a. une
insuffisance, en particulier pour traiter plus compl~­
tement d'un certain sujet".) Le document du 5 janvier
1949 n'a aucune valeur pris isoIement; il n'en a que
par reference au premier document.

99. I have been asked by my Government to in"lite the
Security Council to examine these documents, because
it is on the basis of these that the Council, when the
time comes, will have to see how this question stands,
what the obligations are, what further steps can be
taken or not taken, and what will be the consequences.
I therefore crave the indulgence of the Council and
ask representatives to refer to these documents, which
we have placed before them for purposes of reference.
These resolutions, particularly the resolution of
13 August 1948, are the result of laborious negotiation.
Every word is a matter of give and take and has taken
perhaps a whole conference. We accepted this resolution of 13 August 1948; Pakistan rejected it, in the
first instance. We accepted the resolution of 5 January
1949 on 23 December 1948; Pakistan accepted it on
25 December 1948. Our acceptance was prior. With
regard to the resolution of 13 August 1948, the Government of Pakistan made so many conditions in regard
to its acceptance that the Commission said that those
Conditions really altered the character of the whole
thing.

99. Mon gouvernement m'a demanded'inviter le Conseil de s~curite a. exan:iner ces documents, car c'est
en se inndant sur eux que le Conseil devra examiner,
It:: moment venu, comment la question se pose, quelles
sont les obligations des parties, quelles mesuresnouvelles peuvent etre prises ou ne peU\...:nt pas etre
prises, et queUes en seront les consequences. J'implore done l'indulgence du Conseil et je demande aux
repr~sentants de bien vouloir se reporter a ces documents, que nous leur avons remis a cet effet. Ces
resolutions - en particulier, la resolution du 13 aoiit
1948 - etaient issues de negociations difficiles. Chaque
mot est le resultat d'un compromis, et son acceptation
a peut-etre exige une seance enti~re de discussions.
Nous avons accepte cette resolution dli 13 aoiit 1948; le
Pakistan l'a rejetee d~s l'abord. Nous avons accepte
le 23 decembre 1948 la resolution du 5 janvier 1949;
le Pakistan l'a acceptee le 25 decembre 1948. Notre
acceptation est anterieure. Pour ce qui est de la resolution du 13 aoiit 1948, le Gouvernement du Pakistan
a subordonne son acceptation a. tant de conditions que
la Commission a estime qu'elles modifiaient en fait
le caract~re de l'ensemble de la resolution.

~rancisco,

ent, et les
rande part
tte ~poque
a propose
lpositions.

~~tapeim­

. Il est dit
fferend ne
!s moyens
! securit~.

prolongar le mainionales, il
ticle 36 ou I
qu'il juge

de r~gle­
ss parties
~ faire ap~tabli qu' il
s des dis-

m si mon

seulement
,s compaIII defi aux
id~cisions

;ont celles
s lisez le
les resullbli par le
ation des
le c'etait
git la. d'un
[pages 85
1 juridique '
lla nature
ilde seculcommanlUon a ete
e certaine
ra tout ce
pte. Mais,
lr,comme
S/726], la
lternatioment resu'ilaconation des
:onform~­

Mais nous
ationtelle

f

29

,.

.:
:\

i

100. I invite the Council to examine the official
document as it appears in paragraph 132 of document
S/1430 (Official Records of the Security Council,
Fourth Year, Special Supplement No. 7). Thisisin the
Third Interim Report of the United Nations Commission
for India and Pakistan. At the risk of taxing the patience of the Council, it is my duty, which my Government has instructed me to perform, to deal with every
word of this in so far as pertinent.

100. J'invite le Conseil a. bien vouloir examiner le
document officiel tel qU'il figure au paragraphe 132 du
document S/1430 (Proc~s-verbaux officiels du Conseil
de s~curit~! guatri~me ann~e! SuppMment sp~cial
No 7). Il s'agit du troisi~me rapport provisoire de la
Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan. Au risque d'~prouver la patience du Conseil,
il est de mon devoir, conform~ment aux instructions
de mon gouvernement, de relever tous les mots importants de ce document.

101. The first sentence reads:

101. La premi~re phrase se lit comme suit:

I

I

'I

,.

cl

~1
:1

j

'I

.,1

I

;1

1

.1
:1

I

I
i
i

j
:
1

.!

"The United Nations Commission for India and
Pakistan,

"La Commission des Nations Unies pour Plnde et
le Pakistan,
"Ayant exarrdn~ attentivement les points de vue ex-

"Having given careful consideration to the points
of view expressed by the representatives ofIndia and
Pakistan regarding the situation in the state of Jammu
and Kashmir ... ".

prim~s par les reprGsentants de l'Inde et du Pakistan

au sujet de la situation dans I'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire (... )"

102. I invite attention to the words "regarding the
situation". It does not speak of a "dispute" here, but
of a "situation"-this is what weaccepted-"regarding
the situation" caused by the invasion by Pakistan.
Invasion of what? Not of no-man's-land, not of a
divided territory-but of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir-which is an assertion of the whole of its
entity. These are the key words in the first paragraph. First of all, we are dealing with a "situation",
as my predecessor submitted to this Council. We are
engaged in no territorial dispute; we are making a complaint of a "situation" in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Therafore, there are not two States, there are
not two authorities, and, as you will see later on,
this Government is sovereign.

102. J'attire l'attention des membres du Conseil sur
les mots "au sujet de la situation". Il n'est pas question ici d'un "diff~rend", mais d'une "situation" - c'est
le terme que nous avons accept~ - ... "au sujet de la
situation" crMe a. la suite de l'invasionpar le Pakistan.
InvaSion de quoi? Non d'un "no-man's-land", nond'un
territoire divis~, mais de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, ce qui est affirmer clairement son existence indivisible. Ce sont les mots clefs de ce premier alin~a.
Tout d'abord, il s'agit d'une "situation",ainsiquemon
prM~cesseur l'a d~clar~ devant ce conseil. Nous ne
sommes pas engag~s dans un diff~rend d'ordre territorial; nous portons une plainte au sujet d'une "situation" dans l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. Il n'est
donc pas question de deux Etats, ni de deux autorit~s,
et, ainsi que vous le verrez plus loin, ce gouvernement
est souverain.

103. The next paragraph reads: "Being of the opinion
that the prompt cessation of hostilities...". Those
words are a key to the state of mind of the Security
Council and the parties at that time- "the prompt
cessation of hostilities" -because we brought the
complaint here in order to prevent the fire from
spreading. And, from our point of view, it was telling
the Security Council that we would be forced into a
position which we did not want to take. The next point
reads: "and the correction of conditions the continuance of which is likely to endanger international peace
and security ...". That is the remedy sought. Those
conditions are the invasion by the other side. It then
goes on: " ...to assist the Governments of India and
Pakistan...". There iE no reference here to any other
authority-to "Azad" Kashmir or anybody else. It
speaks of assisting the "Governments of India and
Pakistan", who are the two combatant high commands.
Here it is not a question of two States. It would be
two people engaged in a conflict, as we will see later
when the agreement is signed-the two high commands. " ...to assist the Governments of India and
Pakistan in effecting a final settlement of the situation" .
That is the second paragraph.

103. L'alin~a suivant est ainsi r~dig~: "Estimantque
(... ) il importe de mettre rapidement fin aux hostilit~s ... ". Ces mots, "mettre rapidement fin aux hostilit~s", sont r6v~lateurs de l'~tat d'esprit du Conseil de
s~curit~ et des parties a. cette ~poque, car c'est afin
de pr~venir l'extension du conflit que nous avons d~­
pos~ notre plainte devant le Consei!. Et, a. notre avis,
c '6tait dire au Conseil de s~curit~ que nous serions
oblig~s de prendre une position que nous ne voulions
pas prendre. Nous lisons ensuite: "et a. une situation
dont le maintien risque de menacer lapaixet la s~cu­
rit~ internationales". Cette situation, c 'est I'invasion
commise par l'autre partie. Nous lisons d'autre part:
". "pour ( ) aider les Gouvernements de l'Inde et du
Pakistan ". Il n'est pas question ici d'aucune autre
autorit~, du Cachemire "azad" ou de quelque autorit~
que ce soit. Il est question d'aider "lesGouvernements
de l'Inde et du Pakistan", qui sont les deux hauts commandements des forces en pr~sence.Iln'estpasques­
tion ici de deux Etats. Il s'agit de deux peuples engag~s
dans un conflit, ainsi que nous le verrons plus tard,
lorsque l'accord sera sign~ - les deux hauts commandements. " ...pour (...) aider les Gouvernements de
l'Inde et du Pakistan a. effectuer un r~glement d6finitif de la situation". Voila. ce que dit le deuxi~me
alin6a.
104. Il n'y a rien dans l'a1in~a suivant, qui stipule
simplement que la proposition sera soumise simultan~ment aux Gouvernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan.
Cette proposition a ~t~ soumise simultan~ment, mais

.!

·1

I

~J

tj

.J

I

n

:1

104. There is nothing in the next paragraph, because
it simply says that the proposal will be submitted

simultaneously to the Governments of India and Pakistan. Although it was submitted simultaneiously, it
30

~

:aminer le
,phe 132du
duConseil
1t sp~cial
ioire de la
i et le Pau Conseil,
structions
Jtsimpor-

t:

r l'Inde et

de vue exuPakistan
Jammu et

onseil sur
pas quesIn" - c'est
sujet de la
i Pakistan.
", nond'un
et Cacheistence inier alin~a.
lsiquemon
l1. Nous ne
:dre terrime "situae. Il n'est
. autorit~s,
vernement

stimantque
lUX hostililUX hostiliConseil de
[' c'est afin
; avons d~­
notre avis,
lUS serions
!le voulions
le situation
et la s~cu­
t l'invasion
autre part:
['lnde et du
Icune autre
ue autorit~
rernements
l1auts comltpasques.es engag~s
; plus tard,
1auts com'nementsde
lent d~fini­
e deuxi~me
qui stipule
;e simulta11 Pakistan.
ment. mals

1"
~

1;

i

~

,.

elle a
aceepMe par nous et rejeUle par eux.vota"'l
ce que contient le pr~ambule.
. ""I
105. Le dispositif de la r~solution se divise en trois
ril
parties, ayant chacune plusieurs subdivisions. La pr'ei
mi~re partie a cinq paragraphes: A, B, C, D, E. Je
.'\
prie les membres du Consell de bien vouloir l e s ' ,
examiner.
106. La premi~re partie est intitul~e: "Suspension
d'armes" et le paragraphe A commence comme suit:
"Les Gouvernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan ...". Il
n'-est point question ici du gouvernement "azad", de
forces insu:"g~es ou d'autre chose. Quand laCommission s'est rendue a. Karachi, le Ministre des affaires
~trang~res, sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan, a inform~
la Commission que l'arm~e du Pakistan ~tait dans
l'Etat. Nous le savions tous, mais c'est alors seulement que le fait a ~t~ admis. Le paragraphe A est
ainsi rMig~:
"Les Gouvernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan conviennent que leurs hauts commandements respectifs
donneront s~par~ment et simultan~mentun ordre de
suspension d'armes applicable a. toutes les forces
plac~es sous leurs ordres dans l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire a la date la plus rapprocMe possible ou
a. des dates qui ser-ont accept~es d'un commun accord (... )."
Il n'y a dans tout cela rien qui prete a controverse.
107. Nous arrivons au paragraphe B, fort important
quant a. la situation pr~sente, et c'est avec beaucoup
de tristesse que nous constatons que leConseilde s~­
curit~ ne lui a pas accord~ jusqu'a. pr~sent toute l'attention voulue. Notre Premier Ministre a soulign~ ce
fait bien des fois, et nous devons le r~p~ter. Le paragraphe B se lit comme suit:
"Les hauts commandements des forces de l'Inde
et du Pakistan acceptent de s'abstenir de toutes mesures qui pourraient augmenter le potentiel militaire des forces plac~es sous leurs ordres dans
l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. - Nous allons montrer aujourd'hui que non seulement le Pakistan ne
s'est pas conform~ ala deuxi~me partie de l'accord
mais qu'll a ~galement viol~ l'accord de suspension
d'armes, et nous allons le prouver. - (Aux fins des
pr~sentes propositions, l'expression "forces plac~es
sous leurs ordres" comprend toutes lesforces - et
ce qui suit est tr~s important - organis~es ou non,
qui combattent ou participent aux hostilit~s de l'un
ou l'autre cot~.)"

was accepted by us and rejected by them. That is
the preamble.
105. The pattern of the body of the resolution is that
it is in three parts, and each part has sub-parts. The
first part consists of five paragraphs: A, B, C, D, and

.<

E. I invite the Council's attention to them.
106. Part I is headed "Cease-fire order", and paragraph A reads: "The Governments of India and Pakistan... ". There is no recognition here of the "Azad"
Government, insurgent forces or anything else. When
the Commission went to Karachi, Sir Mohammed
Zafrullah Khan, who was then Foreign Minister, informed the Commission that the Pakistan Army was
there. We all knew it-but only then was it admitted.
Paragraph A reads:

"The Governments of India and Pakistan agree that
their respective High Commands will issue separately and simultaneously a cease-fire order to apply
to all forces under their control in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir as of the earliest practicable date or
dates to be mutually agreed upon..."

There is nothing controversial in that.
107. Then we come to paragraph B, a very important
paragraph on which the present situation so much turns
and we submit with a great degree of sadness that the
Security Council has not hitherto given it sufficient
attention. Our Prime Minister has expressed this
fully in many places and we must say it again. Paragraph B reads as follows:
"The High Commands of the Indian and Pakistan
forces agree to refrain from taking any measures
that might augment the military potential of the
forces under their control in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir." -It is our submission today that not
only has Pakistan not carriedoutpartII of the agreement but it has also violated the cease-fire agreement, and we propose to prove this.-"(For the purpose of these proposals forces under their control
shall be considered" -and the next phrase is very
important- "to include all forces, organized and unorganized, fighting or participating in hostilities on
their respective sides.)"
108. Now this is the kind of definition that you will
find is consonant, for example, with the description in
the Geneva Conventions. Here it is: There is an undertaking by the two High,Commands that they will refrain
from taking any measures that might augment the military potential; and we contend that ever since the conclusion of these two agreements Pakistan has consistently, repeatedly, continuously and without interruptions violated paragraph B of the cease-fire order. I
thought this would be the best place for me to elaborate,
but my advisers tell me that it is better for me to deal
with the resolution first and to come back to this argument afterwards.
109. Paragraph C reads:

108. Cette d~finition s'accorde, par exemple, avec
celle des Conventions de Gen~ve. La voici: Les deux
hauts commandements se sont engag6s a s'abstenir
de toutes mesures qui pourraient augmenter le potentiel inilitaire. Or, nous affirmons que, depuis la conclusion de ces deux accords, le Pakistan n'a cess~ de
violer en toute occasion les dispositions du paragraphe B de la section relative al'ordre de suspension
d'armes. Je pensais pr~senter iei des commentaires
d~taill~s, mais, selon mes conseillers, 11 est pr~f~­
rable de parler d'abord de la r~solution el: de revenir
ensuite sur cet argument.

"The Commanders-in-Chief of the forces of India

"Les commandants en chef des forces de l'lnde et

109. Le. paragraphe C se lit comme suit:
31

I,':"

and Pakistan shall promptly confer regarding any
necessary local changes in present dispositions
which may facilitate the cease-fire."

du Pakistan se r~uniront sans d~lai pour discuter
toute modification locale des dispositions actuelles
qui pourrait faciliter la suspension d'armes."

110. Paragraph Dreads:

"SimuItane
posal for the
outlined in p
lowing princi
truce agreem
out in discus
the Commiss

110. Le paragraphe D est ainsi conlSu:

"In its discretion and as the Commission may find

"La Commission, dans la mesure oi), elle le juge
possible, d~signera des observateurs militaires qui
surveilleront l' ex~cution de l'ordre de suspension
d'armes sous l'autorit~ de la Commission et avec
la coop~ration des deux commandements."

practicable, the Commission will appoint military
observers who, under the authority of the Commission and with the co-operation of both Commands,
will supervise the observance of the cease-fire
order."
Nothing turns on this paragraph. Military observers
have been appointed and they constantly report; and as
I mentioned the other day, if there was any concentration of Indian troops, the military observers would
have reported to the Secretary-General.

Ce paragraphe ne prete pas a. controverse. On a nomm~
des observateurs militaires et ils font constamment
rapport. Comme je l'ai dit l'autre jour, s'll y avait
des concentrations de troupes indiennes, les observateurs i'auraient signal~ au Secr~taire g~n~ral.

111. Now we come to a key paragraph in part I, that
is, paragraph E: "The Government ofIndia and the Government of Pakistan agree to appeal to their respective peoples ... " -the first was a negative action of desisting from doing something, but here we have agreed
to appeal to our respective people- "to assist in
creating and maintaining an atmosphere favourable to
the promotion of further negotiations." As this argument develops you will find a statement by the Government of India: that the one condition that is necessary
for the settlement of this problem, or even for negotiation, is an improved atmosphere. It is impossible to
negotiate effectively, to come to an agreement in the
context of a campaign of war propaganda that goes on
against us and a programme of religious hatred. We
will at no time agree to a State being founded on a
religious foundation. We want our people to be religious, to have freedom of religion and freedom of
worship, but this is a matter between them and their
conscience, or the Supreme Being, or whatever you
call it. We are not prepared to consider secular matters on any other basis. Paragraph Estates:

111. Nous en venons maintenant a. une section essentielle de la premi~re partie, a. savoir le paragraphe E:
"Le Gouvernement de 1'Inde et le Gouvernement du
Pakistan acceptent de faire appel ;l leurs peuples
respectifs (les premi~res mesures ~taient n~gatives:
il s'agissait de ne pas faire quelque chose; ici, au
contraire, nous sommes convanus de faire appela.nos
peuples respectifs) pour qu'lls aident a. cr~er et ;l
maintenir ulie atmosph~re favorable au d~veloppement
de ilouvelles n~gociations." Vous pourrez constater
plus loin que le Gouvernement de 1'Inde a d~clar~ que
la seule condition indispensable au r~glement de ce
probl~me ou meme ;l des n~gociations est une atmospMre plus favorable. Il est impossible de n~gocier
avec succ~s, d'aboutir a. un accord, au milieu d'une
campagne de propagande belliqueuse et de haine religieuse dirig~e contre nous.Nousn'accepteronsjamais
qu'un Etat se fonde sur la religion. Sans doute d~si­
rons-nous que les habitants de notre pays soient anim~s
de sentiments religieux, qu'ils jouissent de la libert~
de religIon et de cuIte, mais c'est l:l une affaire entre
eux et leur conscience, ou entre eux et l'Etre supreme,
quel que soit le nom que vous lui donniez. Mais nous
n'entendons pas meler la religion aux affaires s~cu­
li~res. Le paragraphe E dispose:

"The Government of India and the Government of
Pakistan agree to appeal to their respective peoples
to assist in creating and maintaining an atmos{)here
favourable to the promotion offurther negotiations."

"Le Gouvernement de l'Inde et le Gouvernement
du Pakistan acceptent de faire appel ~. leurs peuples
respectifs pour qu'lls aident a. cr~er et a. maintenir
une atmospMre favorable au d~veloppement de nouvelles n~gociations."

112. It is our submission that from that day-and I
read some of the propaganda-since the Security
Council passed the resolution, it is for the Security
Council to consider 'vhat relation the stepping-up of
the propaganda has to the resolution passed. It is not
for me to say, because I am invited here under Article
32 of thf' r:harter to state my case. We say that paragraph E stands violated. So far as the cease-fire order
is concerned, pararSraphs B and E of part I stand
violated. I will tell the Security Council what the effect
of that y-", lation is on the so-called international
engageme'lt.

112. Je soutiens qu'a. partir de ce jour on a accentu~
~a propagande, et je donnerai lecture de certains Gas
textes de propagande; ~tant donn~ que le Conseil de
s~curit~ a adopt~ la r~solution, llluiappartientd'examiner quel rapport existe entre l'accentuationde cette
propagande et la r~solution adopt~e. Il ne m'appartient
pas de tirer moi-meme la conclusion de cet examen,
car je suis invit~ ici, en vertu de l'Article 32 de la
Charte, pour soutenir la cause de monpays. Mais nous
dirons que la disposition du paragraphe E a~t~ viol~e.
En ce qui concerne l'ordre de suspension d'armes, il
y a violation des paragraphes B et E de la premi~re
partie. Je dirai au Conseil de s~curit~ quel est l'effet
de cette violation sur cequ'onpr~tendetreuneobligation internationale.

11 3. Now we come to Part H. This is a truce agreement, and the first paragraph reads as follows:

113. Je passe maintenant ;l la deuxi~me partie. Il
s'agit de l'accord de treve, dont le paragraphe introductif a la teneur suivante:

wil~

32

114. Let us 10
The first part
so little attenti
passed:

"1. As the
territory of
stitutes a m
was represen
fore the Secur
agrees to wi
115. What is
as I said, the
Pakistan denie
taking that da
fact-it was s
Council found
before-that

116. Therefor
material chang
we came here,
formed to the
use any strong
the basic inst
kept in the dar
Although they w
know about tt'e
tional letters
Minister to the
change is the i
introduction of
previously said

117. Now the
terial change.
ation and unles
cannot be unde
ment to do? "...
withdraw its tr
to listen to thos
part 11 what is
by Pakistan of
Kashmir. So all
nizations and a
not what is int
drawal was unc
agreement can
ended the aggre
Member State a
the Charter-th
of the Charter
is laid down tl
troops from the

.1

"Simultaneously with the acceptance of the proposal for the immediate cessation of hostilities as
outlined in part I, both Governments accept the following principles as a basis for the formulation of a
truce agreement, the details of which shall be worked
out in discussion between their representatives and
the Commission. "

"En acceptant la proposition relative a. une cessation immMiate des hostilit~stelle qu'elle est expos~e
dans la premi~re partie, les deux gouvernements
acceptent ~galement les principes suivants comme
bases pour la r~daction d'un accord de treve dont
les d~tails seront ~labor~s au cours de discussions
entre Ieurs reprt§sentants et la Commission. "

114. Let us look at section A of the truce agreement.
The first part of section A is a key paragraph to which
so little attention has been paid in the years that have
passed:

114. Examinons maintenant la section A de cet accord
de treve. Le premier paragraphe de la section A est
un paragraphe clef, auquel on a accord~ bienpeu d'attention au cours des ann~es qui ont suivi:

"1. As the presence of troops of Pakistan in the
territory of the State of Jammu and Kashmir constitutes a material change in the situation since it
was represented by the Government of Pakista.."1 be~
fore the Security Council, the Government of Pakistan
agrees to withdraw its troops from the State."
115. What is the significance of this? First of all,
as I said, there is something you cannot deny. But
Pakistan denies that there are troops there and, even
taking that date in May-which we do not accept in
fact-it was six months afterwards when the Security
Council found out-when they went to Karachi and not
before-that the troops of Pakistan had entered.

"1. Attendu que la pr~sence de troupes duPakistan
dans le territoire de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire
modifie de fal;on consid~rable la situation telle qu' elle
avait ~t~ expos~e au Conseil de s~curit~ par le Gouvernement du Pakistan, ce dernier accepte de re tirer
ses troupes de cet Etat. "
115. Qu.elle est la signification de ce paragraphe,
Tout d'abord, comme je I'ai dit, II Y a un fait qui est
ind~niable. Or, le Pakistan nie que des troupes soient
stationnlies dans l' Etat et, meme en admettant la date
du mois de mai, date que nous n'acceptons pas comme
exacte, c'est six mois plus tard que le Consell de
securite a constate, lorsqu'on s'est rendu a Karachi,
et non auparavant, que les troupes du Pakistan etaient
entrlies dans l' Etat.

116. Therefore, two things emerge: first, that a
material change has taken place in the situation since
we came here, because the Security Council was informed to the contrary. I submit, without desiring to
use any strong words, that this was the first instance,
the basic instance, in which the Security Council was
kept in the dark and the facts were concealed from it.
Although they were first concealed from us, we came to
know about U'em and that is the reason for all the emotional letters from the heart written by my Prime
Minister to the other Prime Minister. Now a material
change is the introduction of the Pakistan Army, the
introduction of the Army to a country which it had
previously said it had not entered.

116. Ainsi, deux faits se degagent: en premier lieu,
depuis que nous sommes venus ici, la situation a ete
modifilie de fal;0n considerable, parce qu' on avait
donne au Consell de slicurite des renseignements en
sens contraire. Tout en pesant mes termes, je pretends que ce fut le premier cas, d'importance essentielle, dans lequel le Consell de slicurite a ete induit
en erreur et les faits lui ont Me caches. lis le furent
d'abord a nous-memes, mais nous en avons eu ensuite
connaissance, et cela explique les lettres empreintes
d'emotion que mon Premier Ministre a adressees au
Premier Ministre du Pakistan. Ce qui a modifie la
situation de fal;on considlirable, c'est l'entree de
l'armee pakistanaise dans un pays alors que le Gouvernement du Pakistan avait declare qu'elle n'y avait
pas penetrli.

117. Now the Commission says this constitutes a material change. This is a key factor in the whole situation and unless it is taken into account this problem
cannot be understood. What has the Pakistan Government to do? "...The Government of Pakistan agrees to
withdraw its troops from the State." I would like you
to listen to those word3. In paragraph 1 of section A of
part IT what is agreed to is an unconditional withdrawal
by Pakistan of its Army from the State of Jammu and
Kashmir. So all this palaver afterwards about synchronizations and about a balance of forces and so on is
not what is intended by this clause. The duty of withdrawal was unconditional and therefore no part ofthis
agreement can even be considered until Pakistan has
ended the aggression. And if I may submit-and we as a
Member State are entitled to submit under the terms of
the Charter-the duty of the Security Council in terms
of the Charter is to put an end to this aggression. It
is laid down that "Pakistan agrees to withdraw its
troops from the State."

117. Or, la Commission affirme que cette action
pakistanaise modifie la situation de fal;0n considerable.
C'est un element capital dans l'ensemble de la question et, si 1'on n'en tient pas compte, on ne peut la
comprendre. Que doit faire le Gouvernement du
Pakistan? " ... Le Gouvernement du Pakistan accepte
de retirer ses troupes de cet Etat." J e vous demande
de prendre note de ces mots. Au paragraphe 1 de la
section A de la deuxieme partie, le Pakistan accepte
de r.etire r inconditionnellement ses troupes de l' Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire. Ainsi, toutes les palabres
qui ont suivi sur la synchronisation des mesures, sur
un equllibre des forces, etc., ne repondent pas a
l'objectif vise par cette disposition. L'obligation de
retrait est inconditionnelle, et on ne peut meme
prendre en consideration aucune partie de cet accord
tant que le Pakistan n'a pas renonce a son agression.
Si je puis le dire, et je suis autorisli a le faire - en
tant que representant d'un Etat Membre, aux termes
de la Charte - , le devoir du Consell de securite,
aux termes de la Charte, est d'annuler 1'agression.
Le texte dispose que "le Gouvernement du Pakistan
accepte de retirer ses troupes de cet Etat."
33

I

r~-=---:._.c-

;)
•~
j
1,1,
il

1~

"1

11

.-

!-18. Now let us look at paragraph 2 of Section A,
which reads:
"The Government of Pakistan" -that is the first
step, there \\"'11 be more-"will use its best endeavour to secure the withdrawal from the State of
Jammu and Kashmir of tribesmen and Pakistan
nationals not normally resident therein who have
entered the State for the purpose of fighting. "

118. Je passe maintenant au paragraphe 2 de la section A, qui est ainsi rectige:

Paragraph 2 has not been carried out a.'1d it continues
not to be carried out and that action is one of the subsisting problems of the situation, as you will see when
we go into detail.

Cette disposition du paragraphe 2 n'a pas ete appliquee et elle continue de ne pas l'etre, ce qui pose l'un
des probl~mes toujours non resolus de cette situation,
ainsi que vous le verrez lorsque nous examinerons
cela en detail.

119. Paragraph 3 reads:

119.

"Le Gouvernement du Pakistan (il s'agit d'une
mesure qui doit etre suivie d'autres
mesures) fera tout ce qui est en son pouvoir pour
faire evacuer de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire les
membres de tribus et les ressortissants du Pakistan
qui, ,,0 temps normal, ne resident pas dans cet Etat
et qui y ont penetre afin de combattre."

premi~re

t·,

[-i

d

f

~

I~
" :~

If

HI

Li

I,I!~'.~

q1,1
it ,~1
ij.~

ij.',~

I' .1

I;;j
1\1

1\
L·;
L~
1~

11

!{'::'j

J~

1: 1
rj.-"~

r;-;~
,.

~

H'"

fi~

iT.:
Po~l

"m

~-::.~

I:'j

~1:_:;~

:~~

t!¥
t~'<~

Ili
r',~1

I' .~

I[·i

'i~

!"~li~

I,
1\ .~

',11

li:1

i*

I"JJ1
t.

Le paragraphe 3 a la teneur suivante:

"Pending a final solution, the territory evacuated"this is again a very important part-"by the Pakistan
troops" -that is to say, the territory that they are
now occupying, as I told you when I spoke about the
Constituent Assembly and as I shall point out later
on, that territory was supposed to be evacuated by
them altogether. They had to. go away: they were
invaders, they have no right there. The only people
who could stay were the local authorities- "will be
administered by the local authorities under the surveillance of the Commission."

"En attendant une solution definitive, le territoire
evacue (c'est hI encore une partie tr~s importante)
par les troupes du Pakistan (c' est-<\-dire le territoire qu'elles occupent maintenant, comme je vous
l'ai dit lorsque j'ai parle de l' Assemblee constituante et comme je le soulignerai par la suite,
c'est-<\-dire le territoire qu'elles devaient enti~re­
ment evacuer car elles devaient se retirer: c t etaient
des forces d'invasion, elles n'ont pas le droit d'y
etre, seules peuvent y rester les autorites locales)
sera administre par les autorites locales sous la
surveillance de la Commission."

120. Paragraph 3 therefore makes it clear beyond
all doubt that the State of Pakistan had no business
whatsoever in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir
and that the duty which they failed to discharge was
to remove themseh'es fully and completely. It is no
answer for the Foreign Minister of Pakistan to turn
round and ask me, "What is it that he wants the Security Council to do? To serve Kashmir on a platter to
him and India?" [766th meeting, para. 18].

120. Le paragraphe 3 precise donc, sans la moindre
equivoque, que l'Etat du Pakistan n'a absolument rien
a voir dans le territoire de Jammu et Cachemire et
que son devoir, qu'il n'a pas respecte, etait d'en
retirer compl~tement ses troupes. Ce n'est donc pas
une reponse, de la part du Ministre des affaires etrang~res du Pakistan que de se tourner vel'S moi et de
me dire: "Que doit donc faire le Conseil? Lui remettre - a lui et a l'Inde - le Cachemire sur un
plateau?" [766~me seance, par. 18.]

121. We come now to section B, paragraph 1, which
reads as follows: "Whenfl-and the word flwhen fl in
English means just what it says- "the Commission
shall have notified" -that is to say, the following action
must be after the notification-flthe Government of
India"-not the Government of Pakistan, because the
Government of India is the sovereign authority in
this matter- "that the tribesmen and Pakistan nationals
referred to in part n, A, 2 hereof have withdrawn"-(I
invite the attention of the Council to the word "when"nothing can happen until this event takes place. The
Commission has to notify about what? That the tribesmen have withdrawn from the present occupied territory, that they have completely evacuated.)

121. Nous en venons maintenant au paragraphe 1 de
la section B, ainsi redige: "Lorsque (et ce mot ne
peut avoir qu'une seule signification) la Commission
aura informe (c'est-a-dire que ce qui est prevu ensuite doit venir apr~s cette notification) le Gouvernement de l'Inde (et non le Gouvernement du Pakistan,
car le Gouvernementde l'Inde estl'autorite souveraine
en la matiere) du retrait des membres de tribus et
des ressortissants du Pakistan vis~s a la deuxi~me
partie, A, 2, de la presente resolution (J'attire l'attention des membres du Conseil sur le mot "lorsque"
- rien ne peut se produire avant l'evenement dont
il est question. La Commission doit faire part de
quoi? Du retrait des membres de tribus du territoire
occupe a present, de leur retrait complet.)

"When the Commission shall have notified the
Government of India that the tribesmen and Pakistan
nationals referred to in part n, A, 2 hereof have
withdrawn, thereby terminating the situation"-the
situation which was being complained of- "which was
represented by the Government of India to the
Security Council as having occasioned the presence
of Indian forces in the State of Jammu and Kashmir"-that is to say, the Commission has to report
that they have withdrawn, thereby terminating the
situation which made the presence of our troops in
Kashmir necessary. Until that situation is terminated

"Lorsque la Commission aura informe le Gouver- ,
de l'Inde du retrait des membres de tribus
et des ressortissants du Pakistan vises a la deuxi~me
partie, A, 2, de la presente resolution, mettantainsi
fin a la situation qui (il s'agit de la situation qui a
fait l'objet de la plainte), selon les representations
du Gouvernement de l'Inde au Conseil de securite,
a entrafne la presence de forces indiennes dans
l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire (Cela signifie que la
Commission doit rendre compte qu'ils se sont
retires, mettant ainsi un terme a la situation qui
a rendu necessaire la presence de nos troupes au
n~ment

34

f
~,

nothing can
forces are
and Kashmi
to withdraw
stages to be

122. Some 0
are in violati
notifies us th
have been wi
the bulk of 0
be agreed upo
do with Paki
formed the C
mission in co
that we we re
Pakistan insi
of the reason

123. Section
"Pending t
settlement
attention of
the State of
ment will
moment of
which in ag
side red nec
observance
have observ
124. Here we
in the sense th
ated by the SE
Now what dOE
acceptance of
remains, the
agreement of
necessary to a
words are "10
a phrase whic
Pakistan- occu
Government of
therefore, the
tenance of law
is the so-calle
there was no
aggression. T
Council will I'
which is a lett
mission about
para. 78]. I s
Council would
the Commissi
rances which
Hshed, do not
ments.

c-

ne
es
ur
es

r
~!

_.,._---._--~._--~-

--~.

nothing can happen-nand further, that the Pakistan
forces are being withdrawn from the State of Jammu
and Kashmir, the Government of India agrees to begin
to withdraw the bulk of its forces from that State in
stages to be agreed upon with the Commission."

Cachemire; jusqu'a ce qU'il soit mis fin a cette
situation, il ne peut rien se produire de nouveau),
et, de plus, lorsque la Commission aura fait savoir
au Gouvernement de 1'lnde que les forces du Pakistan evacuent 1'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, le
Gouvernement de l'lnde acceptera de commencer a
retirer par etapes le gros de ses forces de cet
Etat, selon des modalites a etablir apr~s entente
avec la Commission."

an

:at

.iun

In,

ns

-_._ ... -.--"~-_ .. , .. _~--:-_.-,,--,,,,".:-.,.,:'

122. Some of the things which the Council has heard
are in violation of this clause. When the Commission
notifies us that the tribesmen and Pakistan nationals
have been withdrawn, then we are tobeginto withdraw
the bulk of our forces, and the stages of that have to
be agreed upon with the Commission. It has nothing to
do with Pakistan; it is with the Commission. We informed the Commission that we would tell the Commission in confidence about our troop movements, but
that we were not prepared to tell Pakistan about them.
Pakistan insisted that it should be told, and that is one
of the reasons why the negotiations broke down.

122. Certaines des circonstances qui ont ete rapportees au Conseil constituent une violation de la
clause que je viens de citeI'. Lorsque la Commission
nous informera du retrait des membres de tribus
et des ressortissants du Pakistan, alors nous devrons
commencer a reti,er le gros de nos forces, et les
etapes de ce retrait devront etre etablies apres entente avec la Commission. 11 n'y a rien a traiter avec
le Pakistan, mais uniquement avec la Commission.
Nous avons fait savoir a la CommiSSion que nous
l'informerions en toute confiance de nos mouvements
de troupes, mais que nous n'etions pas disposes a en
informer le Pakistan. Le Pakistan a insiste pour que
nous le fassions, et ce fut une des raisons de l' echec
des negociations.

123. Section B, paragraph 2 reads as follows:

123. Le paragraphe 2 de la section B se lit comme
suit:

"Pending the ac~eptanceoftheconditionsforafinal
settlement of the situation"-and I again invite the
attention of the Councll to the word "situationtl-tlin
the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Indian Government will maintain within the lines existing at the
moment of the cease-fire those forces of its Army
which in agreement with the Commission are considered necessary to assist local authorities in the
observance of law and order. The Commission will
have observers stationed where it deems necessary."
124. Here we have one of the most difficult clauses
in the sense that its meaning has not been fully appreciated by the Security Council in later considerations.
Now what does this paragraph state? "Pending the
acceptance of the conditions... "-while the situation
remains, the forces of the Indian Army, with the
agreement of the Commission, will be maintained as
necessary to assist the local authorities. Now the key
words are "local authorities". "Local authorities" is
a phrase which is applied only to administration in the
Pakistan-occupied area; in the other parts it is the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir. According to this,
therefore, the Indian Army is to assist, in the maintenance of law and order, the local authorities on what
is the so-called" Azad" side. Therefore, at this stage
there was no question of anything but stopping the
aggression. This will become clear if the Security
Council will read the document dated 20 August 1948,
which is a letter from the Prime Minister to the Commission about the Commission's assurances [S/1100,
para. 78]. I should like to ask whether the Security
Council would say that assurances given on behaJi of
the Commission to the Head of a Government, assurances which are public knowledge and which are published, do not have the same value as all the engagements.

')

.U

~I

"En attendant que les conditions du reglement
final de la situation dans 1'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire aient ete acceptees (et, de nouveau, j'attire
1'attention des membres du Conseil sur le mot
"situation"), le Gouvernement del'Indemaintiendra,
en de~a des lignes existant au moment de la suspension d'armes, les forces de son armee que,
d'accord avec la Commission, il considerera comme
necessaires pOUT aider les auto rites locales a faire
respecter l'ordre public. Le Commission placera
des observateurs la ou elle le jugera necessaire. tl
124. Nous nous trouvons ici en presence d'une des
clauses les plus delicates, er. ce sens que, par la
suite, sa signification n'a pas eM pleinement comprise par le Conseil. Or, que dit ce paragraphe?: "En
attendant que les conditions (...) aient ete acceptees ... " - aussi longtemps que la situation subsiste,
les forces de l'armee indienne, avec l'accord de la
Commission, seront maintenues dans la mesure ou
elles seront necessaires pour aider les auto rites
locales. Les mots clefs sont "autorites locales".
L'expression "autorites local -s" s'applique uniquement it l'administration dans la zone occupee par le
Pakistan; dans le reste d\. ~. -r~toire, c'est le Gouvernement du Jammu et Cae.. ,,-.lire. En consequence,
aux termes de cette clause, 1'armee indienne doit
aider, pour faire respecter l'ordre public, les autorites locales de ce que l'on appelle le cote "azad". A
ce stade, il ne s'agissait dor.c rien d'autre que de
l'evacuation de 1'agresseur. Les membres du Conseil
s'en convaincront s'ils lisent le document en date du
20 aofit 1948, qui est une lettre du Premier Ministre
it la Commission au sujet des assurances donnees
par elle [S/1100, par. 78]. Jemepermetsde demander
si le Conseil de securite estime que des assurances
donnees au nom de la Commission au chef d'un gouvernement, assurances qui sont de notoriete publique
et qui ont ete publiees, n'ont pas la meme valeur que
tous les engagements.

35

'j

J .,'

1:

,...

•. -_ ..., . . _ . - - "_.
..

_-,-~-_.-

~_._

-~.-

'~"-'--- ~

.-

__._ .....
..

_-~._­

~:~,-".

.... "- -

···r.'······,

1

"'::"j

125. Therefore, pltragraph 2 gives the Government of
India the right and the duty to assist in the maintenance
of law and order. When the Chairman was asked what
was meant by law and order and what about the external
defence of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, he stated
that the two could not be separated. The position,
therefore, was the one which Mr. Gopalaswami
Ayyangar put to this Council: the Pakistan forces'
withdrawal and the occupation of the external frontiers of Kashmir by the Indian Army. That was the
position at that time.

125. Le Gouvernement de I'lnde a donc, en vertu du
paragraphe 2, le droit et le devoir d'aider a faire
respecter l'ordre public. Lorsqu'on a demande au
President ce qu'il fallait entendre par legalite et
ordre ainsi que par defense exMrieure de l'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire, il a declare que les deux ne
pouvaient pas etre separes. La position etait donc
celle que M. Gopalaswami Ayyangar avait exposee au
Conseil: retrait des forces pakistanaises et occupation par l'armee indienne des frontieres exterieures
du Cachemire. Telle etait la position a cette epoque.

126. When we raise these questions people think we
are splitting hairs. Might I digress for a moment to
state that if this case was being argued before a legal
tribunal it would probably take three or four weeks'
time. However, the Members of the Council are so busy
that we have to go through.his quickly.

126. Lorsque nous soulevons ces questions, onpense
que nous coupons les cheveux en quatre. Puis-je
m'ecarter un instant du sujet pour dire que, si cette
affaire ~tait plaidee devant un tribunal, elIe prendrait
probablement trois ou quatre semaines? Mais les
membres du Conseil sont si occup~s que nous devons
avancer rapidement.

127. The term "local authorities" is used throughout
the whole of these documents only as applied to the
authorities that are not de jure. Paragraph 2 places
upon the Government of India both the duty and the
right to look after law and order in the occupied area.
In the light of that clause, I ask whether the whole stand
of the Pakistan Government is justified. Notatall.

127. Les termes "autorites locales", utilises constamment dans ces documents, ~'appliquent seulement
aux auto rites tIui ne sont pas de jure. Le paragraphe 2
impose au Gouvernement de l'lnde le devoir - et lui
donne en meme temps le droit - de veiller au maintien de l'ordre public et au respect de la loi dans la
zone occupee. Me fondant sur cette clause, je demande
si l' ensemble de la these du Gouvernement pakistanais est justifie. Absolument pas.

128. Section B, paragraph 3 reads as follows:

128.

Le paragraphe 3 de la section Best ainsi rectige:

"Le Gouvernement de l'lnde s'engagera a veiller
a ce que le Gouvernement de l'Etat de Jammu et

"The Government of India will undertake to ensure
that the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir will take all measures within its powerto make
it publicly known that peace, law and order will be
safe-guarded and that all human and political rights
will be guaranteed."

Cachemire prenne toutes mesures en son pouvoir
pour faire savoir a tous que lapaixet l'ordre public
seront sauvegardes et que tous les droits de l'homme
et les droits politiques seront garantis."

.

and Kashm
the will of
First, as I h
man wish.
termined in
However, thi
State of Jam
cerned with
status under
status. A dist
sion as ro t
the transpira
ferent matte
political impl

Then follows
acceptance";
ance; it not 0
a particular c
"upon ac
what is to b
ernments a
Commissio
and take a p
to enter int
and for wha
able conditi
assured. "
133. When I
be convinced
fair condition
logical warfa
Council, and
and all the co
and equitable
be no questio
Constitution.
to make this f1
men here, re]
friendly intere
owe allegianc
dam and Aus
interest in it,
we have a deb
that respect.
the canons of .
municipal la
responds to in

129. This we have done, and we did itnot only at that
time-it is in that spirit that the Constitution came into
being. Before that time there was no Constitution and
there was no popular Government. What is more, very
soon afterwards the dynasty was displaced and the son
of the older Maharaja, who was an autocratic ruler,
became elected Head of State. We proceeded in pursuance of part IT, section B of t..'1.e resolution.

129. C'est ce que nous avons fait, et nous ne l'avons
pas fait seulement a cette epoque. C'est dans cet
esprit que la Constitution a vu le jour. Avant cela,
il n'y avait pas de Constitution et aucun gouvernement
populaire. De plus, tres peu de temps apres cela, la
dynastie a ete ecartee et le fils du vieux maharajah,
qui etait un souverain autocratique, a ete elu chef de
l'Etat. Nous avons agi conformement aux dispositions
de la section B de la deuxieme partie de la resolution.

130. We come now to sectionC, which has filled many
minds but which is not necessarily the key part of the
picture. Section C, paragraph 1, reads as follows:

130. Nous arrivons maintenant a la section C, qui
a occupe beaucoup d'esprits, mais qui n'estpas necessairement l' element clef duprobleme. Le paragraphe 1
de la section C est libelle comme suit:

"Upon signature, the full text of the truce agreement
or a communique containing the principles thereof as
agreed upon ... will be made public."

"1. Des que l'accord de treve aura ete signe, le
texte complet ou un communique donnant les principes de cet accord tels qu'ils ont ete acceptes (... )
sera rendu public."

131. I am sorry to say that this opportunity has not
arisen because no truce agreement has been signed.
Part I has been violated in two main sections. The
cease-fire agreement has been violated and part IT has
not been implemented. Every necessary condition has
been breached.

131. Je regrette de dire que cette occasion ne s'est
pas presentee parce qu'aucun accord de treve n'a
ete signe. La premiere partie a ete violee sur deux
points principaux. L'accord relatif au cessez-Ie-feu
a ete viole et la deuxiemepartien'apas ete appliquee.
Aucune des conditions necessaires n'a ete remplie.

132. This takes us now to partm, which refers to the
plebiscite, and whi::h reads as follows:

132. Cela nous am~ne maintenant a la troisieme partie, qui a trait au pl~biscite et qUi est ainsi rMig~e:

134. That is
later. It is par
ing the will of
cOnfer about f
and part I hav
of the truce ag

"The Government of India and the Government of
Pakistan reaffirm their wish" - it does not say "their
pledge"-"that the future status of the State of Jammu

"Le Gouvernement de l'lnde et le Gouvernement
du Pakistan affirment a. nouveau leur d~sir (on
ne parle pas d'engagement) que le statut futur

135. Now wha

36

r

...
.:!

du

re

au
et
de
ne
mc
au

a-

:es

le.

Ise
-je
tie
ait
les

~

;

and Kashmir shall be determined in accordance with
the will of the people and to that end ... "

de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire soit fix~ conII la volont~ de la population et, II
cette fin... "

form~ment

First, as I have said, it is an affirmation of our common wish. Secondly, it states that it should be determined in accordance with the will of the people.
However, this wish concerning the future status of the
State of Jammu and Kashmir in part III is not concerned with the present status. The present status is a
status under accession. This concerns only the future
status. A distinction must be made between an accession as pro tem and an accession to be terminated on
the transpiration af another event. Those are two different matters, both in law and in fact and in all the
political implications of this question.

d'abord, comme je l'ai dit, il s'agit d'une affirmation
de notre desir commun. Deuxiemement, il est dit que
le statu devra etre fixe conformement a la vOlonte de
la population. Cependant, ce desir relatif au statut
futur de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, dont il est
question dans la troisieme partie, n'a riena voir avec
le statut actuel. Le statut actuel est un statut etabli
en fonction de l'accession. 11 s'agit seulement du
statui futuro 11 convient de faire une distinction entre
un rattachement temporaire et un rattachement auquel
il est mis fin a la suite d'unautre evenement. Ce sont
la deux questions differentes, a la fois en droit, en
fait et pour ce qui est de toutes les incidcnces politiques de ce probleme.

Then follows that very nice English expression "upon
acceptance"; "upon acceptance" means after acceptance; it not only denotes a sequence, but a sequence of
a particular character:

... "des l'acceptation (notons cette tres interessante expression anglaise: "upon acceptance", "des
l'acceptation", qui signifie: apres l'acceptation; il
ne s'agit pas seulement d'une SUite, mais d'une suite
d'un caractere particulier) de l'accord de treve
(alors, que fait-on? Apres qu'il est accepte) par les
deux gouvernements, ils conviennent d' entamer des
negociations avec la Commission" on ne dit pas: les
deux gouvernements vont organiser un plebiscite,
mais: les deux gouvernements conviennent d'entamer des negociations avec la Commission ... et a
quelle fin?) afin d'etablir des conditions justes et
equitables qui permettent d'assurer la lib re expression de cette volonte. "

US

IS-

ent
e2
lui

in-

, la

lde

ta-

ge:

ler
, et
air

Ilie

me
lUS

cet
!la,
ent
,la

ah,
de
)Us

on.
qui
3S-

le1

, le
in-

"upon acceptance of the truce agreement"-then
what is to be done? After it is accepted-"both Governments agree to enter into consultations with the
Commission" -It does not say, "both Governments go
and take a plebiscite", but "both Governments agree
to enter into consultations with the Commission",
and for what purpose?- "to determine fair and equitable conditions whereby such free expression will be
assured."
133. When I develop this point the Council will, I hope,
be convinced not only that there have never been these
fair conditions but that under conditions of psychological warfare and the threats uttered even in this
Council, and the massing of personnel on the other side
and all the conditions which I shall refer to, these fair
and equitable conditions cannot be assured. There can
be no question of an election-certainly not under our
Constitution. And when I say "our Constitution" Iwant
to make this further observation, because you gentlemen here, representing other States, can have only a
friendly interest in our Constitution. It is only we who
owe allegiance to it. My friends from the United Kingdom and Australia may have more than a friendly
interest in it, because it has family resemblances, and
we have a debt of gratitude and a sense of heritage in
that respect. But these particular provisions reflect
the canons of international behaviour. They are not just
municipal law. They are municipal law which corresponds to international conduct.

133. Lorsque j'expose ce point, le Conseil sera, je
l'espere, convaincu non seulement que ces conditions
justes n' ont jamais existe, mais que des conditions
justes et equitables ne peuvent pas etre assurees dans
une atmosphere de guerre psychologique et a la suite
des menaces proferees au sein meme du Conseil, des
rassemblements de troupes de l'autre cote de la
frontiere et de toutes les raisons que jevais exposer.
Il ne peut pas etre question d'elections - certainement pas aux termes de notre Constitution. Etlorsque
je dis "notre Constitution", je voudrais faire une autre
observation, parce que, en votre qualite de representant d'autres Etats, votre interet pour notre Constitution ne peut avoir qu'un caractere amical. Nous
seuls lui devons cbeissance, 11 se peut que mes
amis du Royaume- Uni et de I' Australie manifestent
a son sujet plus qu'un interet amical, a cause de
resemblances en quelque sorte familiales et parce
que nous avons une dette de reconnaissance et le
sentiment de participer a un heritage commun. Mais
ces dispositions particulieres reproduisent les regles
regissant le comportement des Etats sur le plan international. 11 ne s'agit pas simplement de legislation
interne. 11 s'agit d'une legislation interne correspondant aux pratiques internationales.
134. Telle est la troisieme partie, et j'en traiterai
d'une manil!re detailIee plus tard. C'est donc dans la
troisieme partie qU'll est question de s'assurer de
la volonte de la population. Les deux gouvernements
doivent se consulter au sujet des conditions justes
et equitables apres que la premiere et la deuxieme
parties auront ete appliquees - apres la signature
des accords de treve.

.. )

est
n'a
3UX

ar:ee:

134. That is part Ill, and I will deal with it in detail
later. It is part Ill, therefore, that refers to ascertaining the will of the people. The two Governments are to
confer about fair and equitable conditions after part Il
and part I have been implemented-after the signature
of the truce agreements.

,ent
(on
tur

135. Now what is the present position? PartIIis vio-

feu
ee.
lie.

135. Quelle est la situation actuelle? La deuxieme
37

i·

lated. This is not an old violation; it stands continually
violated. The present position is one of violation.
Therefore the Pakistan Government is, in this respect,
in a state of sin. It was original sin, but it is continuous
so far as part I is concerned, and part IT has not taken
place. And the Council heard what Sir Owen Dixon
said-that, apart from all other considerations under
the resolutions, none of these things could take place
without the agreement of the Government of India.

partie est vioH~e. n ne s'agit pas d'une violation
ancienne, mais d'une violation continue. Nous sommes
actuellement en pleine violation. En consequence, le
Gouvernement du Pakistan se trouve, a cet egard, en
~tat de p~che. Il a commis le pecM originel, devenu
peche d'habitude en ce qui concerne la premiere partie et peche par omission pour la deuxieme partie.
Le Conseil a entendu sir Owen Dixon declarer que,
en dehors de toute autre consideration resultant des
resolutions, rien ne pouvait etre fait sans le consentement du Gouvernement de l'lnde.

136. Before I go on to the resolution of 5 January
1949, I want to repeat what I said a while ago. It is not
as though the Government of India is now trying to
read meaning into these words. It is not what the lawyer
called "the construction of a document"-some old
lady writes a will; there is a contest about it; clever
lawyers try to read as much as they can into it. That
is not the position. This document has taken a great
deal of brain work. It has meant so much coming and
going; so much saying "yes" and "no"; so much breakdown, and so on and so forth. Each word has been put
in there deliberately. Not only has the document to be
read in its obvious and legal meaning-that is to say,
there is a construction of all documents according to
law-but it has to be read against the background of all
the circumstances. The Security Council, in spite of the
fact that its members are heavily engaged, cannot
ignore the background conditions which are recorded in
so many volumes. These are far too serious matters
for it to be said, "There was talk of a plebiscite; well,
if we have not a plebiscite, then this that and the othe r" .
Therefore, the whole of this thing had to be read.

136. Avant de passer a la resolution du 5 janvier
1949, je voudrais repeter ce que j'ai dit precectemment. Il ne faudrait pas croire que le Gouvernement
de l'lnde s'efforce maintenant d'interpreter le document. Il ne cherche pas, comme on le dit dans le
langage juridique, a "interpreter un acte" (par exemple, si une vieille dame red"ge un testament qui
donne lieu a un litige, d'habiles hommes de loi s'efforcent d'en tirer tout ce qu'ils peuvent). Telle n'est
pas la situation. Le document en question a eM rectige
avec le plus grand soin. 11 est le resultat de quantite
de demarches, decisions positives et negatives, de
tentatives infructueuses, etc. Chaque mot y a ete mis
a dessein. Aussi convient-il de le considerer au sens
propre, au sens juridique, puisqu'il ne peut yavoir
qu'une intepretation des documents selon le droit en outre, il faut le lire en tenant compte de tout un
ensemble de circonstances. Bien que ses membres
soient tres occupes, le Conseil ne peut negliger
l'expose d'ensemble de la question qui a fait l'objet
de tant de documents. C'est la un probleme beaucoup
trop grave pour que l'on puisse dire: "on a bien parle
d'un plebiscite; mais, a d~faut de plebiscite, parlons
d'autre chose". 11 faut donc lire les documents dans
leur texte integral.

137. That brings me tu the ,resolution of 5 January
1949. Pakistan refused to accept the resolution of 13
August 1948. At that time the position which was stated
by Sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan was that this was for
the purpose of a cease-fire, and that there should be no
cease-fire until there were political settlements. He
was holding it up in order to obtain other conditions.
Then I believe the Pakistan Army suffered severe
reverses. I am asked to quote to you what the I"rime
Minister said in Allahabad:

137. J' en arrive a la resolution du 5 janvier 1949.
Le Pakistan a refuse de sousc rire a la resolution du
13 aout 1948. A cette epoque, sir Mohammed Zafrullah
Khan a precise que cette attitude etait dictee par la
question du cessez-le-feu, et qu'il ne devait pas y
avoir de cessez-le-feu sans reglement politique prealable. 11 defendait ce point de vue dans l' espoir
d'obtenir d'autres concessions. Puis, sije me souviens
bien, l'armee pakistanaise a essuye de s~rieux revers.
On me demande de vous citer les paroles que notre
Premier Ministre a prononcees a Allahabad:

"We stopped a victorious army. We could have
settled conclusions. We were stronger at that time,
and, God forbid, if our country were invaded we
should still render a good account of ourselves. In
obedience to the Charter we restrained the actionof
our military forces. Instead of obtaining what we
could have obtained by the use of force we continued
to negotiate, having accepted it.!'

"Nous avons arrete une armee victorieuse. Nous
aurions pu aboutir a des conclusions. Nous etions
plus forts a cette epoque et si, a Dieu ne plaise,
notre pays devait etre envahi, nous pourrions encore
mGntrer ce que nous pouvons faire. Par respect
pour la Charte, nous avons limite l'action de nos
forces militaires. Au lieu d' obtenir ce que nous
aurions pu obtenir par l'usage de la force, nous
avons poursuivi les negociations, en ayant accepte
le principe."

138. The Commission returned to Paris, had further
talks with the Pakistan Government-and the military
situation had probably some effect on the matter, as a
matter of opinion-and on 11 December it elaborated
further proposals, partly to meet the Pakistan position
that there must be some talk about what was likely to
happen after the truce, what was the nature of things,
and so on and so forth. Therefore, the Commission

138. La Commission est retournee a Paris, elle a
poursuivi ses entretiens avec le Gouvernement du
Pakistan - a mon avis, probablement en tenant compte
de la situation militaire - et, le 11 decem.bre, elle
a presente de nouvelles propositl.:.ns, en partie pour
donner satisfaction au Pakistan, qui estimait qu'll
convenait d'etudier ce qui se passerait apres la signature de la treve et quelle etait la situation, etc. La
38

!1·:~eM

WFspent tts
il

139. The
so many
adverse p
There are
is worth
IT of the 13
in the ca
terms.
January,
cannot be
or as to i
common g
gether, be
mentary a
It enables

140. Wha

"The
Jammu
decided
imparti
141.

Par

"A pIe
the Corn
lars of E
shall be
is acond
mission,
and truc
the Corn
been car
have bee

142. We

rangement
only if pa
Council's
made, in p
the conditi
happening
investigati
order to f
graph 2.
completed.

143.

Then

"The S
in agree
biscite
high inte
confiden

lation
nmes
ce, le
rd, en
.evenu
l parartie.
r que,
Ilt des
,nsen-

lllvier
ldemement
docuans le
.r exnt qui
, s'efi n'est
redige
lantite
as, de
ce mis
l sens
avoir
roit .out un
mbres
gliger
l'objet
LUCOUp
I parle
.rlons
s dans

~I

_Nous
etions
plaise,
encore
'espect
de nos
e nouS
I, nouS
t,
,ccepte

~ompte

e, elle
le pour
it qu'il
la sigate. La

useful if we ever came to part m.

139. The resolution of 5 January 1949, which covers
so many pages, has, from India's point of view, an
adverse psychological effect upon those who read it.
There are paragraphs about a plebiscite, but none of it
is worth the paper it is written on unless part I and part
IT of the 13 August 1948 resolution are agreed upon and,
in the case of part lIT, we confer and agree on fair
terms. Therefore the whole of the resolution of 5
January, which I shall read to the Council in a moment,
cannot be read, either as to its individual paragraphs
or as to its entirety, except in this context. And it is
common ground that these two resolutions stand together, because it says" supplementary". It is supplementary and subsidiary, because it adds to the other.
It enables the other to function if the occasion came.

139. La resolution du 5 janvier 1949, qui est si longue, exerce, d'apres 1'lnde, une influence psychologique defavorable sur ceux qui la lisent. De nombreux
paragraphes sont consacres au plebiscite, mais ils
n'auront aucune valeur tant que nous ne nous serons
pas mis d'accord sur les premiere et deuxieme parties de la resolution d'aoiit 1948 et que, dans le cas
de la troisieme, nous n'aurons pas negocie et adopte
des conditions equitables. C'est done dans ce contexte
qu'il faut placer l' ensemble de la resolution du 5 janvier - dont je vais vous donner lecture dans un instant - qu'il s'agisse de tel ou tel paragraphe ou de
l' ensemble de la resolution. Il est normal de considerer les deux resolutions ensemble puisqu'elles
se "completent". La resolution du 5 janvier est supplementaire et subsidiaire, parce qu'elle complete
la precedente. Le cas echeant, elle permettrait d'appliquer la resolution du 13 aoiit.

140. What does it say? Paragraph 1 says:

140. Quelle en est la teneur? Le paragraphe 1 ainsi
conC5u:

,f

-1949.
:ion du
:rullah
par la
pas y
e preespoir
uviens
'evers.
l notre

elle a
lent du

Commission s'est done employee a rediger un plan
qui pouvait etre utile si l' on parvenait jamais a la
troisieme partie.

'fapent Ita time in working nnt a plan which cnuld be

"La question dUTattachement de 1'Etat de Jammu
et Cachemire a l'lnde ou au Pakistan sera decidee
d'une faC50n democratique au moyen d'un plebiscite
libre et impartial."

"The question of the accession of the State of
Jammu and Kashmir to India or Pakistan will be
decided through the democratic method of afreeand
impartial plebiscite."
141. Paragraph 2 says:

141. Voici le texte du paragraphe 2:

"A plebiscite will be held when it shall be found by
the Commission" - and I ask all of you who are scholars of English to tell me what this means. "When it
shall be found by the Commission", in plain English,
is a condition precedent. If it is notfound by the Commission, then, no plebiscite.- "that the cease-fire
and truce arrangements set forth in parts I and IT of
the Commission's resolution of 13 August 1948have
been carried out and arrangements for the plebiscite
have been completed. "

"Il sera procede a un plebiscite lorsque la Commission aura constate (Et je demande a vous tous
qui connaissez bien l'anglais de me dire ce que
signifie le texte original. Il exprime bien une condition prealable: "Lorsque la Commission aura
constate." Si la Commission ne peut constater que
toutes les dispositions ont ete prises, il ne peut y
avoir de plebiscite.) que l'ordre de cessez le feu
et l'accord de treve, prevus aux premiere et deuxieme parties de sa resolution en date du 13 aoiit
1948, auront ete executes et que toutes dispositions
auront ete prises en vue du plebiscite. "

142. We can leave aside the second part because arrangements for the plebiscite did not follow. So it is
only if parts I and IT are completed, and I invite the
Council's attention to the number of times mention is
made, in paragraph after paragraph, of this question of
the condition precedent, of the sequence, of something
happening after something else. And then again it is an
investigation; it is the applying of minds to a plan in
order to find fair means of doing this. That is paragraph 2. As I said, neither part I nor part II has been
completed.

142. Nous pouvons laisser dee6Mladeuxiemepartie,
etant donne que l'on n'a pas pris de dispositions en
vue du plebiscite. La condition est done que les premiere et deuxieme parties soient mises en application. J'appelle l'attention du Conseil sur le nombre
de fois qu'est mentionnee dans lesdiversparagraphes
une condition prealable, une serie d'evenements, de
dispositions applicables les unes a la suite des autres.
Ici encore, il s'agit d'une enquete; il s'agit de s' employer a etablir un plan qui permette de trouver un
moyen equitable de mettre en ceuvre cette resolution.
Telle est la teneur du deuxieme paragraphe. Ainsi
que je 1'ai dit, ni la premiere ni la deuxieme partie
n'ont ete mises en ceuvre.

143. Then we come to paragraph 3 (~), which says:

143. Nous en venons au paragraphe 3, alin~a @., qui
est ainsi conC5u:
"Le Secretaire general de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies designera, en accord avec la Commission, un Administrateur du plebiscite qui devra
etre une personnalite jouissant d'un grand prestige
international et disposant de la confiance generale.

"The Secretary-General of the United Nations will,
in agreement with the Commission, nominate a Plebiscite Administrator who shall be a personality of
high international standing and commanding general
confidence. He will be formally appointed" -and this
39

-r:

again is a very important sentence- "to office by the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir."

L'administrateur sera officiellement nomme (et ,,cette phrase est tres importante) a ses fonctions'
par le Gouvernement du Jammu et Cachemire."

Why? Because the Government of JammuandKashmir
is a sovereign Government. It alone has authority over
the territory. And this is what Sir Owen Dixon-as he
was entitled to do in his mediatory function, although
he was ultra vires of this agreement-tried to shift:
"He will be formally appointed to office by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir." It was perhaps this
seiltEmce in the resolution-namely, that the Plebiscite
Administrator "will be formally appointed to office by
the Government of Jammu and Kashmir" -that Mr.
Menzies had in mind; he did not see any reason at all
why the Government should be displaced.

Pourquoi? Parce que le Gouvernement du Jammu et
Cachemire est un gouvernement souverain. Il exerce
seul 1'autorite sur le territoire. C'est cette derniere
clause que sir Owen Dixon - qui, en tant que mediateur, avait le droit de prendre une telle initiative,
bien qu'elle depassat le cadre le l'accord - a cherche a modifier: "L'administrateur seraofficiellement
nomme a ses fonctions par le Gouvernement de Jammu
et Cachemire." C' etait peut-Hre a cette phrase de
la resolution - a savoir que l' Administrateur du
plebiscite "sera officiellement nomme a ses fonctions par le Gouvernement de Jammu et Cachemire"
- que songeait M. Menzies; il ne voyait aucune raison
d'ecarter le gouvernement.

144. Paragraph 3 (~) of the resolution states:

144. Le paragraphe 3, alin~a Qde la resolution stipule:

"The Plebiscite Administrator shall derive from
the State of Jammu and Kashmir the powers he considers necessary for organizing and conducting the
plebiscite and for ensuring the freedom and impartiality of the plebiscite."

"L'Administrateur du plebiscite recevra de l'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire les pouvoirs qu'il juge
necessaires pour organiser et mener a bien le plebiscite ainsi que pour entourer celui-ci de toutes
les garanties voulues de liberte et d'impartialite."
Rien ne se rapproche davantagedeladefinitionclassique de la souverainete que cette phrase: "recevra de
l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire les pouvoirs ...".
Selon la definition classique generale, le souverain
est la personne de qui emanent tous les pouvoirs. Je
ne dis pas qu'il ne saurait y avoir de modifications
de cette definition, mais je dis que c'est la definition
classique.

Nothing can be nearer to the classical definition of
sovereignty than this phrase "shall derive from the
State of Jammu and Kashmir the powers ... ". Under
the general, classical definition, the sovereign is the
person from whom all powers flow. I do not say that
there can be no modifications of that definition, but I
do say that it is the classical definition.
145. Paragraph 3 (£) reads:

145. Le paragraphe 3, alin~a~, est ainsi rMig~:

"The Plebiscite Administrator shall have authority
to appoint such staff of assistants and observers as
he may require."

" L' Administrateur du plebiscite aura qualite pour
designer le personnel d'adjoints et d'observateurs
dont il pourra avoir besoin. "

This is an administrative provision,
146. Paragraph 4 (~) states:
"Mter implementation of parts I and II of the Commission's resolution of 13 August 1948"-and here,
again, we find the words "after implementation"; itis
not I who am repeating these phrases; it is the
resolution itself which, time and again, uses such
words as "when it shall be found" , and so forth-"and
when th\.: Commission is satisfied that peaceful conditions have been restored in the State, the Commission and the Plebiscite Administrator will determine,
in consultation" -with whom?-" with the Government
of India, the final disposal of Indian and State armed
forces, such disposal to be with due regard to the
security of the State and the freedom of the plebiscite."

C'est la une disposition d'ordre adminiStratif.
146. Il est dit au paragraphe 4, alin~a g:
"Lorsque les mesures prevues dans les premiere et deuxieme parties de la resolution adoptee
par la Commission le 13 aoiit1948 auront ~te ex~cu­
t~es (et lit encore nous trouvons les mots "lorsque
les mesures (.. ,) auront ete executees"; ce n'estpas
moi qui repete ces phrases; c'est la resolution ellememe qui, de fac;on repetee, emploie des mots tels
que "lorsque (la Commission) aura constate ...",
etc.) et lorsque la Commission estimera que lapaix
et l'ordre public ont ete retablis dans l'Etat, ladite
Commission et l'Administrateur du plebiscite fixeront, en consultation (avec qui?) avec le Gouvernement de 1'Inde, les modalit~s du retrait definitif des
forces armees de l'Inde et de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire, apres avoir diiment tenucompte des conditions necessaires a la securite de l'Etat et a la
liberte du plebiscite."
147. A ce propos, je voudrais faire une observation
relative a l'emploi du motanglais "disposal" (retrait).
Les membres du Conseil savent que le mot anglais
"disposal" a ete employe, pour ce qui est des forces
du Gouvernement de l'Inde, au sens de fac;on dont on
dispose une chose, et non au sens de fac;on dont on
s'en debarrasse.
148. Assurement le paragraphe 4, alinea!!, de la resolution contient aussi le genre de phrases auxquelles

147. In this connexion, I should' like to make one
observation on the use of this word "disposal". As
members of the Council know, the word "disposal" has
been used with regard to the Government of India
forces in the sense of disposition, not in the sense of
throwing away.
148. Paragraph 4 (~) of the resolution, therefore, also
contains the kind of phrase to which I have been re40

ferrin
been l'
tions
count
order
count
of the
minist
Gover
State
Pakis
matter
biscite
be ma
not be
nessin
come t

149.
admini
in deta'
150.
paragr
great '
concer
attenti
"AI
Kash
with
"(a)

bribe
plebi

"(12
litica
the St
be s
votin
India
trave
and e

151. T
contain
propaga
similar
where a
"Every
against
because
tion is
that the
quoted
mir.
152. P
this mat

'mm~

been restored in the State". Now, these peaceful conditions have not been restored, because part of the
country is under occupation. There is neither law nor
order nor assembly nor constitution in that part of the
country. Furthermore, the phrase in paragraph 4 (a)
of the resolution to the effect that the Plebiscite Administrator will determine "in consultation with the
Government of India" the final disposal of Indian and
state armed forces, again establishes the fact that
Pakistan has no part whatsoever with regard to these
matters. Pakistan will be the beneficiary if t.~e plebiscite goes a certain way. Under the arrangements to
be made by the Plebiscite Administrator, Pakistan will
not be concerned in such matters as watching, witnessing, supervising, and so forth-but we have not
come to that stage.

j'ai fait allusion - a savoir: "lorsque la Commission
estimera que la paix et l'ordre public ant ete retablis
dans l'Etat". La paix etl'ordre public n'ontpas ete retablis, parce qu'une partie du pays est soumise a untl
occupation. Dans cette partie du pays, il n'y ani loi,
ni ordre, ni assemblee, ni constitution. De plus, la
phrase du paragraphe 4, alinea !!, de la resolution oft il
est dit que l'Administrateur du plebiscite fixer a, "en
consultation avec le Gouvernement de 1'Inde", les
modalites du retrait definitif des forces armees de
1'Inde et de t'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, etablit a
houveau le fait que le Pakistan n'a rien a voir dans
ces questions. Le Pakistan aura 1'avantage si les
resultats du plebiscite vont dans un certain sens.
D'apres les dispositions qui seraient prises par
l' Administrateur du pHlbiscite, le Pakistan ne s' occuperait pas de questions telles que la surveillance,
1'observation, le contr6le, etc. - mais nous n'en
sommes pas encore a ce point.

149. The resolution then goes on to set down some
administrative prOVisions, which r shall not deal wit.1in detail.

149. La resolution prevoit ·ensuite certaines dispositions administratives, dans re detail desquelles je
n' entrerai pas.

150. The next important paragraph in the resolution is
paragraph 7; in fact, from our point of view it has very
great importance. I am sure that everyone who is
concerned with freedom of elections will wish to pay
attention to this paragraph. It reads:

150. Le premier paragraphe important de la resolution est ensuite le paragraphe 7; en fait, il est, de
notre point de vue, d'une tres grande importance. Je
suis certain que quiconque s'interesse a la liberte
des elections voudra accorder son attentionaceparagraphe. Il y est dit:

"All authorities within the State of Jammu and
Kashmir will undertake to ensure, in collaboration
with the Plebiscite Administrator, that:

"Toutes les autorites de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire, devront veiller en collaboration avec
l' Administrateur du plebiscite, a ce que les conditions suivantes soient remplies:

"(a) There is no threat, coercion or intimidation,
bribery or other undue influence on the voters in the
plebiscite;

n!!-) Les electeurs prenant part au plebiscite ne
seront soumis a aucune menace, contrainte ou
intimidation, tentative de corruption ou autre influence illegitime;

"(~) No restrictions are placed on legitimate political actiVity throughout the State. All subjects of
the State, regardless of creed, caste or party, shall
be safe and free in expressing their views and in
voting on the question of the accessj.on ofthe State to
India or Pakistan. There shall be freedom ... of
travel in the State, including freedom of lawful entry
and exit ... ".

"~) Aucune restriction ne viendra entraver, sur
le territoire de l'Etat, le libre jeu des droits politiques. Tous les citoyens de l'Etat pourront, en
toute securite et liberte et sans consideration de
croyance, de caste ou d'appartenance politique, exprimer leur opinion et voter sur la question du
rattachement de l'Etat a l'Inde ou au Pakistan. La
liberte (... ) de circuler dans l'Etat, y compris la
liberte d'entrer et de scirtir legalement du territoire, seront assurees (... )".

151. The impo:·tance of paragraph 7 (b) is that it
contains the assurance that there shall be no religious
propaganda; that is to say, there shall be no incidents
similar to the one in the Northwest Frontier Province,
where a mullah sat down, showed the Koran, and said,
"Every vote that you cast against Pakistan is a vote
against the Koran." Of course, ina sense that was true,
because Pakistan is an Islamic State, and its Constitution is based upon the Koran. But that does not mean
that the paragraph of the resolution which I have just
quoted does notpreclude religious propaganda in Kashmir.

151. L'importance du paragraphe 7, alinea~, estqu'il
contient l'assurance qu'il n'y aura pas de propagande
religieuse; autrement dit, pas d'incidents analogues
a celui qui s'est produit dans la prOVince frontitlre
du Nord-Ouest, ou un mollah, assis, montrait le
Coran en disant: "Si vous votez contre le Pakistan,
vous votez contre le Coran." Sans doute, en un sens
cela etait vrai, parce que le Pakistan est un Etat
islamique dont la constitution est fondee sur le Coran.
Mais cela ne signifie pas que le paragraphe de la
resolution que je viens de citer n'empeche pas de
faire de la propagande religieuse au CaclLemire.

152. Perhaps this would be a good time to deal with
this matter of religion influencing elections. I invite the

152. Le moment serait peut-etre bien choisi pour
traiter de cette question de l'influence de la religion'

(et r:erring-nameIY, "when ..• peaceful conditions have

fonetions'
lire."

Jammu et
Il exerce
derniere
le mediainitiative,
- a cher:iellement
de Jammu
)hrase de
rateur du
ses fonc.chemire n
me raison

III stipule:

. de l'Etat
qu'il juge
en le plede toutes
lrtialite. n
:mclassiecevra de
oirs ...n.
souverain
lvoirs. Je
ifications
definition
!dig~:

llite pour
ervateurs
if.

les pren adoptee
te execunlorsque
!n'estpas
ltion ellemots tels
tat~ ... n,
lie lapaix
at, ladite
~ite fixeouvernefinitifdes
rammu et
ldes conat et a la
servation
(retrait).
)t anglais
es forces
III dont on
III dont on
ela resouxquelles

41

representatives' attention to the Indian publication,
Manual of Election Law,§/which they may find in the
library of the United Nations. This is not a manual
which we have devised for the purpose of dealing with
Kashmir. Although it is a municipal document, it conforms to the general practices and standards of elections throughout the world. In this manual, we read that
the following actions are prohibited in connexion with
any elections in India:

sur les ~lections. J'appeUe l'attention des membres
du Conseil sur une publication indienne intituMe
Manual of Election Law.&/, dont ils pourront trouver
un exemplaire a la biblioth~que de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Ce n'est pas un manuel quenous avons
con<;u avec l'intention de l'utiliser dans la question
du Cachemire. Bien qu'il s'agisse d'un document de
l~gislation interne, il est conforme aux pratiques et
normes g~nl§rales des ~lections dans le monde entier.
Dans ce manuel, nous lisons que les actions suivantes
sont interdites dans l'Inde a l'occasion de n'importe
queUes 61ections:

" ... undue influence-that is to say, any direct or
indiI"ct interference or attempt to interfere on the
part of a candiclate or his agent, or of any other
person with the connivance of the candidate or his
agent, with the free exercise of any electoral
right. .. "

" (... ) toute influence ilMgitime - c'est-a.-dire
toute ing~rence ou tentative d'ing~rence directe ou
indirecte de la part d'un candidat ou de son agent,
ou de tout autre personne avec lacomplicit~du candidat ou de son agent, dans le libre exercice d'un
droit 6lectoral quelconque (... )"

It is also stated that there shall be no inducement of,

or attempt to induce, an elector to believe that he or
any person in whom he is interested will become or
will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or
spiritual censure. It is also stated that there shall be
no:

Il est aussi indiqu6 qu'il est interdit de persuader, ou
de tenter de persuader, un 6lecteur que lui-meme,
ou toute personne a. laquelle il est int~resse, deviendra,
ou pourra devenir, un objet de col~re divine ou de
censure spiritueUe. Il y est aussi d~clar~ qu'est
interdit tout:

"systematic appeal to vote or refrain from voting
on the grounds of caste, race, community or religion"
or "appeals to religious af).d national symbols, such
as the national flag or the national emblem, for the
furtherance of the prospects of a candidate's election" .

"appel syst~matique au vote ou a. l'abstentionpour
des raisons de caste, de race, de communaut~ ou
de religion", ou "tout appel a. des symboles religieux et nationaux, tels que le drapeau national ou
l'embl~me national, en vue d'augmenter les chances
qu'un candidat a d'etre ~lu".

153. I freely admit that the law ofIndia is not binding
on the rest of the world. But I do say that what I have
just quoted represents the canons of justice. Furthermore, this is not only what we have understood in our
private, subjective minds, but is also part of the assurances given in the Commission's resolution.

153. Je suis pret :l admettre que les lois indiennes
ne s'appliquent pas au reste du monde. Mais j'affirme
que les citations que je viens de faire sont conformes
aux imp~ratifs de la justice. De plus, il ne s'agit pas
seulement la d'une interpr~tation personnelle et subjective, mais de teUes garanties font partie des assurances donn~es dans la resolution de la Commission.

154. I may be asked: How do you know that this is
going to happen? But I shall come to that when I deal
with the circumstances existing at th~ present time. I
would only say now t.hat,. when religious passions are
inflamed, this leads to unrest and to an inability to
exercise the franchise freely-and, in such circumstances, there cannot be a plebiscite.

154. Peut-etre me demandera-t-on: comment savezvous qu'il en sera ainsi? J'aborderai cette question
lorsque je parlerai des circonstances actueUes. Je
me bornerai a dire pour le moment que, lorsque les
passions religieuses sont excitees des troubles s'ensuivent, et a devient impossible d'exercer librement
le droit de vote. Dans de telles circonstances, il ne
peut y avoir de pl~biscite.

155. I should now like to quotefromanaide-m~moire
which was accepted by the Commission. This aidem~moire gives an account of a meeting between Mr.
Lozano, the Chairman of the Commission, and the
Prime Minister of India. In it, we read the following
comment by the Prime Minister on paragraph 7 (b) of
the Commission's resolution of 5 January 1949: -

155. Je citerai maintenant des passages d'un aidem~moire que la Commission a adopt~. Cet aidem~moire contient le compte rendu des conversations
qui ont eu lieu entre M. Lozano, pr~sidentde la Commission, et le Premier Ministre de l'Inde. Nous y
trouvons les observations suivantes, que le Premier
Ministre a formulees au sujet du paragraphe 7,
alinea ~, de la r~solution de la Commission en d9.te
du 5 janvier 1949:

"India is a secular State; the United Nations is also
a secular organization. Pakistan aims at being a
theocratic State. An appeal to religious fanaticism
could not be regarded as legitimate political activity.
Mr. Lozano agreed that any political activity which

"L'Inde est un Etat lai"que; l'Organisation des
Nations Unies est aussi une organisation laiquf!.
Le Pakistan, en revanche, tend vers la forme tMt'cratique de l'Etat. L'appel au fanatisme religieux
ne peut etre consider~ comme un droit politique.

§./ Government of India, Ministry of Law, Manual of Election Law, New Delhi, Manager of Publications, 1952.

§./ Gouvernement de l'Inde, Ministere des affaires juridiques, Manual of Election Law, New-Delhi, Manager of
Publications, 1952.

42

r'-

mig
re
to f

4, a"

That i
ister;
156.
docum
Securi
leisur
contai
matte
solem
Annex

"T

"(1)
rests
defen
sibili
relat'
or an
is co

"(2)
ermn
not b
word
of th
be no
ereigl
shall
"(3)

India
the r

"(7)

·
·
·
r..
.

~~:,.,

.

..

"!

membres
e intitulae
mttrauver
isatian des
lOUS avons
a question
lcument de
ratiques et
nde entier.
3suivantes
n'importe

I" '

might tend to disturb law and order could not be
regarded as legitimate. The same test would apply
to freedom of press and of speech." [S/1196, annex
4, aide-m~moire 1, para. 4.]

M. Lozano convient que toute activit~ polltique tendant a. troubler l'ordre et la paix ne peut etre consid~rae comme lagitime. Il conviendraitd'appliquer
le meme principe pour daUnir la liberta de la presse
et de la parole." [S/1196, annexe 4, aide-mamoire 1,
par. 4]

That is not a private note recorded by the Prime Minister; it is an agreed summary of the conversations.

Il ne s'agit pas la de notes prises par le Premier

Ministre lui-meme, mais d'un compte rendu officiel
des conversations.
156. Je vais donner lecture d'un passage de l'annexe V du document S/PV.762/Add.1. J'esp~re que
les membres du Conseil liront attentivement cette
annexe V, bien qu'il s'agisse d'un long document,
parce ,qu'elle contient toutes les assurances qui or.t
ata donnaes a l'Inde. Il s'agit la d'un texte juridique,
d'un texte qui a toute la valeur que lui conf~re l'autorita solennelle des Nations Unies. Il est dit a. l'annexe V:

156. I will read out what is contained in annex V of
document S/PV.762/Add. 1. I hope the membersofthe
Security Council will read this document at their
leisure, although it is a long document, because it
contains all the assurances given, and these are legal
matters, they are matters which have the force of the
solemn authority of the United Nations behind them.
Annex V states:

est-a.-dire
directe ou
son agent,
iMdu can!rcice d'un

suader, ou
lui-meme,
deviendra,
vine au de
ara qu'est

entianpour
nunauta ou
loles reliIlatianalou
eschances

;indiennes
sj'affirme
confarmes
s'agit pas
ne et sub:ie des asL Commislentsavez:e question
melles. Je
orsque les
lbles s'enlibrement
nces, il ne
d'un aideCet aideversations
le la Comle. Nous y
e Premier
,graphe 7,
,on en d::J.te
3ation des
lon laiqup..
lrme tM.. '1~
! religieux
politique.

"This note sets out the following assurances given
by the United Nations Commission for India and
Pakistan to India before India's acceptance of the
resolutions of 13 August 1948 [S/1100, para. 75] and
5 January 1949 [S/1196, para. 15]:

"La prasente note expose les assurances ci-apr~s,
qui ont ata donnaes a. l'Inde par la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan avant que
l'Inde acceptat les rasolutions du 13 aout 1948
[S/l1 00, par. 75] et du 5 janvier 1949 [S/1196,
par. 15] de la Commission:

"(1) Responsibility for the security of the State
rests with India." -That is a sovereign right. The
defence of our external frontiers is India's responsibility and, therefore, there is no question of the
relations between the Constituent State and the Union
or any impairment of accession, so far as the present
is concerned, whatever may happen in the future.

"1) La responsabilita de la sacurita de l'Etat
incombe a. l'Inde." - C'est la. un droit souverain.
La responsabilita de dafendre nos fronti~resincombe
cl l'Inde et, par consaquent, il n'est pas question
des rapports entre des Etats de l'Union et l'Union
elle-meme, pas plus que de contester l'accession,
du moins pour le moment, quel que soit l'avenir.

"(2) The sovereignty of Jammu and Kashmir Government over the entire territory of the State shall
not be brought into question. "-Please mark these
words. It is very carefully stated that the sovereignty
of the Jammu and Kashmir Government-so there can
be no argument afterwards that it is another sovereign State-"over the entire territory of the State
shall not be brought into question".

"2) La souveraineta du Gouvernement du Jammu
et Cachemire sur l'ensemble du territoire de l'Etat
ne sera pas contestae." - Je vous prie de noter ces
mots. Il est tr~s nettement indiqua que la souveraineta du Gouvernement de l'Etat de JammuetCachemire - on ne pourra done pas soutenir qu'il s'agit
d'un autre Etat souverain - "sur l'ensemble dll
territoire de l'Etat ne sera pas contestae".

"(3) Plebiscite proposals shall not be binding upon
India if Pakistan does not implement parts I and II of
the resolution of 13 August 1948.

"3) Les propositions en vue d'un plabiscite ne seront pas obligatoires pour l'Inde si le Pakistan ne
met pas en ceuvre les premi~re et deuxi~me parties
de la rasolution du 13 aout 1948.

"(4) There shall be no recognitIon of the so-called
'Azad' Kashmir Government.

"4) Le gouvernement dit "Cachemire azad" ne sera
pas reconnu.

"(5) The territory occupied by Pakistan shall not be
consolidated." -Now it is a part of Pakistan, according to the Constitution of Pakistan.

"5) Le territoire occupa par le P:il.kistan ne sera
pas renforca." - Selon la Constitution du Pakistan,
ce terrl~oire fait maintenant partie du Pakistan.

"(6) Reversion of the administration of the evacuated areas in the north to the Government of Jammu
and Kashmir and its defence to the Government of
India, and maintenance of garrisons for preventing
the incursion of tribesmen and to guard the main
trade routes. "-I ask any member of the Security
Council: What does this mean? ThatInc'lA LS to maintain garrisons to guard the trade routes which lie on
the external frontiers of Kashmir. The cease-fire
line, as the Commission has said, is not a political
boundary. The whole of the State remains.

"6) L'administration des ragions avacuaes du
Nord sera confiae a. nouveau au Gouvernement de
Jammu et Cachemire, et leur dafense au Gouvernement de l'Inde, qui peut y maintenir des garnisons
afin d'empecher les incursions des tribus et de
garder les principales voies commerciales." - Je
demande aux membres du Conseil: ql.'., sigm~ie cette
phrase? Que l'Inde doit maintenir d'db garnisol1:J pour
garder les routes commerciales situ.'5':lS aux lronti~res extarieures du Cachemire. T,~ ligne:1a damarcation, comme l'a dit la Commibsior;. P'Hst pas
une fronti~re politique. Les limites de 1'Etat restent
les memes.

"(7) 'Azad' Kashmir forces shall be disbanded and

"7) Las forces du Cachemire "azad" seront dis-

faires juriManager of

I

43

"

soutes et d~sarm~es." - 11 avait ~t~ dit en fait:
"licenciement et d~sarmement massifs" - la Commission a d~clar~ que, si on licenciait les troupes,
on devait les d~sarmer.
"8) Exclusion du Pakistan de toutes les affaires
du Jammu et Cachemire."

disarmed."-The phrase actually was "large-scale
disbandment and disarmament"-the Commission
said that if you disband them, then you must disarm
them.
"(8) Exclusion of Pakistan from all affairs of
Jammu and Kashmir."
157. The note which constitutes section A of annex V
begins as follows:

157. 11 est dit, au d~but de la note qui constitue la
section A de l'annexe V:
"Le 17 aout 1948, jour oilles membres de la Commission ont rencontr~ le Premier Ministre de l'Inde
a. New-~elhi (trois ou quatre jours apr~s la signature) celui-ci d~clarait ce qui suit, :l propos du
paragraphe 2 de la section B de la deuxi~me partie
de la r~solution du 13 aout 1948:

"At thE' meeting of members of the Commission
with the Prime Minister of India in New Delhi on 17
August 1948,"-three or four days after signature"the Prime Minister, with reference to part IT, section B, paragraph 2 of the 13 August194B resolution,
sta~ed:

, ... that it would be necessary for India to retain
troops in Kashmir for defensive purposes as well as
for the maintenance of law and order. Recallingthat
the same issue had been raised in the Security Counell, he said that the Government of India must have
sufficient troops to protect the territory against
external attack. Mr. Korbel [the Chairman of the
Commission] commented that in his understanding
the phrase "law and order" could be interpreted to
include maintenance of adequate defence inasmuch
as that was essential to law and order.' "

"(...) il sera indispensable que l'Inde maintienne
des. troupes au Cachemire dans un dessein d~fensif,
ainsi que pour assurer le maintien de l'ordre. 11
rappelle que la question a d~ja. ~t~ soulev~e devant
le Conseil de s~curit~ et que le Gouvernement de
l'Inde devra disposer de troupes assez fortes pour
prot~ger le territoire contre une attaque venant de
l'ext~rieur. M. Korbel [le Pr~sident de la Commission] dit qu'a. son avis l'expression "le maintien de
l'ordre" peut etre interpr~t~e comme englobant le
maintien de moyens de d~fense appropri~s puisque
cela est essentiel au maintien de l'ordre."

158. Then follows the letter of 20 August 1948 from
the Prime Minister of India, which the Commission
said was in consonance with and a fair interpretation of
its views.

158. Ensuite vient la lettre du Premier Ministre de
l'Inde en date du 20 aout 1948. Cette lettre contient
une interpr~tation exacte de l'opinion de la Commission, comme celle-ci l'a reconnu.

159. It may be asked whether these assurances were
made by way of a secret instrument, whether the Commission was just trying to state something which was
capable of two interpretations, with a view to getting
some settlement and hoping that things would work out.
If that were so, the position would be rather awkward
for the Commission, and its work would not have recorded the progress it did. But, in fact, these assurances were published and they were known to Pakistan
before it accepted the resolution of 5 January 1949. I
submit that whether one takes a political view or a
common sense view-I am not saying that the two are
in contradistinction-or whether one takes a legal view
or an equitable View, when a party signs an instrument
with the knowledge of certain facts, then the commitments it undertakes are conditioned by and must have
reference to those facts. Therefore, so far as India is
concerned, these two resolutions and the obligations
that go· with them :?re our international obligations.

159. On peut se demander si ces assurances ont ~t~
un instrument secret et si la Commission cherchait uniquement a. faire une :proposition qUi
put etre interp.... ~t~e de deux mani~res, en vue d'arriver a. un r~glement et dans l'espoir qu'une solution
interviendrait. S'il ~tait ainsi, la Commission se trouverait dans une situation assez embarrassante et ses
travaux n'auraient pas permis d'obtenir les r~sultats
qu'elle a obtenus en r~alit~. En fait, ces assurances
ont ~t~ rendues publiques et le Pakistan les connaissait avant d'accepter la r~solution du 5 janvier 1949.
Que l'on consid~re le probl~me d'un point de vue politique ou du point de vue du bon sens - et je ne veux
pas dire que ces deux points de vue soient en contradiction - ou qu'on le consid~re du point de vue juridique ou du point de vue de la justice, j'estime que
10rsqu'une partie signe un instrument en ayant connaissance de certains faits, ses engagements doivent
etre pris en tenant compte de ces faits et qu'ils sont
d~termin~s par ces faits. Par cons~quent, pour ce
qui est de l'Inde, ces deux r~solutions et les obligations qui en d~coulent constituent des obligations internationales.

160. I have not been able, in the time there was, to
work out each ofthese in detail, but! will go over them
again rapidly. First of all, as I said, the cease-fire
agreement was violated by the ~ccumulation of arms
and the training, at that time, ofthin:y-five battalions,
now forty-five batt;· !ions, ofUle "Azad" Kashmir force,
which is not a toy army, but which is as good as the
Pakistan Army. Its personnel came out of the former
British-Indian Army which acquitted itself with great
valour in North Africa, in Italy and in various other
parts during the war. This force consists in the main

160. Je n'ai pas pu, ~tant donn~ le temps dont je
disposais, donner tous les d~tails n~cessaires, mais
je vais proc~der a. nouveau a. un rapide examen de
chaque point. Tout d'RborcJ., comme je l'ai d~ja. dit,
il y a eu violation de l'accord de suspension d'armes
parce que l'on accumuM des armes et form~ a. cette
~poque 35 batail~ons (on en compte maintena.nt 45) de
forces du Cachemire "azad"; il ne s'agit pas 1:1 d'une
arm~e de fantaisie, mais d'une arm~e qui vaut celle
du Pakistan. Ses effectifs proviennent de l'ancienne
arm~e anglo-indienne qUi pendant la guerre s'est

," .'

of ex-service
there are la
guerrilla war
one time, and
the communi
gun emplace
far as part I,
is for the Se
step that we
condition, wh'
The Govern
fire agreeme
any more tro
the time of
have withdra
people there,
of the Indian
other respo
assisting in
Therefore, w
problem. Ha
ficient, becau
is on the othe
that goes to
contract, a b
does not ve
breach of w
something th
and if it goe
whole of the

donn~es dans

44

\.
If·

..f>

!

161. The on

have made ou
is maintained
and I have gi
ment of India
irrespective
respective of
and to se,' an
India will not
which will vi
same time, it
tory, and the
a solemn obl
that were utt
in regard to
Or in fear, b
with our res
obligation to

162. Nine ye

reports arc
being no tim
here in the
Points of vie
United Nation
Whole of Mr.
with this one
read the new
be misled int
Points, ten 0

l.cw_,,_

.

;, '

.'

,.

;""':

of ex-servicemen and their descendants. In addition,
there are large numbers of irre<rulars trained in
guerrilla warfare, with about 600 or so in training at
one time, and after training they are thrown back into
the community. I refertotheairforceand the military
gun emplacements, and this is the state of affairs so
far as part I, that is, the cease-fire, is concerned. It
is for the Security Council to consider whether any
step that we have taken was in breach of the first
condition, which is the maintenance of the cease-fire.
The Government of India has not violated this ceasefire agreement. We have not introduced into Kashmir
any more troops or any more equipment than we had at
the time of the signing of the agreement. In fact, we
have withdrawn large numbers and we have many less
people there, since, as the whole world knows, the size
of the Indian Army has been reduced and it also has
other responsibilities, particularly in the way of
assisting in agriculture and economic development.
Therefore, we ask t.he Security Council to look at this
problem. Have we been in default? That is not sufficient, because we are not on the defence, the default
is on the other side, and, what is more, it is a default
that goes to the root of the agreement. Just as in every
contract, a breach of an ordinary superficial condition
does not very much matter, it is usually known as a
breach of warranty. But a breach of a condition is
something that changes the character of the contract,
and if it goes to the root of the agreement, then the
whole of the agreement is violated.

courageusement battue en Afrique du Nord, en Italie
et dans d'autres r~gions. La majeure partie de ces
forces se compose de vt§t~rans et de leurs filsj elles
comprennent en outre un grand nombre de partisans
form~s a. la gut§rillaj ceux-cl sont form~s par groupes
de 600 environ et apr~s la pt§riode d'instruction
s'int~grent a. nouveau dans la collectivit~. Compte
tenu de l'aviation et des batteries, telle est la situation en ce qui concerne la premi~re partie, c'est-a.dire la suspension d'armes. Il appartient au Conseil
de st§curitt§ de d~terminer si l'une quelconque des mesures que nous avons prises constitue une violation
de la premi~re condition, a. savoir le maintien de la
suspension d'armes. Le Gouvernement de l'Inde n'a
pas violt§ l'accord de suspension d'armes. Nous
n'avons pas introduit au Cachemire plus de forces
ou de matt§riel que nous n 'en posst§dions lors de la
signature de l'accord. En rt§alitt§, nous avons t§vacut§
un grand nombre de soldats, et les effectifs de nos
forces au Cachemire ont considt§rablement diminut§j
en effet, personne n'ignore que l'arm~e indienne a
t§tt§ rt§duite et qu'elle doit se consacrer a. d'autres
taches, en particulier a. 1'assistance a 1'agriculture
et au dt§veloppement t§conomique. J'invite donc le
Conseil de st§curitt§ a examiner cette question: avonsnous commis une faute? Et cela ne sOOit pas, parce
que nous ne SOffimes pas les accust§sj la faute doit
etre imputt§e aI' autre- partie; bien plus, il s' agit d'une
faute qui touche au fond meme. de l'accord. Comme
dans tout contrat, la mt§connaissance <l'une condition
accessoire, appeMe habituellement rupture de garantie, est de peu d'importance. Mais la m~connaissance
d'une condition essentielle change le caract,'\re du
contrat et, si elle touche au fond de ce contrat, il y
a violation de l'accord tout entier.

161. The only thing that today remains in which we
have made our contribution is that the cease-fire line
is maintained, the authority of observers is respected,
and I have given the solemn undertaking of the Government of India that, irrespective of our legal rights,
irrespective of our rights under the Charter, and irrespective of our desire to put an end to the aggression
and to se,' an end of this business, the Government of
India will not move one soldier, one gun, or fire a shot
which will violate the cease-fire agreelnent. But, at the
same time, it is our boundendutytoprotect our territory, and the Security Council, in our submission, has
a solemn obligation to take into account the phrases
that were uttered by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan
in regard to what can happen. We do not live in terror
or in fear, but at the same time we, as a Government
with our responsibility to the United Nations, have an
obligation to remain under conditions of prudence.

161. Le seul rt§sultat qui ait t§tt§ obtenu actuellement,
et cela en partle grace a nous, c'est le maintien de
la ligne de d~marcation et le fait que l'on reconnaft
l'autorit~ des observateursj en outre, je promets
solennellement au nom du Gouvernement de 1'Inde que,
quels que soient nos droits aux termes de la Charte
et bien que nous d~sirions qu'il soit mis fin a l'agression et que cette affaire soit rt§gl~e, le Gouvernement
de 1'rnde ne dt§placera pas un seul soldat, un seul
canon et ne tirera pas un seul coup de feu en violation
de l'accord de suspension d'armes. Mais, en meme
temps, nous avons le devoir strict de prott§ger notre
territoire, et nous pensons que le Conseil de s~curitt§
a l'obligation solennelle de tenir compte des d~clara­
tions faites par le Ministre des affaires t§trang~res
du Pakistan au sujet des t§v~nements qui pourraient
se produire. Nous ne vivons ni dans lacrainte ni dans
la terreur, mais. en qualitt§ de gouvernement responsable devant l'Organisation des Nations Unies, nous
sommes oblig~s de faire preuve de prudence.

162. Nine years have passed since then. Mr. Graham's
reports ar c before the Council. On account of illere
being !l0 time, we have not been able to go into them
here in the Council, but they set out the two different
points of view in their relation to the findings of the
United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan. The
whole of Mr. Graham's activities have been concerned
with this one problem of demilitarization. Those who
read the newspaper reports at that time were likely to
be misled into the facile impression that, out of twelve
points, ten or so were accepted; the others were not.

162. Depuis lors, neuf ans ont pass~. Le Conseil est
en possession des rapports de M. Graham. Le temps
faisant d~faut, nous n'avons pu les examiner en d~tail
ici, mais on y trouve expos~s les deux points de vue
relativement aux conclusions de la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan. Tous les
efforts de M. Graham ont portt§, et ont port~ seulement, sur le probl~me de la dt§militarisation. Les
personnes qui, a cette ~poque; ont lu les communiques de presse risquaient d'etre t§gar~es par ceux-ci
d'en tirer l'impression que, sur 12 points, 10 environ

~-'-'

45

~-----------

~''"_'''_''''_'''IIIf_;~_c-"

,

-:.:;

:4.

:·i

•""If

-~_ ..

I

Iy.

avaient ~t~ acceptas et les autres repouss~s. 11 est
toujours possible de faire ~tat d'un certain nombre
de points, mais le seul qui importe est le point 7,
et celui-ci n'a pas ata accept~. 11 ne pouvait etre
accept~, parce qu'il portait atteinte ~ la sO:lverameta
du Gouvernement du Jammu et Cachemire. Ainsi que
l'a daclara hier le Premier Ministre, M. Nehru:
"Nous avons accepta d'organiser un pl~biscite, mais
l'armae du Pakistan avait promis de se retirer." Or,
cette armaes est toujours a - et ce n'est pas moi
qui J'affirme: le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res
du Pakistan l'a reconnu lorsqu'il nous a dit, au premier jour des d~bats: "Nous sommes prets ~ nous
retirer. II En d'autres termes, l'armae du Pakistan
est toujours 1ft, et cela apr~s un dalai de neuf ans.
Et nous maintenons que, aux termes de l'accord, ce
retrait doit avoir lieu unilat~ralement.
163. Pour notre part, il est de notredevoir- encore
que nous n'ayons rien a nous,reprocher - de repondre
bri~vement aux accusations de violation et d'infraction
port~es contre nous. La premi~re de ces accusations
se rapporte a la cr~ation de l' Assembl~econstituante.
J'ai deja traite de cette question longuement, et je
crois que lorsque les documents de cette Assembll~e
constituante seront examines, lorsque ses fonctions
seront comprises, les membres du Conseil de securite - dont la majorite, sinon la totalite, appartiennent a des pays et a des syst~mes partisans du fonctionnement d' organes de ce genre - reconnaftront que
cette Assemblee constituante s'estpreoccJlpee surtout
du developpement economique et constitutionnel de la
region. Elle ne prend aucune decision opposee a l'accession, mais, meme si elle le faisait, il n'en resulterait aucune obligation pour le Gouvernement de
l'Inde, car ses decisions ne peuvent pr~valoir contre
la "loi sur le gouvernement de l'Inde". Je reconnais
d'ailleurs que lA Gouvernement de l'Inde, aussi bien
que n'importe quel autre gouvernement, a le pouvoir
de ceder une partie de son territoire.

One can mention a number of points, but the key point
is point 7, and that was not accepted. It could not be
accepted because it violated the sovereignty of the
Jammu and Kashmir Government. As Prime Minister
Nehru said yesterday: "We agreed to concur in a
plebiscite, but the Pakistan Army promised to go." It
is still there-and I am not saying this: the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan told us on the first day: "We are
prepared to withdraw." That means that the Pakistan
Army is there; and this is nine years after. And I say
that this withdrawal should be a unilateral action under
this agreement.

163. So far as we are concerned, it is our duty-even
though we are not remiss-to answer briefly to the
allegations of breaches and defaults. The first breach
alleged against us is the Constituent Assembly. About
this I have spoken so much, and I believe that when the
documents of this Constituent Assembly are read, when
its functions a!'e understood, members of the Security
Council-the majority, if not all of whom belong to
countries and systems which want to see the functioning
of bodies of this kind-will appreciate the fact that this
has been concerned with the economic and the constitutional developments of that part of the area. It does
not-but even if it did-decide something against accession, that would not be binding on the Government of
India. It would be ultra vires of the Government of
India Act. I fully concede that the Government of India
could cede any territory as indeed any other Government could.

164. Then the Foreign Minister of Pakistan stated and
implied so many times-and newspapers do the sameand when one has no information it is easy to come to
very quick conclusions-that the Government of India
delayed these matters. I invite :representatives to read
the proceedings of the discussions with Mr. Graham
and others who have tried to establish a pi:'ogramme of
demilitarization. How many concessions have we
made? How many agreements of a prOVisional character have we made in private conversations? It goes
further than all that, but I want to say here and now
that they are no longer operative because they have
not been accepted. They were provisional proposals
put forward for this purpose.

164. Ensuite, le Premier Ministre des affaires etrandu Pakistan a declare ou insinu6 a maintes
reprises - de meme que les journaux, et lorsqu'on
n' est pas suffisamment informe, il est facile de conclure un peu trop rapidement - que le Gouvernement
de l'Inde a fait traIner les choses enlongueur. J'invite
les membres du Conseil a lire les proc~s-verbaux
des discussions avec M. Graham et avec tous ceux
qui se sont efforces d'obtenir la demilitarisation.
Combien de concessions n'avons-nolls pas consenties?
Combien d'accords provisoires n'avons-nous pas acceptes au cours de conversations privees? Nous avons
fait bien davantage encore, mats ce que je veux souligner ici, c'est que ces accords provisoires sont a
present sans effet parce qu'ils n'ont pas eteacceptes.
11 s'agissait en effet de propositions a caract~re provisoire presentees en vue de parvenir a un accord.

165. Thattakes us to the present position. And I want
to submit to the COUflCil that it is not a question of the
mathematics of 21,000 and 6,000. So long as there are
the violations which I have complained A, so long as
there is a campaign of hatred, wherever there is a:
slogan, it is my duty to point out t.lIat it ends-as in the
case of the Roman emperors, who said: "Carthage must
be destroyed" - with "!>dia must be conquered" . Rep resentatives on the Council cannot expect us to submit to
this without exercising our rigUs of survival. I am

165. Cela nous amene a la situation actualle. Jeveux
faire remarquer au Conseil qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une
question d'arithmetique, de chiffres: 21.000 ou 6.000.
Aussi longtemps que sont commises les violations
dont je me suis plaint, "aussi longtemps qu'il existe
une campagne de haine, partout ou 1'on proclame des
mots d'ordre, j'ai le devoir de montrer que, comme
au temps des Romains qui repetaient "Delenda Carthago", tout se termine par le cri: "11 faut conquerir
l'Inde." Les membres du Conseil ne peuvent attendre

'lI

t

-'-'0"

going to refe
is that nine y

166. The Fo
the rebus sic
44]. I must s
objection to
intelli itur r
the Security
a tribunal. T
doctrine but,
some resear
Pakistan was
had turned d
cannot turn
international
glossato:rs. It
rebus sic sta
mental basis

167. And he
the best pea
nationals will
cans because
perience in
of them and h
volume of la
to Sir Pierso
can still put
Sunday, or so
conditions ha
as internatio
English judge
has been plac
against his 0
Case in the In

g~res

46

..~
n ••• it is
arise in co
sphere of p
sarytoimpl
it is clear
adverted to
agreed to p
reasonable
on the basis
term or con

168. I shall
from Sir Ar
authority, Mr
"Neither
effect depen
than those

-

V Arnold Du
Columbia Unive

1'1

going to referto this in a moment. The present position
is that nine years have passed.

de nous que nous acceptions cela sans exercer notre
droit de chercher a vivre. Je reviendrai sur cette
question dans un moment. Pour 1'instant, qu'il me suffise de repeter que neuf ans se sont ecoules.

166. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan twitted me on
the rebus sic stantib4s doctrine [766th meeting, para.
44]. I must say I enjoyed it. I have not the slightest
objection to arguing the doctrine of conventio omnis
intelligitur rebus sic stantibus, but I do not know how
the Security Council can take upon itself the powers of
a tribunal. That is Why I did not want to quote legal
doctrine but, unless I am mistaken-and I have done
some research on L'1is-the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan was in error· in informing this Council that it
had turned down this doctrine. The Security Council
cannot turn down this doctrine; it is a doctrine of
international law that goes back to the days of the
glossatoTs. It can no more turn down the doctrine of
rebus sic stantibus than it can turn down the fundamental basis of law.

166. Le Ministre des affaires etrangeresduPakistan
a exerce son ironie a mes depens a propos de la
doctrine rebus sic stantibus [766eme seance, par. 44].
Je dais dire que j'ai beaucoup apprecie cette ironie.
Pour ma part, je ne demande pas mieux que de discuter de la doctrine conventio omnis intelligitur rebus
sic stantibus, mais je ne vois pas commentle Conseil
de securite pourrait assumer le role d'un tribunal.
C'est d'ailleurs pourquoi je n'ai pas voulu citer la
doctrine juridique. Cependant, si je ne me trompe (et
j'ai fait quelques recherches sur ce point), le Ministre
des affaires etrangeres duPakistanetaitdans1'erreur
lorsqu'il a dit au Conseil que celui-ci avait rejete
cette doctrine. Le Conseil de securite ne peutabsolument pas rejeter cette doctrine; il E'':'..git en effet
d'une doctrine du droit international qui remonte a
l'epoque des glossateurs. Il ne peut pas plus rejeter
la doctrine rebus sic stantibus qu'il peut rejeter les
fondements memes du droit.

167. And here we have the best authority, and perhaps
the best people to look into this-and I hope other
nationals will not mind-are tht! British and the Americans because they have had a longer period of experience in the conclusion of treaties, and getting out
of them and having to modify them, and so on. A large
volume of law hasbeendeveloped.lamfree to concede
to Sir Pierson Dixon that, according to his system, you
can still put a man in prison or lock him up on a
Sunday, or something of the kind. That is because the
conditions have not changed in that regard. But so far
as international law is concerned, the distinguished
English judge, Sir ArnoldMcNair, whose.independence
has been placed beyond doubt by his giVing judgement
against his own country in the Anglo-Iranian Oil Co.
Case in the International Court of JUstice, said:

167. Nous avons pres de nous les gens les plus
autorises, et ceux qui sont le plus qualifies pour se
prononcer sur cette question sont sans doute les ressortissants du Royaume-Uni et ceux des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique - j'espere ne pas offenser les ressortissants d'autres pays. Ils ont en effet une plus longue
experience de la conclusion, de la denonciation et de
la modification des traites. Des sources du droit
etendues se sont constituees. J'accorde a sir Pierson
Dixon que, dans le systeme britannique, il est encore
possible d'emprisonner un homme le dimanche ou de
prendre des mesures de ce genre. On peut le faire
parce qu'a cet egard les conditions n'ont pas change.
Mais, en ce qui concerne le droit international, voici
ce qu'a dit un juge britannique eminent, sir Arnold
McNair, dont 1'independance ne peut etre mise en doute
puisque, a la Cour internationale de justice, apropos
de l'affaire de l'Anglo-lranian Oil Co., il a donne un
avis allant contre la these de son propre pays:

" ... it is reasonable that circumstances should
arise in connexion wiLl} treaties (as they do in the
sphere of private law contracts) in which it is necessary to im.ply a term or condition. That is to say when
it is clear that, if the parties whe;; negotiating had
adverted to some contingency, ... they would have
agreed to provide for it in a particular way, it is
reasonable to impute to them an intention to contract
on the basis of such a provision and to imply it as a
term or condition in the treaty." 1/

"(...) On peut a bon droit estimer que des circonstances interviennent parfois apropos des traites
(comme il arrive dans le cas des contrats prives)
dans lesquelles il est necessaire de presumer
I' existence d'une clause ou d'une condition implicites. Autrement dit, lorsqu'il est evident que les
parties auraient introduit dans leur convention une
disposition speciale .si elles avaient eu a l'esprit
une contingence determinee (...), on peut raisonnablement leur attribuer l'intention de fonder leur
convention sur une telle disposition, et de conside re r
que cette disposition est sous-entendue dans le
traiteV."

168. I shall come back to more conclusive statements
from Sir Arnold McNair. I will now quote another
authority, Mr. Hall, who has written as follows:

168. Je compte ulterieurement faire etat dedeclarations encore plus concluantes de sir Arnold McNair.
J e citerai maintenant un autre auteur faisant autorite ,
M. Hall, qui a ecrit ce qui suit:

"Neither party to a contract can make its binding
effect dependent at his own will upon conditions other
than those contemplated at the moment when the

"Aucune des parties a un contrat ne peut a son
gre subordonner l'execution de ses obligations a
l' existence de conditions autres que celles qui ont

V Arnold Duncan McNair, The Law of Treaties (New York,
Columbia University Press, 1938), p. 233.

']j Arnold Duncan McNair, The Law of Treaties, New-York,
Columbia University Press, edit., 1938, p. 233.

S

n

.;ii,
.,"1

It

e

x

x

1.

?

is

.-

l.

IX

le

J.

..,

IS

:e
~s

le
:-

ir

:e

47

,!

~---",,''''.- ­
-.

contra ct was entered into, and, on the other hand, a
contra ct ceases to be binding so soon as anythin g
which formed an implie d conditi on of its obligat ory
force at the time of its conclu sion is essent ially
altered . " §j

I

~I

I

'~-'I

,.-'0.->;'
i'

169. The United Kingdom regard s the cessati on of, or
a vital change in, the specifi c raison d'etre of a treaty
as a ground for recogn izing ipso facto the termin ation
of a treaty. The princip le applies to a change which
destro ys the very object of a treaty stipula tion: cessante ratione cessat lex.
170. As an illustra tion of the ~pplicability of this
dactrin e, referen ce may be made to a procla mation
issued by Presid ent Roosev elt on 9 August 1941, which
announ ced that certain treatie s had becom e suspen ded
and inoper ative. He said:

"Wher eas the conditi ons envisa ged by the conven tion have been, for the time being, almost wholly
destroy ed, and the partial and imperf ect enforc ement
of the Conven tion can operat e only to prejud ice the
victim s of aggres sion," -that is what we are- "whom
it is the avowed purpos e of the United States of
Ameri ca to aid;"-a nd that phrase "to aid" is a statement in which my countr y believ es- "and Where as it
is an implic it conditi on to the binding effect of the
conven tion that those conditi ons envisag ed by it
should continu e withou t such materi al change as has
in fact occurr ed ... "
171. The circum stance s were part of the consid eration of the contri.cct, assumi ng t.lJ.at there was one. It was
becaus e of those circum stance s that the promis e was
made and that the disapp earanc e of those circum stance s, which were the foundation of the promis e,
render ed the promis e ineffec tive.
172. These are moder n author ities. Presid entRoo sevelt was a moder n person in this connexion, and so is
Sir Arnold McNai r. But Oppenheim is the classic
author ity. He wrote the following:

"Vital change s of circum stance s may be of such a
kind as to justify aparty in deman ding to be release d
from the obligat ions of a treaty which cannot be
abroga ted by unilate ral notice. Many writer s defend
the princip le conven tio omnis intellig itur rebus sic
stantib us, and assert that all treatie s are conclu ded
under the tacit conditi on rebus sic stantib us. In subabused by
stanc~ -altho ugh it has on occasi ons been
provid ing a cloak for lawles s violati ons oftrea tiesthe doctrin e rebus sic stantib us, when kept within
proper limits, embod ies a genera l princip le of law
as expres sed in the doctrin es of frustra tion, or
superv ening imposs ibility of performal,~;;;, Gr the
like, It is in this sense- and in this sense only--t hat
every treaty implie s a conditi on that, if by an uPlo:."eseen change of circum stance s an obligat ionpro videa
for in the treaty should imperi l the existen ce or vital

ete envisa gees au momen t de la conclu sion du contrat; en revanc he, un contra t cesse de lier les
parties des qu'un elemen t quelconque constit uant une
conditi on implic ite de sa force obliga toire au moment de sa conclu sion subit une modifi cation essentielle §/."
169. Le Royaum e-Uni consid ere que ladisp arition ou
une modifi cation essent ielle de la raison d' etre specifique d'un traite en entrain e ipso facto la caduci te.
Ce princip e s'appli que aux change ments qui detruis ent
l'objet meme des dispos itions d'un traWl: cessan te
ratione cessat lex.
170. Pour illustr er les possib ilites d'appli cation de
cette doctrin e, on peut citer une procla mation du
presid ent Roosev elt en date du 9 aout 1941, annon<;ant
que certain s traites etaient suspen dus ou etaient
devenu s caducs . Le presid ent Roosev elt s' exprim ait
ainsi:
"Etant donne que les conditi ons envisa gees lors 1
de la signatu re de la conven tion ont, pour le momen t,
presqu e entiere ment cesse d' exister , et que l' execution partiel le et imparf aite de la conven tion ne '\
peut que porter p~4judice aux victim es d'unea gression (et nous somme s les victim es d'une agress ion),
alo rs que l' intenti on declar ee des Etats- Unis d'Ame ,~
rique est de venir en aide a celles- ci (et pour notre
sa
pays, l'expre ssion "venir en aide" revet toute
,
signific ation) et etant donne que la conven tion ne
condiles
que
autant
pour
que
oire
obligat
re
demeu
tions envisa gees lors de sa signatu re continuent
d'exist er, et qu'en fait un change ment de ces conditions est interve nu(...) "
~
171. Les circon stance s existan tes etaient entree s en
ligne de compte , lors de la conclu siondu contra t - en
suppos ant qu'il s'agiss e d'un contra t. C'est d'apres
elles que la prome sse avait ete faite, etla dispari tion
de ces circon stance s, raison et fondem ent de l' engage ment souscr it, a eu pour effet de rendre celui-c i
caduc.
172. Ce sont la des au~orites modern es. Le preside nt
Roosev elt etait extrem ement moder ne du point de vue
quj. nous occupe; on peut dire la meme chose de sir
Arnold McNai r. Mais Oppenheim, qui reste l'aator ite
classiq ue, a ecrit ce qui suit:
"Un change ment fondam ental de circon stance s peut
etre que 1'une des parties a un traite soit fondee a
deman der a etre degage e de ses obligat ions, bien
que ce traite ne puisse etre annule par une denonciation unilate rale. Nombr eux sont les auteur s qui
defend ent le princip e conven tio omnis intellig itur
rebus sic stantib us, et affirm ent que tous les traites
sont conclu s sous la reserv e implic ite rebus sic
stantib us. En substa nce - et bien qu' elle ait donne
lieu a des abus en rendan t possib les des violati ons
deguis ees - la doctrin e rebus sic stantibUS, interpretee de fa<;on restric tive, enonce un princip e
iuridiq ue genera l qui inspire les doctrin es dites de
"frustr ation", ou de la caduci te des obligat ions, ou
des doctrin es analog ues. C'est dans ce sens - et
dans ce sens seulem ent - que tout traite suppos e
une conditi on implic ite selon laquell e si, par suite

,

~

.,

§/ William Edward Hall, A Treatis e on Internat ional Law,
Oxford, Clarend on Press, edit., 1895, 4eme ed., p. 367.

§/ William Edward Hall, A Treatis e on Interna tional La~
(Oxford , Clarend on Press, 1895), 4th ed., p. 367.

48

developm
words "sh
ment of 0
demand to
Thus con
when trea
princip le
mitted as
un~nfo rce

of circum

173. I am
not going to
accept the v
to take over
.Justice, but
There was
mentioning
it. Now reb
ancient doc
of those ou
ditioned by
has said is
be applied t
of Interna ti
free zones
this years
ceedings of
pared to wi
where the
doctrine. I c
great respe
because it i
go to the Int
as this is co

174. May I
lawyers. OnE
that is the f
dom, Sir A
difficulties .
trovers ies.
Mr. John F
were at the
February of
Germa nyar
iness to go i
to deal wi
certain circ
suggests, an
agreem entof that agree
to be stated
tative of Ind
be extrem el
Here is wh
reference to
sians were

-

W L. Oppen
H. Lauterp ach
Green and Co.

onles
une
noen-

nou
,pe-

lite.

5ent
l.llte

!l de

1 du

gant
ient
nait

,

lors
lent,

J

,

-

~xe-

ne
resion),
melotre
e sa
n ne
mdiluent
mdi-

11

lS en

>f

l~

~
.~

- en
pres
'ition
;ageui-ci
ident
~ vue
e sir
orite

~

~ -.

,peut
dee a
bien
~non­

'S qui

19itur

'aites
s sic
lonne
ltions
.nter.ncipe
:es de
lS, ou
- et
ppose
suite

i

development of one of the parties. "_I repeat th.e
words "should imperil the existence of vital development of one of the parties n - n it should have a right to
demand to be released from the obligation concerned.
Thus conceived, the doctrine rebus sic stantibus,
when treated as a legal doctrine, embodies the same
principle which the law of various countries has admitted as a ground for dissolution or discharge or
unl:'nforceability of a contract owing to a vital change
of circumstances. ft!V

d'un changement de circonstances i:nprevu, une obligation decoulant du traite risque demettre endanger
l'existence ou le developpement vital d'une des parties (je repete: "risque de mettre en danger l'existence ou le developpement vital d'une des parties"),
"ce11e-ci doit avoir le droit de demander a etre
degagee de l'obligation en question. Con<;ue de cette
fa<;on, la doctrine rebus sic stantibus, en tant que
doctrine juridique, s'inspire du principe retenu dans
la legislation de divers pays dans le cas ou un contrat peut etre annule, considere comme execute, ou
declare non executoire en raison d'un changement
fondamental de circonstancesV."

173. I am not relying on this doctrine, because I am
not going to use this doctrine. My Government does not
accept the view that the Security Council is called upon
to take over the functions of the International Court of
Justice, but the substance of itis important politically.
There was some suggestion that I have avoided even
mentioning this because there is something wrong about
it. Now rebus sic stant;bus is a very respectable and
ancient doctrine. But of course it is the law; it is one
of those outstanding instances where the law is conditioned by fact. What the International Court of Justice
has said is that the doctrine still holds, but it could not
be applied to the case before it. The Permanent Court
of International Justice, particularly in the case of the
free zones of Upper Savoy and the district of Gex, said
this years ago. I cannot find any evidence in the proceedings of the Security Council-and I shall be prepared to withdraw this statement if I were shown itwhere the Council has turned down the doctrine as a
doctrine. I can see no evidence of it. If it did, then with
great respect, it would be acting beyond its own powers,
because it is not a law-making body. You would have to
go to the International Law.Commission. That is so far
as this is concerned.

173. Je ne m'appuie pas sur cette doctrine, parce
que je n'ai pas l'intention de l'invoquer. Mon gouvernement se refuse a considerer que le Conseil de
securite doive assumer les fonctions qui appartiennent
a la Cour international~ de Justice, mais la substance
de cette doctrine presente une certaine importance
politique. On a d'ailleurs insinue que j'ai evite d'en
faire mention parce qu' e11e serait difficile adefendre.
Or, la doctrine rebus sic stantibus est extremement
ancienne et respectable. Nature11ement, il s'agitd'une
doctrine juridique; mais nous nous trouvons dans un
de ces cas remarquables OU le droit est determine
par le fait. Ce que la Cour a affirme, c'est que la
doctrine est toujours valable, mais elle ne pouvait
etre appliquee dans l'affaire dont la Cour etait saisie.
Il y a des annees que la Cour permanente de Justice
internationale a adopte cette fa<;on devoir, notamment
dans l'affaire des zones franches de la Haute-Savoie
et du pays de Gex. Je n'ai pu trouver dans les travaux
du Conseil de securite aucun exemple - et si l'on
m'en montre un, je serai tout pret a revenir sur ma
declaration - indiquant que le Conseil aurait rejete
cette doctrine en tant que te11e. Je n'en trouve
absolument aucune preuve. Si le Conseilla rejetait,
il outrepasserait ses pouvoirs, je dois le faire observer
respectueusement, car il n' est pas un organe Iegislatif.
Il faudrait s'adresser pour cela a la Commission du
droit international. Voila pour cette question.

174. May I now try to deal with people who are not
lawyers. One is a very dear friend of my country, and
that is the former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Sir Anthony Eden. I hope I am not starting any
difficulties in regard to the sides taken in other controversies. The four Foreign Ministers, Mr. Bidault,
Mr. John Foster Dulles, Mr. Molotov, and Mr. Eden,
were at the Conference held in Berlin in January and
February of 1954, and the question of the treatment of
Germany arose. It is neither my purpose nor my business to go into the merits of that question. I have only
to deal with what is the effect of an agreement in
certain circumstances, whether the whole of it ever
suggests, and in all this, on the basis that there was an
agreement-I have been at pains to point out the nature
of that agreement, and I do not want anything that I say
to be stated here afterwards that in 1957 the representative of India said there was an agreement. I have to
be extremely careful in view of the previous history.
Here is what Sir Anthony Eden said. This is with
reference to the Potsdam Agreement, where the Russians were insisting that on account of the Potsdam

174. Permettez-moi maintenant de citer des declara-·
tions de certaines personnalites qui ne sont pas des
juristes. L'une d' elles, sir Anthony Eden, ancien
premier ministre du Royaume- Uni, est un excellent
ami de mon pays. J'espere qu'en le citant je ne vais
pas faire naItre de difficultes apropos d'autres contraverses. Quatre ministres des affaires etrangeres,
MM. Bidault, John Foster Dulles, Molotov et Eden,
ont participe a la Conference de Berlin, en janvier
et fevrier 1954, ou a ete debattue la question du sort
de l'A11emagne. Je n'ai pas l'intention d'examiner le
fond de cette question, car ce n' est pas la ce qui
m'interesse. Je veux seulement parler de ce qui peut
advenir d'un accord, dar:.s certaines circonstances, si
tant est qu'on puisse dire, en considerant l'ensemble
de la situation, qu'un accord est intervenu; quoi qU'il
en soit, j'ai pris soin d'indiquer queUe €tait la nature
de cet accord, et je ne veux pas que l'on vienne dire
ici un jour qu'en 1957 le representant de l'Inde a
reconnu qu'il y avait eu un accord. Il me faut etre

-

!

I

I

i, i
,I

, 1

I1
,

\

-=-

~"

'\

~

i·
f"

I:·.•••••• . :.,

V' L. Oppenheirn, International Law - A Treatise, 8erne
W L. Oppenheirn, International Law-A Treatise, 8th ed.,
ed., revue par H. Lauterpacht, Londres-New-York-Toronto,
H. Lauterpacht (ed.) (London, New York, Toronto; Longmans,
Green and Co., 1955), vol. I, pp. 939 and 940 •
49 Longmans, Green and Co., edit., 1955, vol. I, p. 939 et 940.

.-~____..1'.'--""""---

11

~>
it

tres prudent en raison de ce qui s'est passe. Voici
ce qu'a dit sir Anthony Eden, a propos de l'accord

I'~;!
.-....----..~ I.j
~
..

I

",~. ;.'"

'I

l.

Agreement, the European community and various
other things, were not possible, ar
9re was this
clause and the other clause. This is .':lat Sir Anthony
Eden said on 1 February 1954:

de Potsdam, au moment ou les Russes insistaient en
disant qu' en raison de cet accord la communaute
europeenne et diverses autres chases etaient impossibles et invoquaient telle clause et telle autre clause.
Voici donc ce qu'a dit sir Anthony Edenle ler fevrier
1954:
"Nous nous sommes tous engages a offrir aux
Allemands l' occasion de reconstruire leur existence
dans la liberte et la democratie, de sorte qu'ils
puissent prendre place parmi les peuplespacifiques
du monde. C'est de ce principe que s'inspirent les
accords de Potsdam, et M. Molotov l'a invoque le
25 janvier. Nous sommes tous tenus d'y conformer
nos actes. (Ce n'est pas comme s'il s'agissait de
chiffons de papier.) Toutefois, cela ne signifie pas
que les dispositions des accords de Potsdam soient
toutes applicables aujourd'hui. La delegation sovietique elle-meme a dit que certaines d' entre elles
etaient devenues caduques du fait des evenements.
(Ce cours precipite des evenements constitue un
probl~me politique.) D'ailleurs, ces accords euxmemes stipulent explicitement qu'ils ont trait au
traitement a appliquer a l'Allemagne au cours de
la periode initiale de controlelQ/."
C' est la encore un autre point dontilfaut tenir compte.
Si toute cette discussion, toutes ces resolutions, etc.,
sont considerees du point de vue du cessez-le-feu,
d'un r~glement rapide des choses, la situation n'est
pas la meme au bout de neufans. En supposant qu'elle
dure pendant 90 ans, le probl~me sera-t-il toujours le
meme? Voici la phrase suivante de la declaration de
sir Anthony Eden: "n nous faut envisager les faits
tels qu'ils se presentent aujourd'hui, et non tels qu'ils
se presentaient il y a neuf ans." Le fait qu'il s'agisse
la aussi d'une periode de neufans estune coincidence.

"We are all pledged to give the Germanpeople the
opportunity to reconstruct their lives on a free and
democratic basis, so that they may take their place
among the peaceful peoples of the world. This principle was embodied in the Potsdam Agreement, and
referred to by Mr. Molotov on January 25. We all
have a duty to uphold it." -It is not as though they
were just scraps of paper-"But that does not mean
that all the provisions of the Potsdam Agreement
are applicable today. The Soviet Delegation itself has
said that some of them have been overtaken by
events."-This overtaking of events is a political
issue-"lt is indeed clearly stated in the Agreement
itself that it is intended to cover the treatment of
Germany in the initial control period. " !Q/

That is again another matter to be taken into account.
If all this argu~ent, all these resolutions and every-

thing else were in terms of the cease-fire, hoping that
they will be terminated quickly, thenyougeta different
picture after nine years. Supposing this goes on for
ninety years, are we still in this business? Then there
is the following sentence of what Sir Anthony Eden said:
"We have to look at the facts as they are today, and not
as they were nine years ago." -The nine years is a
coincidence.
175. If I quote Sir Anthony Eden, who is not a lawyer,
distinguished as he is, I may perhaps be regarded
as quoting lay authority on a subject on which I have
just now quoted a Latin doctrine. Therefore, we come
to John Foster Dulles, who in the days of less political
involvement, was a distinguished political lawyer . And
once a lawyer always a lawyer. This is what Mr.
Dulles said on behalf of the United States of America,
as Secretary of State, on 26 January-it says 26
January; I did not put down this date-:

175. Quand je cite sir Anthony Eden- qui, si eminent
qu'il soit, n'est pas un juriste - on pourrait peutetre ~e reprocher d'invoquer 1'autorite d'unnon-specialiste sur un sujet apropos duquel je viens de
citer une formule latine de droit international. C' est
pourquoi, je citerai maintenant John Foster Dulles,
qui, avant de se consacrer entierement a la politique,
etait un juriste distingue, specialiste des questions
politiques. Or, qui a ete juriste le reste. Voici donc
::e qu'a dit M. Dulles au nom des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, en sa qualite de secretaire d'Etat, le 26 janvier - le texte dit: 26 janvier; ce n' est pas moi qui ai
invente cette date -:
"Ces decisions de Yalta, D.uxquelles mon propre
gouvernement a eu part, etaient comprehensibles
dans le climat de l' epoque. On en etait encore au
plus fort de la guerre contre l' Allemagne, et ce
n'est pas l'esprit de tolerance qui peut faire gagner
les guerres. (Nous devrions le savoir.) Mais il est
affligeant de voir qu'aujourd'hui, neuf ans apres
1'armistice accorde a 1'Allemagne, l'unedesparties
a la Conference de Yalta tente de ranimer l'amertume et la haine de cette epoque, ainsi que les decisions cruelles nees de cette haine et de cette
ame rtume !lI."

"These decisions of Yalta, which my own Government shared, were understandable in the context of
the day. The German war was still in full vigor and
wars are not won by a spirit of tolerance."-We
should have learned that-"But it is sad that today,
nine years since the German armistice, one of the
parties to the Yalta Conference should attempt to
revive the bitterness and hatred of those days and
the cruel decisions which that hatred and bitterness
occasioned. "111

1Q/ France, Ministere des affaires etrangeres, Documents
de la Conference de Berlin (25 janvier-18 fevrier 1954),
Paris, La Documentati on franqaise, Editions de la Presidence
du Conseil, p. 31 et 32.

10/ Documents relating to the Meeting of Foreign Ministers
of France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United
States of America, Berlin, 25 January to 18 February 1954
(London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1954), Cmd. 9080,
p.50.
111 Ibid., p. 16.

111 Ibid., p. 14.
50

--I

The im
this cas
is creat

176. N
lowing:
"Th
only t
to avo
is on
the di
may
two fu
be a
look t
be irr
of the
Franc

ent en
maute
nposause.

~vrier

!r aux
;tence
qu'ils
fiques
mt les
que le
)rmer
ait de
ie pas
soient
sovieelies
nents.
tue un
) eux'ait au
Irs de
(

ompte.
:;, etc.,
le-feu,
n n'est
qu'elle
ours le
tion de
s faits
squ'ils
'agisse
idence.
minent
t peutn-speiens de
. C'est
Dulles,
litique,
estions
ci donc
l'Ame26 jani qui ai
propre
nsibles
~ore au
, et ce
gagner
s il est
; apres
parties
,'amerles dele cette

r

The implication of it is that when conditions change-in
this case the whole position is reversed-anew position
is created.

Cela signifie que lorsque les conditions changent - et
dans le cas present la situation a ete renversee - il
se cree une nouvelle situation.

176. Now we come to Mr. Bidault who said the following:
"The Peace Treaty must be of such a nature as not
only to provide a suitable conclusion to the war, but
to avoid sowing the seeds of a new conflict." -This
is one of those things which in the case of Kashmir
the distinguished members of the Security Council
may well bear in mind- "In my own view there are
two fundamental considerations. The peace mustnot
be a vengeful peace or an imposed peace. It must
look to the future and not only to the past. It would
be irrelevant to insist on too close an interpretation
of the Potsdam Agreement, in the drafting of which
France, as a matter of fact, had no part."W

176. Voici maintenant ce qu'a declare M. Bidault:

France as a matter of fact had no part in it, so it
subscribed to it afterwards. So its action is something
after the fact.

En fait, la Fr~nce n'avait pas participe a. la rectaction
de l'accord de Potsdam. Elle yasouscritpar la suite.
Son action est done intervenue apr~s le fait.

177. Now we come to Mr. Molotov. Mr. Molotov said
the following on 1 February 1954, the same day as Mr.
Eden spoke:

177. Nous en arrivons maintenant :l M. Molotov.
M. Molotov a dit ce qui suit le 1er fevrier 1954, le
jour meme ou M. Eden a fait sa d~claration:

"According to these agreements the Soviet Union,
the United States of America and the United Kingdom
would act together in helping the German people
rebuild their ~tate on democratic and peace-loVing
principles. In due time France associated herself
with these decisions, although Mr. Bidault now and
then tries to avoid discussion of these agreed decisions. I suggest, however, that these agreements
are no less necessary to France than, let us say, to
the Soviet Union. It W
178. That is the statement on the other side. But then
Mr. Molotov goes on to say:

"Il a ~t~ arrete, aux termes de ces decisions, que
l'union sovi~tique, les Etats-Unis d'Amerique et la
Grande-Bretagne collaboreront en vue d'aider le
peuple allemand a. retablir son :Etat sur une base
democratique et pacifique. La France aadh~reult~­
rieurement a. ces decisions, bien qu'actuellement
M. Bidault les repousse :l tout propos. Cependant,
je pense que ces accords ne sont pas moins necessaires :l la France que, par exemple, it l'Union
sovietique W. "
178. C' est la la declaration de la partie oppos~e.
Mais M. Molotov a declare ensuite:

"We acknowledge that many points of the Potsdam
Agreements have become outdated." W

"Nous admettons que nombre de points des accords
de Potsdam sont perimes~"

That statement, apart from any political views one way
or another, has very considerable force,

Cette declaration, en dehors de toute opinionpolitique
dans un sens ou dans l'autre, a unetr~s grande force.

179. For purposes of reference, these quotations are
from United Kingdom documents issued by Her
Majesty's Stationery Office, relating to the Meeting
of Foreign Ministers of France, the United Kingdom,
the Soviet Union, and the !Jnited States of America,
held in Berlin, 25 January to 18 February 1954,
Command Paper 9080.

179. Je precise a titre de reference que le texte
anglais de ces citations est tire de documents du
Royaume-Uni pubW~s par Her Majesty's Stationery
Office qui ont trait a la Conference des quatre ministres des affaires etrang~res de France, des EtatsUnis d' Amerique, du Royaume-Uni etde l'Union sovietique, tenue a Berlin du 25 janvier au 18 fevrier 1954,
Command Paper No 9080.

180. These principles may all be regarded as universal, and it may well be argued, do they apply to
the particular instance? We come to the United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan. What does the
Commission say? It says:

180. Ces principes peuvent etre consideres comme
ayant une porlee universelle, et onpeutposer la question de savoir s'Us s'appliquent au cas particulier
que nous examinons. Nous en venons donc :i la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'lnde et le Pakistan.
Que dit la Commission a cet egard? Elle dit ceci
dans son troisi~me rapport interimaire:
"Le fond du probl~me du retrait des forces (il
s'agit de la deuxieme partie de l'accord du 13 aoiit
1948) reside dans le fait que l' echelonnement des
etapes successives de la demilitarisation de l'Etat,

"In essence, the problem of the withdrawal"-that
is, part IT of the 13 August 1948 agreement-"lies
in the fact that the sequence for the demilitarization
of the State, as containeu in the Commission's

)cuments
~r

1954),

esidence

_

"Ce trait~ de paix doit etre de nature, non seulement a tir.er les consequences de la guerre, mais a
eviter de jeter les germes d'u.\l nouveau conflit.
(C'est l:i une chose que les distingues membres du
Conseil de securite pourraient garder presente a
l'esprit lorsqu'il s'agit de l'affaire du Cachemire.)
Deux consid~rations me paraissent a cet egard fondamentales. La paix ne saurait etre une paix de
vengeance ou une paix imposee. Elle doit regarder
vers l'avenir et non pas seulement vers le passe.
nest, :i mon sens, hors de propos de se ref~rer
:i une interpretation d'ailleurs tr~s rigoureuse du
texte des accords de Potsdam, a. l'~laboration desquels la France n'a d'ailleurs pas participelY.'''

..~<;~

_ _ _ . ... . .•

~ :~:::~: ~~.

~ :~:::~: ~3.

":i
ij

; ")
I>!

,

;1

'!

ft!

-51---------"""""'--------------~,~--11
..

......"""""'""""'-.....

.,"':'

~
..... .

'!

resolu.tions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949, is
not adequate to solve the present situation. The
situation in the State has changed; the resolutions
remain unchanged." -That is what happened to the
last resolution the S~curity Council passed-"Again
in this question, the Commission endeavoured to find
means of reaching an agreement without contravening
the terms of the resolution; but, taking into account
the changes that have occurred in the situation,"that is what the Commission is saying: "taking into
account the changes that have occurred in the situation" -"it found that the Governments were strict
in adhering to the letter of those clauses which
met their position."!1I

tel que le prevoient les resolutions de la Commission en date des 13 aout 1948 et 5 janvier 1949 n'est
pas de nature a apporter une solution a la situation
actuelle. La situation de l'Etat s'est modifiee; les
resolutions demeurent inchangees. (C'est ce qUi est
arrive a la derniere resolution qu'a prise le Conseil
de securite.) Pour cette question encore, la Commission s'est efforcee de trouver les moyens d'aboutir a un accord sans contrevenir aux termes de la
resolution, mais, compte tenu de l' evolution de la
situation (c'est l:l ce queditlaCommission: "compte
tenu de l'evolution de la situation"), elle a ccnstate
que les gouvernements tenaient a se conformer
strictement aux clauses qui correspondaient a leur
position 141."

181. The Commission says in the same report, in
another paragraph:

181. Dans un autre paragraphe du meme rapport, la
Commission declare:

"Over a prolonged period, in a changing and
dynamic situation" -and this is particularly true of
the part of Kashmir which is still under the administration of Jammu and Kashmir- "and restricted
by long-standing related clarifications which proved
to be a real impediment to reaching agreement, the
framework of the resolution of 13 August has become inadequate in the light of the factual conditions
in the State. The Commission has been unable, therefore, to mediate much beyond what is today a rather
outmoded pattern. "W

"Apr~s une pericde prolongee, dans une situation
mouvante et novatrice (et cela est particulierement
vrai en ce qui COncerne la partie du Cachemire qui
se trouve toujours sous l'administration de Jammu
et Cachemire), au milieu de laquelle laCommission
se trouvait limitee par des precisions etablies de
longue date, precisions qui se sont averees etre un
reel obstacle a la realisation d'un accord, le caq.re
de la resolution du 13 aout a perdu de son actualite
au regard de la situation de fait qui existe dans
l'Etat. La Commission a donc ete incapable de conduire des mectiations au-dela de ce qui, a Pheure
actuelle, constitue une formule plutot desuete!Q/."

182. There are other instances for which you and I
are responsible. One was the question of Trieste.
Here was an agreement that something had to be done
in a particular way. Something else was done and the
Security Council did not regard that as ~_ breach of its
resolutions. The Italian Peace Treaty p;rovidedforthe
establishment of the Free Territory of Trieste. The
Statute of Trieste conferred upon the Security Council
certain functions and responsibilities in respect of
administration of the Territory, including the appointment of the Governor in consultation with Yugoslavia. At its 91st meeting on 10 January 1947, the
Security Council adopted a resolution formally accepting the responsibilities devolving upon it under the
relevant treaty document. Here is an acceptance by
the Security Council that makes it a party, a point to
which my Government wants to come back. The Council, however, failed to agree on a candidate to be
appointed as Governor and the military administration
of the area continued. On 5 October 1954, the representatives of Italy, the United Kingdom, the United
States and Yugoslavia agreed on certain arrangements
concerning the future of the Territory different from
those provided in the Peace Treaty, and the people
seemed to have been comparatively happy. That is the
history of Trieste.

182. Il est d'autres exemples dans lesquels nos pays,
les votres et le mien, ont leur part de responsabilite,
et 1'un de ces exemples est bien le probleme de
Trieste. Selon l'accord conclu, on devait aboutir a un
certain reglement dans certaines conditions. C' est un
reglement different qui a eu lieu, et le Conseil de
securite n'a pas' considere que ce fait etait contraire
aux resolutions qu'il avait votees. Le Traite de paix
avec l'Italie prevoyait la cr~ation du Territoire libre
de Trieste. Le Statut de Trieste confiait au Conseil
de securite certaines fonctions et certaines responsabilites, notamment la nomination, apr~s consultation
avec la Yougoslavie, d'un haut-commissaire. Le 10
janvier 1947, lors de sa 91eme seance, le Conseil de
securite a adopte une resolution par laquelle il acceptait formellement les fonctions que lui confiait le
traite. Ce faisant. il devenait partie, point sur lequel
le Gouvernement indien se propose de revenir. Cependant, l'accord n'a pu se faire sur le choix d'un ~r­
candidat au poste de haut-commissaire et l'administration militaire est demeuree en fonctions. Le 5 octobre 1954, les representants de l'Italie, du RoyaumeUni, des Etats- Unis d' Amerique et de la Yougoslavie
se sont entendus concernant l'avenir du Territoire sur
certains arrangements qui differaient de ceux qui
avaient ete prevus par le Traite de paix. Or, tout le ')
monde semble avoir ete a peu pres satisfait. Telle
est l'histoire de Trieste.
183. Il est un autre exemple que jevoudrais rappeler
ici. Je n'ai pas le temps de remonter dans l'histoire,
mais tous les membres du Conseil de securite, et

183. There is another instance to which I waRt to
refer. I do not have the time to go into its history but
all the members, particularly f-he great Powers, will

W Prn~es-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, guatriemeal;llee, Supplement special No 7, document S/1430,
par. 249.
W Ibid., par. 283.

14/ Cfficial Records of the Sf'_cp-ity Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplement No. 7, document S/1430, para. 249.

!.Q/ Ibid., para. 283.
52

.

recall
cisco,
the U
that
not b
basis
9 Fe
resol
lution

J'

"1
Fra
to w
Unit
regi
forc
Unit
pow
184.
sion
unani
condit
and th
histor

185.
plebis
like to
of pIe
cites
which
Leagu
detail
these
the tin
treatie

187.
in purs

But ea
effecti
other
There
Spisz a
cision
1919.
in 1921
prOVide
and Pe

Commis949 n'est
situation
ifiee; les
e qUi est
eConseil
la Comsd'abouIles de la
cion de la
: "compte
L ccnstate
:Informer
ent a leur

r

:

recall the discussions in Dumbarton Oaks, San Francisco, London, and other places on the founding of
the United Nations when it was definitely laid down
that any State that was a creation of Nazi power could
not be a Member of the United Nations. That was the
basis on which the United Nations was founded. On
9 February 1946 the General Assembly passed a
resolution. India w<:ed for it. Paragraph 1 of resolution 32 (I) of the Assembly stated:

surtout les representants des grandes puissances, se
rappellent certainement les discussions qui ontprecede, a Dumbarton-Oaks, San-Francisco, Londres et
ailleurs la creation de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, et a la suite desquelles il a ete definitivement
decide qu'aucun Etat dont le regime avait ete mis en
place par les nazis ne pourrait devenir membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Telle est la base
sur laquelle I'Organisation des Nations Unies a ete
edifiee. Le 9 fevrier 1946, l'Assemblee generale a
adopte une resolution, en faveur de laquelle l'Inde
s'est prononcee. Voici le texte du paragraphe 1 de
la resolution 32 (I) de l' Assemblee:

"1. The General Assembly recalls that the San
Francisco Conference adopted a resolution according
to which paragraph 2 of Article 4 of chapter IT of the
United Nations Charter 'cannot apply to States whose
regimes have been installed with the help of armed
forces of countries which have fought against the
United Nations so long as these regimes are in
power'. "

"1. L'Assemblee generale rappelle que la Conference de San-Francisco a adopte une resolution aux
termes de laquelle le paragraphe 2 de l'Article4 du
Chapitre IT de la Charte des Nations Unies "ne pourra
pas s'appliquer a des Etats dont les regimes ont
ete installes avec ~'aide de forces militaires des pays
qui ont lutte contre les Nations Unies, tant que ces
regimes seront au pouvoir".

184. This was a resolution barring forever the admission of Spain to the United Nations. Last year, by
unanimous vote, we admitted Spain. Why? Because
conditions had changed. The same rules were in power
and the conditions of origin had not been changed by
history. But the conditions of the world had changed.

184. Cette resolution interdisait pour toujours I'admission de l'Espagne a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Or, l'an dernier, a l'unanimite, nous avons
admis l'Espagne au sein de I'Organisation. Pourquoi?
Parce que les conditions avaient change. Les memes
dirigeants etaient aupouvoir, l'histoire n'avait apporte
aucun changement aux origines du regime; mais la
situation n'etait plus la meme.

185. I want now to deal with plebiscites for a momentplebiscites in regard to general agreements. I would
like to invite the attention of the Council to the history
of plebiscites. There were large numbers of plebiscites which had been initially agreed upon, many of
which were never carried out. The Covenant of the
League of Nations, which was drafted in much greater
detail and probably with greate'r reference to some of
these matters, contains the law and the practice of
the time. Article 19 concerns the reconsideration of
treaties which have become inapplicable.

185. Je veux maintenant parler un moment de plebiscites - de plebiscites en rapport avec des accords
internationaux. Il y a de nombreux plebiscites qui ont
ete decides a un moment donne et dont un grand nombre
n'ont jamais eu lieu. Le Pacte de la Societe des Nations, qui avait ete rectige tres en detail et qui sYetendait probablement tres largement sur ces problemes,
contient le droit et la pratique de l'epoque. L'Article
19 du Pacte traite du nouvel examen des traites qui
sont devenus inapplicables.

186. Certain plebiscites were required to be held by
the treaties of peace. After the First World War, the
method of plebiscites was used in a number of cases,
and wherever those plebiscites could be held in a
reasonably short time, they took place. There are
five instances: in Schleswig in 1920, as recorded in
part III of the Treaty of VersaillefO; the plebiscite of
Allenstein and Marienwerder in 1920, also under the
Treaty of Versailles; the plebiscite of Klagenfurt
Basin and Upper Silesia in 1921; and in Sopron in 1921.

186. C'est en vertu des traites de paix que certains
plebiscites devaient €ltre organises. Apres lapremiere
guerre mondiale, on a applique dans uncertainnombre
de cas la methode des plebiscites, et, lorsque ceux-ci
ont pu etre organises dans une periode relativement
courte, ils ont effectivement eu lieu. On en compte
cinq exemples: au Schleswig en 1920, selon les dispositions de la troisieme partie du Traite de Versailles;
a Allenstein et Marienwerder, en 1920, egalementaux
termes du Traite de Versailles; dans le bassin de
Klagenfurt et en Haute-Silesie, en 1921, ainsi qu'a
Sopron, encore en 1921.

187. These were plebiscites that were actually held
in pursuance of international decisions that were taken.
But each one of them was a plebiscite that became
effective soon after the decision. But when we come to
other plebiscites the situation is rather different.
There was an attempt to take a plebiscite in Teschen,
Spisz andOrabain1920. That was in pursuance of a decision of the League of Nations Council of September
1919. There was a proposal for a plebiscite in Vilna
in 1921. There was the plebiscite of Tacna and Arica
provided for in the Treaty of Peace between Chile
and Peru.

187. Les plebiscites que je viens de citer ont eu lieu
en application de decisions internationales. Tous ont
suivi ces decisions de tres pres. Mais lorsque nous
en venons a d' autres plebiscites, la situation est assez
diiferente. On a essaye en 1920, a la suite d'une decision prise en septembre 1919 par le Conseil de la
Societe des Nations, de proceder a un plebiscite a
Teschen, Spisz et Oraba. Il y a eu proposition en vue
d'un plebiscite a Vilna, en 1921. Il ya eu le plebiscite
de Tacna et Arica, ,prevu par le traite de paix entre
le Chili et le Perou.

i'

:tpporl, la

situation
lierement
emire qui
le Jammu
mmission
tablies de
~s €ltre un
, le cadre
I actualite
~iste dans
le de cona l'heure
suete ill"

; nos pays,
msabilite,
:Jbleme de ~
outir a un
. C'est un
~onseil de
contraire
te de paix
:oire libre
tu Conseil
responsamsultation
re. Le 10
::onseil de
elle il acconfiait le
sur lequel
venir. Cechoix d'un ,('
l'adminis. Le 50cRoyaume- r
ougoslavie
ritoire sur
l ceux qui
Or, tout le ')
fait. Telle
Is rappeler
l'histoira,
§curite, et
curite, qua- •
lent 8/1430,

53

____J....----------....--....-.--------------------"..--.:-~.

,,;;
"C: ~

I

i

';

."}
Cl
1

.1,

,j
.~

;1
)

~

..

i~

188. Now, what happened to them? In the Vilna case,
the conclusion with regard to the attempted plebiscite
shows that when there were delays in carrying out the
plebiscites, "the inevitable consequences of these
delays is to make it impossible for the Council"-the
League of Nations Council- "to adhere to its plan of
a speedy Popular Consultation as originally contemplated". The Council "has therefore been compelled
to consider whether the parties interested really and
sincerely desire a Popular Consultation and if it would
not be possible to devise some more simple and effective procedure. "16/ The result was direct negotiations.
189. Then we come to Teschen in 1920. This is an
instance of plebiscite which has some relation to the
present circumstances. When tension increases and
racial hatreds flare up, it is not considered opportune
to hold a plebiscite. !V

188. Que s'est-il passe en fait? A Vilna, il y eutdes
retards dans l'organisation du plebiscite, etle Consell
de la Societe des Nations a constate "que la consequence inevitable de ces retards est de rendre impossible au Conseil d~ s'en tenir au projet de consultation populaire rapide qu'll avait d'aboi-d envisage".
"Le Conseil a donc ete amene a se demander si les
parties desirent reellement et sincerement laconsultation populaire et si on ne pourrait pas envisager
une procedure plus facile et plus efficace 1§/." On a
donc procede a des negociations directes.

190. Then there is the classic instance of AlsaceLorraine:
"To hold a plebiscite now, the French maintained,
would be to sanction the wrong done in 1871 byadmitting the lawfulness of that act of violence." W

190. Enfin, nous avons l'exemple classique de l'Alsace-Lorraine:
"Les Frangais soutiennent qu'organiser maintenant un plebiscite reviendrait a sancti"onner le tort
commis en 1871 en admettant la legitimite de cet
acte de violence ill"

It almost looks prophetic in these words.

Ces mots sont presque prophetiques.

191. The best authority on plebiscites is Mattern. He
says:
"The plebiscite can render effective service only
when and where such binding agreeme1J.ts, free from
all force, have been reached in advance by, the parties involved to the effect that a majority of a fixed
and agreed proportion shall prevail, and where the
plebiscite is employed solely to establish which side
of the issue involved can muster this majority and
where the resulting minority is assured of a fair
degree of local autonomy and the enjoyment of its
own language and religion.
"No state can, at the present time, from the point
of view of constitutional law recognize the right of
secession founded upon the, principle of self-determination. By doing so it would invite its own destruction.... "!V
I did not write that.
192. I shall now deal with breaches on the other side.
I am afraid I have arranged my time so badly that I
will have to rush through this. Therefore I shall only
itemize them. If we come back again I shall goo into the
details.
193. The first of the breaches on the part of Pakistan
is withholding information from the United Nations
that it was a combatant and that it was a party to the
invasion, and allOWing the United Nations to proceed
under Chapter VI of the Sha'!'ter, thinking an entirely
different set of circumt d.nces existed. In regard to
this, there are a number of observations by the United

191. Mattern, la meilleure autorite en matiere de
plebiscite, a ecrit:
"Le plebiscite ne peut etre utile que lorsque les
parties sont librement arrivees a une entente selon
laquelle une majorite determinee et approuvee doit
l'emporter, lorsque le plebiscite a seulement pour
objet d'etablir vers quel cote de la question penche
cette majorite, et lorsque la minorite est assuree
de jouir dans une mesure equitable d'une autonomie
locale ainsi que de la liberte de parler sa langue
et de pratiquer sa religion.

l§/ League of Nations, Minutes of the Twelfth Session of
the Council, Annex 163b, p. 101.
11/ See Sarah Wambaugh, Plebiscites since the World War
(Washington, D.C., Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, 1933), vol. I, p. 156.
W Ibid., p. 17.
ill Johannes Mattern, The Employment of the Plebiscite
in the Determination of Sovereignty (Baltimore, The J ohns
Hopkins Press, 1920), pp. 202 and 203.

189. A Teschen, en 1920, nous trouvons un exemple
de plebiscite qui a quelque rapport avec les circonstances actuelles. Lorsque la tension croit et que des
haines raciales s' enflamment, il n' est pas opportun
d' organiser un plebiscite 17 ~

"( ...) Aucun Etat, a l'heure actuelle, du point de
vue du droit constitutionnel, ne reconnait le droit de
secession fonde sur le principe du droit despeuples
a disposer d'eux-memes, car ce serait soliciter
sa propre destruction (... )lU"
Je souligne que je ne suis pas l'auteur de ce texte.
192. J'en viens maintenant aux violations commises
par l'autre partie. Je me contenterai d'en faire une
Lreve enumeration, car je crains de devoir etre tres
bref a, present. Le cas ecMant, j'y reviendrai plus
en detail.
193. La premiere violation commise par le Pakistan
est constituee par le fait que ce pays a cache a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies son role de combattant et sa qualite de partie a l'invasion, et qu'ill'a
laissee agir conformement au Chapitre VI de la Charte,
avec une idee fausse de la situation. A cet egard, la
Commission' des Nations Unies a presente un certain
l§/ S~ciete des Nations, Compte rendu de la douzieme

session du Conseil, Annexe 163b, p. 101.
'17/ Voir Sarah Wambaugh, Plebiscites since the World
War, Washington (D. C.), Dotation Carnegie pour la paix
internationale, edit., 1933, vol. I, p. 156.
l§/ Ibid., p. 17.
ill Johannes Mattern, The Employment of the Plebiscite
in the Determination of Sovereignty", Baltimore, The Johns
Hopkins Press, edit., 1920, p. 202 et 203.

Ji i i i i i!i!:l~i i i i i i_i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i 5i i4i i i i i i i i i i i i

'"

'

...

Nations Commission, to which I made reference in
my previous statement before the Council.

nombre d' observations auxquelles je me suis refere
dans une declaration anterieure devant le Conseil.

194. The next is with regard to non-withdrawal. By
withdrawal is meant the removal of striking capacity
in that area. It is not merely to put your foot on the
other side of the frontier. Withdrawal of an army is
the withdrawal of the striking capacity. Not only has
the Pakistan Army not withdrawn, but the changed
conditions in view of the imbalance of forces created
by rearmament is such that withdrawal has become
practically impossible.

194. La seconde violation concerne le non-retrait.
Par retrait, j'entends le retrait de tout potentiel
d'attaque dans la region. Il ne s'agit pas seulement
de mettre le pied de l'autre cote de la frontiere. Le
retrait d'une armee est le retrait de tous les elements du potentiel d'attaque. Non seulement l'armee
pakistanaise ne s'est pas retiree, mais la nouveUe
situation creee par le desequilibre des forces auquel
a abouti le rearmement est teUe que tout retrait est
devenu pratiquement impossible.

i
;1
11

·1

,~,~,:,
~.-

"

'<'

';

<

,.

;~}

t~~

~~

~1K
,,~~
~<t

..:

~

-; ?"

~

';'\'1
\. ,,\9
f-~'

,~

i- ~

_}

195. I have already referred to the violations of the
cease-fire agreement-the training of the "Azad"
Kashmir irregulars, the importation of arms and
the building of airfields for the taking off of fighter
jet planes. But the most important part, from a constitutional point of view, of this violation-and my
Government with great respect expresses its surprise that the Security Council has not given it attention-is the integration of the territory.

195. J'ai deja mentionne les violations de l'accord
de cessez-Ie-feu, la formaticn de bandes d'irreguliers
du Cachemire "azad" l'importation d'armes et la
construction d'aeroports pour le decoUage de chasseurs a reaction. Mais ce qu'il y a de plus important,
du point de vue constitutionnel, dans cette violation a laqueUe mon gouvernement s'etonne respectueusement que le Conseil de securite n'ait pas prete attention - c'est l'integration du Territoire.

196. Now, I have, in the last two, or two hours and
a half, analysed the documents paragraph by paragraph and have shown that Pakistan has no locu§
standi in this area at all, and that the only way
Pakistan came there was by force and by violation
of every moral law, of every political law, of every
international canon of behaviour. Therefore it had
no right whatsoever to incorporate the territory.
The Council took a very strong view in regard to the
Constituent Assembly, which had done nothing of this
kind, which is onh proceeding in pursuance of a
legal action. But wuat is on the other side?

196. En effet, depuis deux heures, ou deux heures et
demie, j'ai procede a l'analyse, paragraphe par paragraphe, des documents, montrant que le Pakistan ne
pouvait revendiquer aucun droit dans cette region, et
qu'il ne peut s'y etre etabli que par la force et en
vio~ation de toutes les lois morales et politiques des
divers codes d'usages internationaux. Par consequent,
il n'avait d'aucune maniere le droit d'incorporer ce
territoire. Le Conseil a exprime une opinion tres
vigoureuse a l'egard de l'Assemblee constituante,
qui n'avait rien fait de tel, et qui agit seulement en
suivant les voies legales. Mais queUe est la situation
de l'autre cote?

197. The distinguished Foreign Minister of Pakistan
asked at the last meeting: "Why has the Government
of India become suddenly exercised over Chitral?"
The reason is very simple. The Pakistan Constitution
was adopted only very recently. And it was only when
that constitutional act was passed that we raised this
(;)~~.t.itUtiOnal point. Article 1, clause (2), sub-clause

197. Le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan
a demande a la precedente s~ance "pourquoi le Gouvernement de l'Inde commenl;ait subitement a sepreoccuper du Chitral". La raison en est bien simple.
La Constitution du Pakistan n'a ete adoptee que tres
recemment, et ce n'est qu'au moment du vote que
nous avons souleve ce point constitutionnel. L'article
premier, paragraphe 2, alinea Q ...

1
~:I :::~ti:.o:::~~:::~:':0::: ::,:::::l::~
:.-::;.

'~:1?

198. Le PRESIDENT (traduitdel'anglais): Je regrette
de devoir interrompre le representant de l'Inde un
instant - simplement pour lui demander combien de
temps il lui faudra pour terminer son intervention.

198. The PRESIDENT: I am sorry I have to interrupt
,", for a moment, just to ask how much time the repre-

~ ~t

~, qr:~

199. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit del'anglais]:
Monsieur le President, je fais de mon mieux; si je
parlais plus vite, personne ne me comprendrait.
D'autre part, le Conseil de securite reconnaftra que
la presse du Royaume- Uni, des Etats- Unis, de la
France et d'autres pays, est tres mal informee de la
situation. Le Conseil de securite aadopte a sa 765eme
seance une resolution qui ne tient pas compte de certaines questions. Mon gouvernement a le devoir de
vous exposer ces faits. En effet, nous pensons qu'aucun
Etat Membre n'accepterait de prendre de decision sans
en examiner toutes les consequences et sans tenir
~ompte du passe, du present, et de l'avenir. C'est
pourquoi je suis tout dispose a m'arreter maintenant
et a poursuivre mon expose demain si le Conseille
desire. Mais je suis pret a continueI'. Onm'a demande
de terminer aujourd'hui.

beE~; if I spoke any faster nobody would understand

me. On the other hand, the Security Council appreeiates that the Press ofthe United Kingdom, the United
.•:.:;, , States, France and other countries is poorly informed
! about the situation. The Security Council passed a
resolution at its 765th meeting without taking into
1_
account some of these matters. My Government has
~
the dUty to lay these facts and record them before
you. We proceed on the basis that no Member State
would take any steps in these matters without considering what are all its implications-what is past,
what is present and what is ahead. That is why I
am quite prepared to stop and do it tomorrow if that
is the will of the Council. But I am quite prepared
() to go on. I have been conditioned to finish today.
;$'

55

I,

!
"J
"

i

200. The PRESIDENT: My only reason for a~king
the representative of India is that we have to find
out how we are going to proceed. I would like to know
if possible what the total time would be, because if
it is very long we would have to adjourn the meeting
until 8.30 this evening and then continue.

200. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La seule
raison pour laquelle j'ai pose cette questionaurepresentant de 1'Inde est que nous devons organiser la
suite de nos travaux. Je voudrais savoir, si possible,
de combien de temps il a besoin en tout, car s'illui
faut beaucoup de temps il nous faudrait renvoyer la
seance a ce soil', a 20 h. 30.

201. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): The incorporation
took place in the Pakistan Constitution and with
regard to Chitral...

201. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de1'anglais]:
L'incorporation du Chitral est consac ree par la Constitution du Pakistan. Or, en ce qui concerne le Chitral...

202. The PRESIDENT: I am sorry to interrupt. I did
not get the reply to my question. Will it be a very
long time?

202. Le PRESIDENT (traduitde1'anglais): Je regrette
de devoir interrompre l'orateur. Je n'ai pas rec;u de
reponse a ma question. De combien de temps le
representant de l'Inde a-t-il besoin?

203. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): I will try to finish
in half an hour but I can give no guarantee on that. I
am not trying to drag this out.

203. M. Krishna MENON (rnde) [traduit de l'anglais]:
J'essaierai de finir en une demi-heure, raais je ne
peux rien garantir. Je ne cherche pas a faire trainer
le debat.

204. The PRESIDENT: In that case I think the representative of India can proceed.

204. Le PRESIDENT (traduit tie .1'anglais): Dans ce
cas, je crois que le representant de l'Inde peut poursuivre.

205. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): The accession of
Chitral has been accepted by the Government ofPakistan and it is included in the arrangements in the
Constitution as a State that has acceded. Now Chitral
cannot accede under the terms of the Cabinet Mission Document or under the obligations of the British
Crown in the past, because its name does not appear
in the States that are entitled to accession either in
the 1935 Act or thereafter. We are up against timeI could read to you dozens of documents of British
residents, of L'1e Secretary of State for India in London,
where the suzerainty of the Maharaja of Kashmir over
Chitral is accepted by the British Government. And
what is more, the Maharaja received tribute from
Chitral which received subsidies from him. As for
Chitral the position is that it is part of Kashmir.

205. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit del'anglais]:
L'accession du Chitral a ete acceptee par le Gouvernement du Pakistan, et le Chitral figure dans les dispositions constitutionnelles comme Etat rattache au
Pakistan. Or, le Chitral ne peut faire 1'objet d'un
rattachement, que l' on se refere au document de la
mission du Cabinet ou aux obligations' contractees
autrefois par la Couronne britannique, car ilnefigure
pas au nombre des Etats qui, aux termes de la loi
de 1935 ou de lois posterieures, peuvent se rattacher
a d'autres Etats. Nous sommes malheureusement
limites par le temps, mais je jJourrais vous lire a
cet egard des dizaines de documents emanant des
residents britanniques et du Secretaire d'Etat pour
l'Inde a Londres, d'ou il ressort que le Gouvernement
britannique acceptait la suzerainete du maharajah du
Cachemire sur le Chitral. De plus, le maharajah
recevait un tribut du Chitral, a qui il donnait des
subsides. Quant au Chitral, il fait partie du Cachemire.

206. So the Pakistan Government, I do not know for
what reason, because it amalgamated the others in
other ways, received the accession from the Mehtar
of Chitral-the ruler of Chitral-which he had no
right to give because he was only a feudatory; he had
no right of accession. And it was incorporated in the
Pakistan Constitution.

206. Ainsi, le Gouvernement du Pakistan - j'ignore
pour quelle raison etant donne que les autres Etats
ont ete rattaches d'une maniere differente - a accepte
1'accession du Mehtar du Chitral, le chef de cet Etat,
qui n'avait pas le droit de la decider puisqu'il n'etait
qu'un vassal. Et cette accession est consacree par la
Constitution pakistanaise.

207. The matter came up before our Parliament and
we have stated the position. It is not as though we were
taking any effective steps to undo this business or to
violate the cease-fire agreements, but the incorporation of Chitral is against the resolution of 13 August
1948 and, what is more, a violation of the arrangements
reached when the British left India.

207. La question a lite discutee par notre Parlement
et nous avons defini notre position. Ce n'est pas que
nous prenions des mesures effectives pour defaire ce
qui a ete fait, ou pour violer l'accord de cessez-lefeu, mais le rattachement du Chitral est contraire a
la resolution du 13 aout 1948 et, qui plus est, il
constitue une violation des accords signes au moment
du depart des Britanniques.

208. I make reference to part I of the Constitution of
Pakistan and article 1, clause (2), sub-clause~) which
incorporates territories which are under the adminis.;.
tration of the Federation but are not included in either
province. That is to say, anything that is administered
by the Pakistan Government but is not one of the provinces becomes part of Pakistan. Now, the whole of
these occupied territories is administered by Pakistan

208. Je fais allusion a la premilhepartiedela Constitution pakistanaise, et plus particulierement a l'article premier, paragraphe 2, alinea ~, qui indique que
le territoire du Pakistan comprend les territoires qui
sont administres par la Federation, mais qui ne sont
compris dans aucune province. Autrement dit, tout
territoire qlli est administre par le Gouvernement
pakistanais mais qui n'est pas une provincefaitpartie
56

and so
Pakistan I

209. The
cease-fir
corporati
Baltistan,
Kashmir
side of th
ing of eith
in so far
which we
Council ha
over whic
Commissi
Pakistan
authoritie
tory of P

r

I
~

210. But
of these vi
are carri
va::ying te
is less. It
India, but
liberation
Pakistan 0
of every P
and Pakist
of Kashmir
211. The
Prime Mi
Day. "I a
said, and
The freedo
Qut Kashm'
acquire th
pute was n
asserted t
762/Add.1,
tention to
rest there.
the procedu
212. The
which he sa
"The c
cheered
rest until
he would
even if th

"So Ion
snatch Ka
lem is no
would be
lead to a
He also said
but will cer

_______J.,_.__

I

and so under article 1, clause (2), sub-clause (~),
Pakistan has illegally incorporated these territories.

du Pakistan. Comme ce pays administre l'ensemble
des territoires qu'il occupe, il les a rattaches illegalement en s'autorisant de l'article premier, paragraphe 2, alinea.£, de la Constitution.

209. Therefore, there has been a violation of the
cease-fire agreement, a non-withdrawal and the incorporation of these territories. This applies to Gilgit,
Baltistan, Hunza and Nagar, the whole of western
Kashmir and all those areas which are on the other
side of the cease-fire line. And therefore if the changing of either the status jure or anything else was wrong
in so far as the Constituent Assembly was concernedwhich we deny-here is a major sin. The Security
Council has been faced with this fact, that the territory
over which, under the resolutions of the United Nations
Commission, Pakistan had no right whatsoever, which
Pakistan was supposed to vacate, where only local
authorities can function, is incorporated in tl\e territory of Pakistan.

209. Par consequent, il y a eu violation de I'accord
de trEwe, non-retrait des troupes pakistanaises, et
inco.rporation de ces territoires. Il s'agit du Gilgit,
du Baltistan, de Hunza et Nagar, de l'ensemble du
Cachemire occidental et de toutes les regions situees
du cote pakistanais de la ligne du cessez-Ie-feu. Par
consequent, s'il y a eu, dans la mesure oil. I'AssembIee
constituante etait en cause, un changement injustifie
dans la situation juridique ou dans tout autre domaine ce que nous ne pensons pas - ce que nous avons ici
est une faute grave. Le Conseil de securite s'est
trouve devant ce fait que le territoire sur lequel, en
vertu des resolutions de la Commission des Nations
Unies, le Pakistan n'avait aucun droit, qU'il devait
evacuer, et que seules les autorites locales devaient
administrer, a ete incorpore au Pakistan.

210. But the most difficult and the most important
of these violations are in regard to the campaigns that
are carried on in Pakistan itself. Now, this has
va~'ying tempo, sometimes it is more, sometimes it
is less. It is not only aimed at the personalities of
India, but also against the whole of our country. "The
liberation of Kashmir," said the Governor-General of
Pakistan on 19 September 1956 "is a cardinal belief
of every Pakistani. It is an integral part of Pakistan,
and Pakistan would remain incomplete until the whole
of Kashmir is liberated."

210. Toutefois, les plus importantes de ces violations
ont trait aux campagnes qui sont menees au Pakistan.
Elles varient en intensitej elles sont tantot violentes,
tantot moderees. Elles ne visent pas seulement les
personalites indiennes, mais l'ensemble de l'Inde.
"Chaque Pakistanais, a dit le Gouverneur general du
Pakistan le 19 septembre 1956, croit fonci~rement cl
la liberation du Cachemire. Le Cachemire est partie
integrante du Pakistan, et le Pakistan ne sera pas
complet tant que le Cachemire ne sera pas enti~rement libere."
.

211. The "Times of Karachi" carried the Pakistan
Prime Minister's speech on the tenth Independence
Day. "I am ready for the liberation of Kashmir," he
said, and added: "but I want the people to get ready."
The freedom of Pakistan would not be complete without Kashmir, he asserted, and exhorted the people to
acquire the spirit of unity. He said the Kashmir dispute was now going before the Security Council, but
asserted that the nation would not rest there [S/PV.
762/Add.1, annex n, sect. 1]. I want to draw your attention to that phraseology: "The nation would not
rest there." So the Security Council is only part of
the procedures to carry out other designs.

211. A l'occasion du dixieme anniversaire de l'independance, le "Times of Karachi" a publie le discours
du Premier Ministre du Pakistan, qui a declare:
"Je suis pret a liberer le Car.hemire, mais je veux
que le peuple soit pret lui aussi." Le Premier Ministre a affirme que "la liberte du Pakistan ne serait
pas complete sans le Cachemire", et a exhorte la
population a s'unir. Il a ajoute que le differend sur
le Cachemire allait etre porte devant le Conseil de
securite, mais que son pays n'en resterait pas lcl
[S/PV.762/Add.l, annexe IT, sect. 1]. Je desire signaler ces paroles: "le pays n'enresteraitpaslcl." Ainsi,
le Conseil de securite n'estquel'unedesvoies suivies
par le Pakistan pour realiser d'autres desseins.

212. The Prime Minister made another speech in
which he said the following:

212. Le Premier Ministre a fait un autre discours
dans lequel il a dit:

"The crowd listened to the Prime Minister and
cheered him when he declared that he would not
rest until the Kashmir Moslems were freed and that
he would not allow his cOin,' rymen to become slaves,
even if they were to live witnout food or clothing."

"La foule a ecoute le Premier Ministre et a applaudi lorsqu'il a declare qu'il n'aurait pas de repos
tant que les musulmans du Cachemire ne seraient
pas liberes, et qU'il ne permettrait pas que ses
concitoyens deviennent des esclaves, meme s'Us
devaient vivre sans nourriture et sans vetements."

213. The Governor of West Punjab said:

:onsl'are que
lsqui
sont
tout
'ffient
lartie

'

213. Le Gouverneur du Pendjab occidental a declare
de son cote:

"So long as a single Pakistani is alive, nobody dare
snatch Kashmir from Pakistan by force ... If the problem is not settled immediately, the whole of Asia
would be engulfed in the flames of war which might
lead to a world conflagration."[Ibid.]

"T~nt qu'un seul Pakistanais sera en vie, personne ne pourra arracher le Cachemire au Pakistan
par la force (...). Si le probleme n' est pas immediatement regIe, toute l' Asie sera plongee dans les
flammes d'une guerre qui pourrait conduire a un
conflit mondial." [Ibid.]

He also said: "We would not mind being cut into pieces
but will certainly conquer Kashmir." Here is another

Il a ajoute: "Le Cachemire sera conquis, dussions-

-l..__

nous etre mis en morceaux." Et voici une autre de57

statement he made immediately afterwards: "We will
have to exhibit our strength if we want to take Kashmir" [ibid].

cIaration qui a ~t~ faite aussit6t apr~s: "Si nous
voulons prendre le Cachemire, nous devrons d~mon­
trer notre force" [ibid.].

214. The Chief Minister of the Northwest Frontier
Province said:
" ... not only the entire Pathan population" -these
are the people from whom the hordes came before"o~ Pakistan and the tribal areas will rise up for the
holy Jehad"-the holy crusade-"in Kashmir, but our
b!'others from across the Afghan frontier will also
throw in their lot with us for the cause". [Ibid.]

214. Le Premier Ministre de la province fronti~re
du Nord-Ouest a declar~:
"( ...) ce ne sera passeulementlapopulationpathan
tout enti~re [il s'agit de la population dont sont
venues autrefois les hordes 1. ce ne sera pas seulement les tribus de toute cette r~gion qui r~pondront
a l'appel de la guerre sainte pour le Cachemire,
mais egalement nos freres habitant de l'autre c6t~
de la frontiere afghane qui feront cause commune
avec nous". [Ibid.]
Si ce n'est pas hl une incitation a. la guerre contre
notre pays, je me demaT'de ce que c' est.

If that is not an incitement to war against our country,

I should like to know what is.
215. I shall not read in full the statements of important persons and religious leaders but I shall refer
to them, Here is a statement by one of the most important leaders: "Today Pakistan is standing on the verge
of war and sooner or later she will have to go to war
against Indi2," [ibid.].

215. Je ne vous donnerai pas lecture de toutes les
declarations des personnalites et des chefs religieux,
mais je vais cependant en faire mention. Voici celle
de l'un des chefs les plus importants: "Aujourd'hui,
le ~akistan se trouve sur le penchant de la guerre,
et, tot ou tard, ildevraentreren guerre contre l'Inde"
[ibid. ].

216. There are other newspaper articles, but Idonot
propose to read them, Since the Security Council passed
its resolution, there have been considerable demonstrations in Pakistan, and t.he whole tenor of these is
the conquest of India, that is to say, the leading of
armies into our territory; and there is the exhortation
to the people to carry on this campaign. It says that
it means fear of God, financial sacrifices by every
individual, whether trader, master or clerk, getting
together and making a firm resolve to unite the nation.
This is one of those'things on which India has definitely
given its pledge, and no responsible person in India
would ever say a thing like that. It urges purification
of the heart and feelings of unity, Everyone should be
overflowing with excitement and make it a point to
assemble at fixed places in their respective towns. In
all these public meetings Pandit Nehru would be asked
to hand over Kashmir by a given date and give up forthwith the ann~hilation of Indian Moslems and enmity towards Pakistan, "failing which batches of ten lakhs,
[meaning a million] would march towards Amritsar
and Patna".

216. n y a d'autres arti~les de journaux, mais je
n'ai pas l'intention de les lire. Depuis que le Conseil
de securite a adopte sa resolution, d'importantes
manifestations ont eu lieu au Pakistan, et tout le
theme en est la conquete de l'Inde, c'est-a.-dire la
penetration d' armees sur notre territoire, et l' on
exhorte le peuple a soutenir cette campagne. On
demande a tous de craindre Dieu, cl chaque individu,
commer<;ant, patron ou employe, de consentir des
sacrifices financiers, de se grouper et de prendre la
decision inebranlable d'unifier la nation. Ce sont des
choses sur lesquelles l'Inde a pris une attitude definitive, et aucune personnalite ayant en Inde une situation importante ne se permettrait de dire de telles
paroles. La campagne recommande la purification du
coour et les sentiments d'unite. n faut que chacun
deborde d' enthousiasme et se fasse un devoir de se
rendre a des points de rassemblement determines
dans la ville qu'll habite. Dans toutes ces reunions
publiques, On demande aupandit Nehru d'abandonner le
Cachemire a. une certaine date et de renoncer sur-lechamp a la destruction des Indiens musulmans et a.
l'hostilite envers le Pakistan, "faute de quoi des
groupes de dix lakhs [c' est-a.-dire 1 million d' hommes]
marcheraient sur Amritsar et Patna".
217. Voici quelques-uns de leurs mots d'ordre, dont
l'authenticite est officiellement etablie. Bs sontd'inspiration gouvernementale: ils proviennent de manifestants· qui sont re<;us par le Premier Ministre: celuici leur a parle. Je ne lis pas l'hindoustani, mais je
lirai les traductions. Voici une serie d'inscriptions:
"Si Nehru disparaissait, ce serait la fin du Congr~s, et la prise de l'Inde deviendrait certaine."

217. These are some of the slogans, which are officially based. They are sponsored, because these demonstrators are received by the Prime Minister; he spoke
to them. I cannot read the Hindustani, but I shall read
the translations. Here are some of the slogans:

~'

l

"If Nehru is finished, that would be the end of
Congress, and the capture of India would become
certain. "
"Ten lakhs should get prepared for the march
towards Amritsar. "
"India shall be conquered in 1957 only if every
person gives up falsehood and fraud." -That was a
good idea.

i.• •......
.:,..

.

"Dix lakhs doivent se prepareI' ;1 marcher sur
Amritsar."
'''L'Inde ne sera vaincue en 1957 que si chacun
renonce a. la faussete et a. la fraude." - C'etait la.
une bonne idee.
"Nous pourrions vaincre l'Inde si chacun consentait

"If every person would make some sacrifice,
India would be conquered."

a. quelques sacrifices."

c,

,,:

;

58

"Ind
years
"Ge
"Le
be ca
"Gi

These a

"We
be con

Then the
they me

'i
I:,

Shah R
would c
conquer

,

"Ful
be con

"

1

"Do
India i

"Sett
conque
"Obs
if Indi

,
I

I>

219. No
the Secu
this. In
to imple
we joine
view that
selves to
mit, wro
quote to
I refer t
one sente

"In d'
shall ac
ciples

"... an
confor
national
;~

r)
I

220. I su
law that I
of justice
of India
equality t
with near
Ourselves
Possible_
people hav

__1.__
1

nouS

mon-

tiere

athan
sont
eule1dront
mire,
e cote
mune

lais je
:onseil
:tantes
tout le
lire la
et l'on
le. On
dividu,
:ir des
ldre la
mt des
lde de! situatelles
tion du
chacun
r de se
rmines
\unions
nner le
mr-lens et a
.oi des
,mmes]

I

"

!
.,I

~
i

b

td'insanifes: celuimais je
tions:
lu Con-

ler sur
chacun
~tait III
lsentait

"Get united. Get righteous. India will be conquered. "

"Unissez-vous. Pratiquez la justice. L'lnde sera
vaincue. "

"Leave all the parties and turn Moslem. India will
be captured."

"Quittez tous les partis et deveilez musulmans.
L'lnde sera prise."

"Give up all rivalries. India will be conquered."

"Renoncez II toutes rivaliMs. L'lnde sera vaincue."
Tous cas mots d'ordre constituaient autant d'affiches
diff~rentes.

'e, dont

le."

"Au bout de ces 10 ans de souffrances, la d~faite
de l'lnde est in~vitable. Pr~parez-vous."

These are all different posters.

contre

es les
gieux,
celle
o'hui,
uerre,
'Inde"

"India is bound to be conquered after these ten
years of sufferings. Get ready."

"Weigh correctly. Make an honest living. India will
be conquered."

"Servez-vous de poids loyaux. Gagnez honnetement votre vip.. L'lnde sera vaincue."

Then there is another thing: salutations to every person
they meet, "India will be conquered."

Il y a encore autre chose: on salue tous ceux que 1'0n
rencontre en disant: "L'lnde sera vaincue."

Shah Rahmatullah Wall predicted that Moslems in 1957
would conquer India. "Therefore, march. Once India is
conquered all ailments will end. "

Shah Rahmatullah Wali a prMit qu'en 1957 les musulmans conquerraient I'Inde. "Done, en avant. Une fois
1'Inde vaincue, nous verrons la fin de tous nos maux."

"Fulfil your promises. Don't tell lies. India will
be conquered. "

"Tenez vos promesses. Ne mentez pas. L'lnde
sera vaincue."

"Do away with all your enmities during 1957, if
India is to be conquered."

"Oubliez toutes vos inimitMs en 1957, si l'Inde
doit etre vaincue."

"Settle all your mutual affai:.:s. India will be
conquered. "
"Observe complete 'Hartal' on date announced,
if India is to be conquered."

"R~glez tous vos diff~rends. L'lnde sera vaincue."

218. I have quoted only some of these. There a:re
some w':1ich it would not be aesthetic to read in the
Security Council. So this vast campaign of religious
hatred and fanaticism is fanned. That is the position.

218. Je n'ai cit~ que quelques-uns de ces mots
d'ordre. Il en est qu'on ne saurait lire au Conseil de
securit~ sans braver l'honnetete. C'est ainsi que 1'0n
attise le feu de cette vaste campagne de haine religieuse et de fanatisme. Voilll 011 nous en sommes.

219. Now I think it is necessary for me to state to
the Security Council the position arising from all
this. In order to obtain an end of the aggression and
to implement the complaint -on which we came here,
we joined in every endeavour that was possible. The
view that is taken with facility that we committed ourselves to something without pre-conditions is, I submit, wrong. It is not only wrong, but I should like to
quote to you the appropriate provisions ofthe Charter.
I refer to Article 24, paragraph 2. I shall read only
one sentence:

219. Je crois maintenant n~cessaire d'indiquer au
Conseil de s~curite la position qui resulte de tout cela.
En vue d'obtenir la fin de l'agression et pour qU'il
soit donne suite II la plainte que nous avons deposee
ici, nous nous sommes associ~s autant que possible
II tous les efforts qui ont et~ faits. L'idee que 1'0n se
fait volontiers, que nous nous ~tions engag~s llquelque
chose sans conditions pr~alables, est, a mon aViS,
tout II fait fausse. Non seulement cette opinion est
erron~e, mais je voudrais vous citer les dispositions
correspondantes de la Charte. Il s'agit du paragraphe
2 de l'Article 24. Je n'en lirai qu'une seule phrase:

"In discharging these duties the Security Council
shall act in accordance with the Purposes and P rinciples of the United Nations."

"Dans l'accomplissement de ces devoirs, le Conseil de s~curit~ agit conformement aux buts et
principes des Nations Unies."

The Purposes and Principles of the United Nations are,
as far as is relevant to this, set out here, and this
is the important part:

Dans les buts et principes des Nations Unies, tels
qu'ils sont expos~s, les mots les plus importants pour
la question qui nous occupe sont les suivants:

"... and to bring about by peaceful means, and in
conformity with the principles of justice and international law... ".

t)
i

"Observez scrupuleusement le "Hartal" llla date
fixee si vous voulez conqu~rir I'lnde."

"Et

par des moyens pacifiques, conprincipes de la justice et du droit

internationaL .. "

220. I submit that the considerations of international
law that I have pointed out to you, the considerations
of justice that I have pointed out to you, the desire
of India to live as a democratic community giVing
equality to our peoples to enable a large democracy
With nearly 200 million voters to demonstrate to
Ourselves and to the world that that way of life is
Possible-that is one of the treasured objectives our
people have.

220. Les

consid~rations de

droit international, les
justice que j'ai cit~es devant vous,
le d~sir de l'lnde de vivre en tant que communaut~
democratique accordant l'~galit~ ll. toutes les populations qui la composent pour permettre II une vaste
d~mocratie comptant pr~s de 200 millions de votants
de prouver a nous-memes et au monde que ce mode
de vie est possible - tel est, je le declare, l'un des
objectifs les plus chers de notre peuple.
consid~rations de

·59

___-1-

r~aliser,

form~ment aux

221. Therefore, the further article in the Charter,
referring to this particular matter, which is binding
upon our friends opposite, is Article 2, paragraph 4:
"All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations."
222. I am directed by my Government to say that it
has been sometimes said, perhaps with a feeling of
apprehension, that the peoples of India and its Government have not reconciled themselves to the idea of
partition and the existence of Pakistan. I tell this
Council what we have told all the world: that we have
no desire whatsoever to undo the partition. It is the
price we paid for our independence. We did not like it.
Nobody likes his country to be cut into pieces. But it
was better than civil conflict at that time. It was an
agreement we entered into among three parties, and
that agreement we shall honour. We have no desire to
reunite India as before partition. In fact, we have
enough problems of our own. We have enough headaches
and difficulties, and we do not want to take on more.

223. So I want to make this solemn statement that
any propaganda, any statement, any fear, any apprehension, any suspicion that exists in anyone's mind,
that my country, my Government, or our people have
anything but the desire to live in peace with our neighbours does not correspond with the truth.
224. We have come to so many agreements withPakistan on various matters. They are suffering; we are
suffering. We have families that live on the two sides.
We have lost a lot of territory in the sense of the constitution of our State but we are getting the people.
There is no responsible person in India-never mind
the political parties-there is no responsible body of
opinion that wants to venture on an act of hostility. I
ask you to read the Indian Press and the statements of
Indian leaders and compare them with what! have said
about the other side. I confess that there have been one
or two student demonstrations.

225. Our leaders have done everything they can to
persuade our people, and successfully persuade themwe are a free country, and we cannot stop them-not
to indulge in expressions of hatred either toward
Pakistan or toward the United Kingdom or toward
anybody else they may think is involved in this matter.
But the main thing is this: We have no desire to undo
the partition. We do not regard that as a pro tem affair.
We agreed to it with our eyes open. We knew the consequences. We have suffered economically, politically
and culturally. We have created problems for ourselves. But, if we were now to try to do anything, those
problems would become worse.

221. En cons~quence, l'autre article de la Charte
qui a trait :l ce cas particulier et qui lie nos amis,
d'en face, est l'Article 2, paragraphe 4.
tiLes Membres de l'Organisation s'abstiennent,
dans leurs relations internationales, de rE:courir :l
la menace ou :l l'emploi de la force, soit contre
1'int~grit~ territoriale ou l'ind~pendance politique
de tout Etat, soit de toute autre manH~re incompatible
avec les buts des Nations Unies."
222. Mon gouvernement m'a charg~ de direquel'ona
parfois d~clar~, peut-etre avec un sentimentd'appr~­
hension, que les populations de 1'Inde et son gouvernement n'ont pas accept~ l'id~e du partage etl'existence
du Pakistan. Je r~pMe au Conseil ce que nous avons
dit au monde entier: nous n' avons pas le moindre d~sir
de revenir sur le partage. C'est le prix que ilOUS
aVOilS pay~ pour notre ind~pendance.U ne nous plaisait
pas: personne n'aime voir morceler son pays. Mais,
:l l'6poque, cela valait mieux qu'un conflit intl§rieur.
C '~tait un accord qUi a ~tl§ conclu entre trois parties,
et cet accord, nous le respecterons. Nous n'avons
aucun d~sir de reconstituer l'lnde telle qu'elle se
pr~sentait avai,t le partage. En fait, nous avons, de
notre c6t~, suffisamment de probl~mes :l resoudre.
Nous avons assez de soucis et de difficultes, et nous
ne souhaitons pas en avoir davantage.
223. Je tiens donc a d~clarer de fagon solennelle
que toute propagande, toute d~clarationet toute crainte,
toute appr~hension, tout soupgon pouvant exister dans
l'esprit de qui que ce soit, selon lesquels mon pays,
mon gouvernement, ou notre population ~prouventautre
chose que le desir de vivre en paix avec nos voisins
ne correspondent nullement :l la v~rit~.

State
Wc

,,-

227.
relat
groun
natio
resol
have t
spirit
the w
drawn
assur
honou
certai
State
part 0

224. Nous avons conclu avec le Pakistan de nombreux
accords sur des q1J.:Jstions de toutes sortes. Us souffrent; nous souffrons. Nous avons des familIes qui
vi vent des deux c6t~s de la fronti~re. Nous avons perdu
un territoire ~tendu lors de la formation de notre
Etat, mais nous avons acquis un peuple. U n'y a dans
l'lnde aucune personnalit~ importante - que 1 que soit
le parti politique auquel elle appartienne - aucune
fraction organis~e de l'opinion, qui souhaite entreprendre un acte d'hostilit~. Je vous demande de lire
la presse indienne et les d~clarations faites par les
dirigeants de notre pays, et de les comparer a ce que
j 'ai rapport~ sur les d~clarations faites dans l'autre
camp. J'admets que deux ou trois manifestations
d'~tudiants SC! sont produites chez nous.
225. Nos dirigeants ont tout fait pour persuader notre
peuple - nous sommes un pays libre, et nous ne
pouvons l'en empecher par la force - de ne pas exprimer sa haine a l'~gard du Pakistan, du Royaume-Uni
ou de qui que ce soit d'autre qui, d'apr~s lui, serait
impliqu~ dans cette affaire. Le point essentiel est le
suivant: nous ne d~sirons nullement revenir sur le
partage. Nous ne le consi 1erons pas comme quelque
chose de provisoire. Nous l'avons accept~ les yeux
ouverts. Nous en connaissions les cons~quences.Nous
en avons 130uffert sur les plans de l'~conomie, de la
politique et de la culture. De nouveaux probl~mes se
sont pos~s :l nous. Cependant, si nous essayions
maintenant de faire quoi que ce soit, ces probl~mes
iraient en s'aggravant.

not i
elect
them
in p
to us
look
publi
cont
to th
bility
what
obUg
ever
hatre
thing
entir

228.
our s
and th
nels, t
to exe
this
229.
any G
you. y

want.
tains
permit
it is a
tourist
Where,
backwa
230. I

~
I

I

~~~~~

a half
of lan
Govflrn
Louisi
rights
Alaska

j .~.~.~.' o.n.rl.~.c.~.~.nw.iZ.e .r.e.~.~.g.i:.ita.Z.;.i.t.,S.b.:.t_~_to_r_:_:_e_~_~n_v_eS_rt_:_itgr_e_~_6_0_;_~_~_~_e_:_aO_i~_~_N_~e_nC_~_~_~_~_~_~_S_~_~_tS_n_;_:_s_i_eak_r_~_~_~_a:_n_a_~_~_~_:_s_~_m_E_:_~s_1~~:~~
e

.n.:.t.

!

la Charte

~ nos amis,

.b stienne nt,
rE:cQurir a
soit contre
e politiq ue
compa tible

:eque l'ona
ntd'app rl§Igouve rnel'existe nce
nous avons
lndre d~sir
x que nous
JUS plaisai t
lays. Mais,

~.,

state. We recogn ize all its attribu tes of sovere ignty.
Wc have no desire to interfe re in its affairs . We are
not interes ted in its form of govern ment. It can have
electio ns, if it wants them- and it does not have to have
them, if it does not want them. We only want to be left
in peace. We will not at any time yield to provoc ation
to use force. But if our territo ry is violate d, we shall
look to the Securi ty Counci l, to the Charte r, to the
public opinion of the world. And my country has given
continuous eviden ce, tangibl e eviden ce, of its loyalty
to the Charte r, of its willing ness to take on respon sibility, of its readin ess to take on unpopu lar roles in
what it consid ers its duty in regard to interna tional
obligations. And therefo re any sugges tion, from whatever quarte r it may coma, that India nurses some
hatred, that Kashm ir is a jumpin g-off ground for something else or part of a score that is not settled , is
entirely unhisto rical.

c'est un Etat souver ain. Nous lui reconn aisson s tous
les attribu ts de la souverainet~. Nous ne d~sirons
nullem ent interve nir dans ses affaire s. Nous ne nous
pr~occ upons pas de la forme de son gouver
nemen
n peut organi ser des ~lections, s'il le d~sire; il peutt.
n'en pas organi ser s'il n'en veut pas. Nous voulon s
seulem ent vivre en paix. Nous ne c~derons jamais
aux provoc ations a recour ir a l'usage de la force.
Toutef ois, si notre territo ire est vioM, nous en appellero ns au Consei l de s~curit~, a la Charte , et a.
l'opini on publiqu e mondia le. Monpa ys a toujou rs donn~
des preuve s tangib les de sa fid~lit~ a. la Chart~, de
son d~sir d'assu mer des responsabilit~s, de son empresse ment a accept er des roles ingrats lorsqu 'il
consid ~re que tel est son devoir en vertu de
ses obligations interna tionale s. C'est pourqu oi toute d~clara­
tion, d'011 qu'elle ~mane, selon laquell e PInde entretiendra it des haines ou n'enten drait se servir du
Cache mire que comme d'un trempl inen ayantd 'autres
visees ou pour un but plus import ant, est absolu ment
contra ire a la realite .

227. I want particu larly those who have been closely
related to us in the past, who know some of the background, to bear thj s in mind. India will honour its international obligat ions. The only obligat ions are the two
resolut ions of the Comm ission. Those two resolut iuns
have to be judged in the lightof the words in them, the
spirit in them- I do not say we will be going beyond
the words or what they intend -which can be reason ably
drawn from the printed words of the time and the
assuran ces given as solemn undert akings . And we shall
honour our undert akings . But time has passed and
certain things have happen ed. Our positio n is that the
State of Jammu and Kashm ir is Indian territo ry; it is
part of the Indian Union.

227. Je voudra is en particu lier que tous ceux qui,
par le passl§, ont eu avec nous d'~troites relatio ns
et sont au couran t des faits, prenne nt note de cecL
L'Inde fera honneu r a ses obligat ions interna tionale s.
Ses seules obligat ions sont celles qui resulte nt des
deux rl§solutions de la Comm ission que j'ai citees.
Celles -ci doiven t etre consid~rees dans leur lettre
comme dans leur esprit - je ne veux pas dire que
nous irons au-del a de la lettre ou de l'intenU on des
auteur s, mais il faut tenir compte de l'espri t, qui
peut etre raisonn ableme nt deduit du contex te comme
des assura nces donnee s solenn elleme nt. Nous ferons
honneu r a nos engage ments. Mais le temps a passe
et certain s evenem ents se sont produi ts. Nous estimons que l'Etat de Jammu et Cache mire est un territoire indien; il fait partie de l'Union indienn e .
228. Nous somme s venus presen ter une plainte pour
ag ·:lssion. A notre avis, 11 est du devoir du Conse il
de securi te et des Etats Memb res d'exer cer leur influence , par la voie diplom atique, par l'action collective ou individ uelle, de mani~re a mettre fin a cette
agress ion.

t int~rieur.

lis parties ,
us n'avon s
qu'elle se
j avons, de
resoud re.
~s, et nous

I\
If

solenn elle
Ilte crainte ,
dster dans
mon pays,
uvent autre
10S voisins

I

enomb reux
s. Ils souftmilles qui
.vons perdu
'il de notre
. n'y a clans
lel que soit
- aucune
aite entre.nde de lire
tes par les
er a ce que
ans Pautre
ifestati ons

Iladern otre
et nouS ne
pas expriyaume-Uni
lui, serait
ntiel est le
mir sur le
me quelque
~ les yeux
mces.N ous
mile, de la
Jbl~mes se
essayio ns

228. We came here with a compla int of aggres sion. In
our submis sion, it is the duty of the Securi ty Counci l
and the duty of Memb er States thrflugh diplom atic channels, throug h co-ope rative action or individ ual action,
to exerci se their influen ce in order to put an end to
this aggres sion.
229. My Govern ment invites the repres entativ e of
any Govern ment to go into Kashm ir. No one will stop
you. You can go anywh ere you like-a sk anybody you
want. We have neithe r silk curtain s nor bamboo curtains nor anythin g of that kind. You have to obtain
permits and pay for your living. But, apart from that,
it is an open countr y, which is visited by thousa nds of
tourists includi ng foreign journa lists. It is a territo ry
Where, for a long, long, long time, there has been
backwardness.

~
I
I

probl~ mes

Jmme 'Etat
isons, mais

1"

230. It is no argum ent on the part of my Pakist an
colleague to come and tell us that the Mahar aja of
Kashmir paid the British Gover nment -what was it?a half million pounds , and therefo re bought this piece
of land. I ask Mr. Lodge whethe r the United States
Govprnment would be willing to take that view about
Louisiana and return it to France , or to abdica te its
rights over Florid a and return it to Spain, or over
Alaska and return it to Russia , or over Rhode Island
and return it to whome ver it belong ed to. Purcha ses
have been made in the past-a nd, if there has been any
. 61

_L

229. Mon gouver nemen t invite le repr~sentant de
quelque gouver nemen t que ce soit a. se rendre au
Cache mire. Person ne ne vous arrete ra. Vous pourre z
aller ail il vous plaira, questio nner qui vous voudre z.
Nous n'avon s ni rideau de soie ni rideau de bambou,
ni rien de ce genre. Il suffit d'obten ir les autoris ations hab;~.lelles et de pouvoi r subven ir a. ses frais.
A part cela, c'est un pays ouvert , 011 se renden t des
miUie rs de tourist es, y compr is des journa listes
etrang ers. C 'est un territo ire qui, pendan t bien longtemps, a tr~s peu ~volue.
230. Il n'est pas s~rieux de la part de mon coll~gue
pakista nais de venir nous dire que le mahar ajah de
Cache mire a vers~ au Gouve rnemen t britann ique quelle ~tait la somme exacte ? - un demi-m illion de
libres pour acquer ir ce territo ire. Je deman de a.
M. Lodge si le Gouve rnemen t des Etats-U nis serait
dispos e a adopte r sembla ble attitud e a. propos de la
Louisi ane et la rendre a la France , a abando nner ses
droits sur la Florid e pour la rendre a l'Espag ne, ou
renonc er a. l'Alask a pour le rendre a la Russie ou
a l'Etat de Rhode -Island pour le rendre a qui il ,ap-

immorality about the purchase, we were not the rulers
at that time. Her Britan..'1ic Majesty, Queen Victoria,
held the responsibility. And we are not shirking the
responsibility, because we are her successors in title.
So whateVer has happened there has happened when
Pakistan and we were one country-and we cannot now
separate the sheep from the goats.

partenait auparavant. Des achats ant eu lieu autrefois
et, s'ils ont ~t~ entach~s de quelque immoram~, nous
n'~tions pas les dirigeants a. cette ~poque. Sa Majest~
britannique la reine Victoria en porte la responsabilit~.
Nous ne cherchons pas a. rejeter les responsabilit~s,
car nous sommes ses successeurs en titre. Ainsi,
quels que soient les ~v~nements survenus, ils se sont
produits lorsque le Pakistan et l'Inde ne formaient
qu'un seul pays - et nous ne pouvons maintenant
s~parer les brebis d'avec les boucs.

231. I submit the views of. the Government of India
to the Security Council in the firm belief that, above
all things, it has to be remembered that there is
prosperity in the land of Kashmir. I have not been able
to read the various commentators-Scandinavians, who
are traditionally neutrals, have been out in our country
and have seen these things-but there is peace and
prosperity, there is development of democratic institutions among a people who have been steeped in ignorance and backwardness for gene~ationa and have had
no industries, no development of water power, no
exercise of the franchise. That has been done in association with a country where not only are there 200
million people entitled to exercise their franchise but
where, over and above that-in our land ofIndia-there
are probably 200,000 bodies where people exercise
power in that way, where every single person, from
the President to the lowest Village official, is elected.

231. Je pr~sente au Conseil de s~curite le point de
vue du Gouvernement de l'Inde dans la ferme :::onviction que, par-dessus tout, il convient de rappeler que
le Cachemire est un pays prosp~re. n ne m'a pas ~t~
possible de donner lecture des commentaires de divers
auteurs - des Scandinaves, neutres par traditic,n,
qui sont venus chez nous et ont vu toutes ces choses mais la paix et la prosp~rit~ r~gnent, les institutions d~mocratiques florissent au sein d'une population
qui vivait dans l'ignorance et la pauvret~ depuis des
g~n~rations, qt:i n'avait aucune industrie, oft l'~nergie
hydraulique n'~tait pas exploit~e, oft le droit de vote
~tait inconnu. Cette ceuvre a ~t~ accomplie en collaboration avec un pays - le notre, l'Inde - oft non
seulement 200 millions de personnes peuvent exercer
leur droit de vote mais oft, en outre, il y a environ
200.000 organismes au moyen desc:uels le peuple peut
ainsi exercer son pouvoir, oft toute personne investie
d'une autorit~ quelconque, duPr~sidentauplushumble
fonctionnaire municipal, est ~lue.

232. Any unsettlement can only be based on the appeal
to non- secularity; it can only be based on this appeal
to religious prejudice. The only "claim" that can be put
forward on behalf of the Pakistan Government, in
regard to Kashmir, is that the majority of its population is Moslem. And my Government-totally, for all
time-repudiates what is called the two-nation theory.
We will not accept as the basis of our State the religion
of a people. The United Nations is a secular organization. The majority of you would not discriminate
against a Catholic or a Protestant because such a
person happened to be in the minority. Buthere is the
Constitution of Pakistan, wnich says that, if a man does
not belong to the Islamic religion, he ca.nnot be the
President of the State. (I inVite you to read an article
by Mr. Sulzberger, of the "New York Times", a paper
that is consistently hostile to us on every question-an
article which refers to the position that there will be
no democracy in Pakistan. I am not quoting him as an
authority; I am quoting him as a friend of theirs. So
there it is.)

On ne pourra troubler l'ordre ~tabli qu'en se
la neutralit~ en mati~re de religion,
qu'en faisant appel aux passions religieuses. La seule
"justification" qu'on puisse donner des revendications
pr~sent~es par le Gouvernement du Pakistan au sUjet
du Cachemire est que la population de cet Etat est
musulmane en majorit~. Or, mongouvernementrejette - absolument et a. jamais - ce qu'on appelle la
th~orie des deux nations. Nous refusons d'admettre
que la religion d'un peuple soit la base de notre Etat.
L'Organisation des Nations Unies est une organisation
lafque. La majorit~ d'entre vous refuseraient de
prendre des mesures discriminatoires contre un
catholique ou un protestant parce qu'il se trouverait
appartenir :l une minorit~. Mais la Constitution du
Pakistan pr~voit, elle, qu'un homme ne peut devenir
pr~sident de l'Etat s'il n'appartient pas a. la religion
islamique. (Je vous sugg~re de lire un article de
M. Sulzberger, parudans le "New York Times", organe
qui n'a cess~ de nous t~moigner son hostilit~ a. taus
propos. L'article en question parle de la th~se suivant
laquelle il n'y aura pas de d~mocratie au Pakistan.
Je ne cite pas M. Sulzberger comme une autorit~; je
le cite en tant qu'ami de la partie adverse. A vous de
juger,)

233. Whatever there may be of right or wrong in a
problem, if there are difficulties in a situation-and I
repeat: a situation-it is necessary to find means of
settlement.

233. QueUe que puisse etre la part du juste et de
l'injuste dans un probl~me, si la situation pr~sente
des difficult~s - et je dis bien: la situation - il faut
trouver un moyen de r~glement.

234. I ask the PreSident and the members of the
Security Council whether, in the ten years that my
country has been represented here, it has been found
wanting in attempts to reach these solutions. Can the
Government of Pakistan tell us that, in very complicated matters of other kinds, we have not gone through

234. Je demande au Pr~sident et aux membres du
Conseil de s~curit~ si, au cours des 10 ann~es 'oft man
pays a ~t~ repr~sent~ ici, on l'a jamais vu se d~rober
lorsqu'il s'est agi d'essayer d'arriver a. une solution.
Le Gouvernement du Pakistan peut-il nous dire si,
dans d'autres questions tr~s d~licates et fort diffl'§-

232.

d~partissant de

62

237
Can
bey
onl
res
pro
leg
the
sev
r

mil
in t

eve
if y

thin

I

I

prin
lar
to 0
our
to P
Who

Can

r ,;,;i!".~

eu autrefois
oralit~, nous
. Sa Majest~

,~

t!
r

sponsabilit~.

ponsabilitEis,
titre. Ainsi,
S, ils se sont
ne formaient
S maintenant

te le point de
erme :::onvicrappeler que
e m'a pas EitEi
res de divers
?ar traditic,n,
ces choses , les institume population
tEi depuis des

, oill'~nergie

droit. de vote
pUe en collande - OU non
llvent exercer
il y a environ
Le peuple peut
jonne investie
tu plus humble

r
I

.abli qu'en se
e de religion,
Ises. La seule
'evendications
:istan au sujet
~ cet Etat est
'nement rejetl'on appelle la
IS d'admettre
de notre Etat.
e organisation
fuseraient de
es contre un
se trouverait
onstitution du
~ peut devenir
s a. la religion
un article de
imes",organe
ostilit~ a. tous
:I. th~se suivant
~ au Pakistan.
t1e autorit~; je
'se. A vous de
:Iu juste et de
ttion pr~sente
ation - il faut

r

membres du
tnn~es 'ou mon

vu se d~rober
l une solution.
nous dire si,
et fort diffEi-

I

I

.
·1

a great deal of negotiation and settlement along with
it, and that we have not bent over backward to find
settlements? We are in the United Nations with a
record that is clean.

rentes, nous ll' avons pas engag~ avec lui de nombreuses
n~gociations et r~gM de nombreux litiges et si, pour
arriver a. un accord, nous avons jamais refus~ d'adopter une attitude conciliante? Aux Nations Unies, notre
pass~ est sans tache.

235. On the other hand, there is the crime of invasion-and that is a crime that cannot be tolerated.
We have not asked that anybody be branded an aggressor. Why? It may be a mistake on our part.

235. D'autre part, il yale crime de l'invasion - et
c'est un crime qu' on ne peut pas tol~rer. Nous n' avons
pas demand~ qu'Oti fMtrisse qui que ce soit du nom
d'agresseur. Pourquoi? C'est peut-etre la. une erreur
de notre part.

236. I have deliberately not referred to suggestions
that have been made by the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan, as to what he regards as solutions, because
they are not solutions and they are violations of the
Charter and of international law and they are a mockery
of the undertakings that rest on th~ shoulders of the
Pakistan Government. My Government does not regard
it as right, so far as its duty to the Security Council
is concerned, to discuss those proposals unless the
Security Council wants to discuss them. So far as we
are concerned, there are no proposals. We have given
the solemn undertaking that we shall not use a gun, we
shall not fire a bullet, we shall not move an aeroplane
over the cease-fire line to assert our rights, that is
to say, we shall not determine by force the future of
that part of our country which is under Pakistan occupation. We shall seek to solve every problem peacefully, but our peacefulness is limited by the fact that
we shall not brook aggression upon our territory. And
we look to each one of you to stand with us if there is
a violation of one square inch of Indian territory, bfJcause we are loyal Members of the United Nations. To
each of you we are bound not only through the United
Nations but by bilateral ties and by appreciation and
respect, even when we are in fundamental disagreement. And I submit we have the right to look to you in
a matter of this kind.

236. C'est de propos dEiliMr~ que je n'ai pas relev~
les suggestions qui ont etEi prEisentEies par le Ministre
des affaires ~trang~res du Pakistan concernant ce
qu'il consid~re etre des solutions, parce que ce ne
sont pas des solutions, mais des violations de la Charte
et du droit international, et parce qu' elles ne tiennent
aucun compte des obligations qui incombent au Gouvernement du Pakistan. Mon gouvernement ne consid~re pas, du point de Vllede sesdevoirs a l'Eigard du
Conseil de s~curitEi, qu'il convienne de discuter ces
propositions, a. moins que le Cor;seil de sEicurite ne
veuille les examiner. A nos yeux, il n'y a pas eu
jusqu'ici de propositions. Nous nous sommes solennellement engagEis a. nous abstenir de tirer des coups
de f£:'u, d'utiliser l'artillerie ou de faire franchir la
ligne de suspension d'armes par nos avions pour affirmer nos droits - c'est-a.-dire que nous ne dEicidel'ons pas par la force de l'avenir de cette partie de
notre pays qui se trouve sous l' occ upation pakistanaise.
Nous chercherons a 'r~soudre pacifiquement chaque
probl~me, mais nos dispositions pacifiques ont une
borne: nous ne toMrerons pas d'agression sur notre
territoire. Et, parce que notre pays est un Membre
loyal de l'Organisatio'1 des Nations Unies, nous attendons de chacun d'entre vous qu'il se range a. nos cotes,
en cas de violation meme d'un seul pouce carre du
territoire indien. Hors des liens de solidarit~ qUi
eXistent entre tous les Membres de l' Organisation des
Nations Unies, nous sommes rattaches cl chacun d'entre
vous par des liens bilat~raux, et par l'estime et le
respect -meme lorsque nous nous trouvons en complet
d~saccord. Et je crois pouvoir dire que nous avons
le droit de faire appel cl vous pour une question de ce
genre.

237. It is not the k:ind of problem where a resolution
Can be passed and it can be said that somebody disobeyed-I told you about the nature of resolutions. The
only resolutions that are binding on us would be
resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter, and this
problem is not under Chapter VII. But! am not arguing
legalities, I am not the defendant in this case, I am
the plaintiff, although it may not so appear after these
seven, eight or nine years. That is because we are a
mild and meek people, which is shown by our patience
in this matter, our forbearance, our desire to explore
everything. The Security Council, if '[ may say so, and
if you \'\ ill pardon the expression, has no right to
think that our country is going to throw overboard the
principles of the Charter, our insistence upon a secular State, the fundamental rights that are guaranteed
to our people under tJ.,~ Constitution, the freedom that
Our people have won
.lch has also brought freedom
to Pakistan, and the ....·ms of co-operation wil:h those
who are our erstwhile opponents, with whom today we
can disagree and still remain friends. It is those things

2,'37. Il ne s'agit pas d'un de ces problemes OU l'on
puisse voter une resolution et dire que quelqu'un a
desobei - je vous ai parle de la nature des resolutions. Les seules r~solutions qui auront pour nous
force obligatoire seront celles qui seraient prises en
vertu du Chapitre VII de la Charte - et le present
probl~me ne rent.re pas dans le cadre du Chapitre VII.
Mais je n'entends pas discuter sur des points de droit,
je ne suis pas en l'occurren~e defendeur, mais demandeur - bien qu'apres ces sept, huit ou neuf annees,
il soit possible qu'll n'en paraisse pas ainsi. Et cela
parce que nous sommes des gens doux et moderes,
comme le prouvent notre patience dans cette affaire,
not re longanimite, notre desir d'examiner toutes les
suggestions. Le Conseil de securite, si je puis
m'exprimer ainsi, et si vous me pardonnez l'expression, n'a pas le droit de s'imaginer que nous allons
jeter par-dessus bard les principes de la Charte,
nos exigences concernant la laicite de l' Etat, les droits
fondamentaux qui ont ete reconnus :i notre peuple par
la Constitution, les libertes que notre peuple a con-

1.

----

.

63

i

:.[
(-:

I

~·

I'

rc,-----.-

~
.f!,~

~;~!

f, ~

quises (ce qui a aussi valu ses libertes au Pakistan),
ainsi que les conditions de notre cooperation avec ceux
qui sont nos adversaires d'hier et avec lesquels nous
pouvons aujourd'hul. differer tout en restant amis.
C' est en fait a cela que nous attachons du prix, et
c'est la raison qui a pousse mon gouvernement a me
prescrire de presenter cette affaire aussi compl~te­
ment que possible.

238. What has been committed in Kashmir is a violation of our territory; and any imprudent action could
plunge the whole of our continent into bloodshed and
civil war. It was very wrong of the Foreign Minister
of Pakistan-who ten years ago was a fellow citizen
and even today is a very close friend-to tell us that
these are threats. We utter no threats. What do we want
to threaten anybody for? We are a very large country
with many problems to tackle. We only want to be left
in peace. We have no desire to stop their waters of
their money or their trade or anything of that kind. To
the extent to which our home responsibilities permit,
we are prepared to co-operate. It is not we who have
turned our faces away from the sub-continent of India.
n is Pakistan that has turned away from the continent
of India. We still regard it as part of this ancient land
whose heritage is common to both of us.

238. Ce qu'on a commis au Cachemire constitue une
violation de notre territoire; et tout geste inconsidere
pourrait plonger tout notre continent dans des flots
de sang et dans la guerre civile. Le Ministre des
affaires etrangeres du Pakistan - qui, il y a 10 ans,
etait un compatriote et qui est encore aujourd'hui un •
ami tres proche - a eu tort de nous dire que ce sont
hi des menaces. Nous ne mena<;ons nullement. Pourquoi aurions-nous besoin de menacer quelqu'un?Nous
sommes un tres grand pays et nous avons beaucoup
de problemes a regIeI'. Nous voulons seulement qu'on
nous laisse en paix. Nous n'avons nul desir de detourner les eaux qui coulent vel'S le Pakistan ou de
gEmer les finances ou le commerce de ce pays, ou de
commettre n'importe quelle action de cette sorte.
Dans la mesure 011 nos responsabilites a l'egard de
notre pays nous le permettent, nous sommes prets
a cooperer. Ce n'est pas nous qui avons tourne le
dos a la peninsule indienne. C'est le Pakistan qui
s' est detourne du continent de l'Inde. Nous le considerons toujours comme une partie de cette ancienne
terre dont l'heritage nous est commun a tous deux.

Q!:]

(,~·'i~l
~,.

241. Do all y
and a half n
ruled by the
opportunity to
talk about th
any country a
skeleton of t
ia a happy co

that we value, and that is why my Government has
given Ule instructions to present this case as fully as
possible.

-~J

H

,

~
:1

242. Let any
has said fro
the national m
Moslem move
my country,
for that. He
plainly offere
stan; you can
India-and he
to show me 0
Abdullah-and
before he was
me one phrase
of Pakistan.

,

239. It is in that spirit that we ask you to consider
this problem and to give it all the consideration it
requires. On behalf of the Government of India, I am
asked to pledge our faith that we shall never be found
wanting in the methods of exploration but I think it is
necessary to take a realistic view that the resolution
of nine years ago, the conditions of nine years ago and
the slogans of nine years ago-and if I am not out of
order, I turn to my colleague of the United Kingdomand the newspaper campaigns in different countries
will not shake our faith in what we regard as the
righteous course of action that we took when we came
here.

239. C'est dans cet esprit que nous vous demandons
de considerer ce probleme et de lui accorder toute
l'attention qU'il merite. Au nom du Gouvernement de
l'Inde, je suis charge de donner l'assurance que nous
ne ferons jamais defaut lorsqu'il s'agira de trouver
des moyens d'entente, mais je pense qU'il est necessaire de bien reconnaitre que la resolution d'll ya
neuf ans, la situation d'ilyaneufans, les mots d'ordre
d'il y a neuf ans - et, si cela n'est pas contraire au
reglement, je m'adresse ici a mon collegueduRoyaume-Uni - et les campagnes de presse menees dans
divers pays n'ebranleront pas notre foi touchant l'attitude que nous avons prise lorsque nous nous sommes
presentes ici, attitude que nous estimons juste.

240. I want finally to ask: Why didwe come here? Not
because we were a weak country. The British left us
a militarily strong country. They left us immediately
after the war with nearly 2 million soldiers, a great
part of them only just demobilized; we had a military
position superior to that of Pakistan. Militarily we
could have solved this problem any day, but that would
not have been a solution. That is why we came here,
and if this aspect of the problem is not taken into consideration it is not India alone that will suffer-India's
suffering will be momentary-but the Charter, the
United Nations, which will suffer because this is a
penalty which is imposed upon those who will obey the
law. We came here in full trust in the United Nations.
For nine years we have been pushed from pillar to
post and we have been castigated for allowing our
people to express their will.

240. Je voudrais demander enfin: pourquoi sommesnous venus ici? Ce n'est pas parce que nous etions
un pays faible. Les Britanniques nous ont laisses
militairement forts. Ils nous ont laisses, immectiatement apres la guerre, avec pres de deux millions I
de soldats, dont une grande partie venaient seulement
d I etre demobilises; nous nous trouvions dans une situation militaire superieure a celle du Pakistan. Militairement, nous aurions pu resoudre ce probleme n'importe quand, mais cela n'aurait pas ete une solution. f
C'est pourquoi nous sommes venus ici, et si eet
aspect du probleme n'est pas pris en consideration,
ce n'est pas l'Inde seule qui en souffrira - la souffrance de l'Inde ne sera que passagere - mais ce
sera la Charte, ce seront les Nations Unies qui
patiront, parce que l'on aura inflige une sanction :l
ceux qui auront obM a la 10L Nous sommes venus ici
pleinement confiants dans les Nations Unies. Pendant
neuf ans, on nous a renvoyes d'un endroit a l'autre et \
nous avons ete chaties pour avoir permis a notre
peuple d'exprimer sa volonte.
64

243. If we ar
Kashmir to s
would say that
than that. One
was allowed to
tered as a pal
leaders are 0
mosques for p
anything. How
going there, w
time, even if w
be the reactiOJ
would not stan
there should b
is the worst
wish for, not
And I look to m
as well.

I

244. The insta
just emerged
that will affect
in high circle
friends in that
own troubles an
we shall do so,
Why for two ye
under the auspi
struction and D
so on and it mi
Council to know
the Indus runs i
We are prepare
met considerabl

..-.L

UX

US

s.
et
me
e-

me
re
ots
es
ns,
un "
ont
1'-

US

>up

on
ede
de
te.
de
ets
le
:rui

241. Tous les pays democratiques diront-ils que les
4 millions et demi d'habitants du Cachemire auraient
dii etre gouvernes par des fonctionnaires de NewDelhi sans avoil' l' occasion de faire entendre leur
voix au Parlement? Vous parlez de ces gens qui sont
emprisonnes; y a-t-il un pays autour de cette table
qui n'ait pas quelque chose de ce genre a se reprocher?
S'il en est un. c'est un heureux pays et nous lui
souhaitons tout le bonheur possible.
242. Que quelqu'un veuille bien me citeI' une declaration quelconque faite par le cheik Abdullah depuis
qu'il est devenu le chef du mouvement national au
Cachemire - il s'agissait a l'origine d'unmouvement
musulman, que le cheik Abdullah a abandonne, declarant: musulman ou non. c'est mon pays. Il s'est
rendu a l'Assemblee constituante et illui a simplement propose ces trois solutions: vous pouvez vous
rattacher au Pakistan, vous pouvez rester independants. ou vous pouvez vous rattacher a l'Inde - et il
a rejete les deux premieres solutions. Je mets au defi
qui que ce soit de me montrer une seule phrase
prononcee ou que ce soit par le cheikAbdullah - et le
cheik est devenu maintenant l'idole des foules, bien
qu'on l'ait auparavant traite de Quisling - jedemande
a qui que ce soit de me montrer une seule phrase par
laquelle il ait declare qu'il desire que son pays fasse
partie du Pakistan.
243. Si l'on nous dit que naus n'avons permis a
personne au Cachemire de declarer qu'il devrait y
avoir un plebiscite, je repondrai que rien n'est plus
eloigne de la verite. L'un des partis politiques au
Cachemire qui a ete auto rise a prendre part aux elections, qui a ete inscrit en t".nt que parti, s'appelle le
Front du plebiscite. Ses chefs sont libres, ils mellent
des campagnes, ils se servent meme des mosquees
pour faire leur propagande, et nous ne leur avons
rien refuse. Comment pouvions-nous le faire, meme si
nous le voulions, alors que 70.000 personnes se rendent
chaque annee dans ce pays, et que de nombreux
journalistes s'y trouvent en tout texr.ps. Et qui plus
est, quel en serait l'effet sur le reste de l'Inde? Notre
pays ne voudrait pas prendre une telle attitude, et si
vous proposez que la question ne soit pas reglee,
nous dirorls qu'une te11e situation est bien la pire que
le Conseil de securite puisse souhaiter, non seulement pour nous, mais pour le continent asiatiqUf:. Et
je demande a mes amis d'Asie de penser aussi ace
probleme.

241. Do all you democratic countries say that the four
and a half million of Kashmiris should have been
ruled by the officials from Delhi without having the
opportunity to express themselves in Parliament?you
talk about those people who are imprisoned; is there
any country around this ta,ble who has not got some
skeleton of this kind in its cupboard? If there is, it
ia a happy country and we wish it well.

n),

.f

m-

me

ms
ute
de

>Us

,er

~s-

ya
Ire
au
LU-

ms
atles I

242. Let anyone show me anything that Sheikh Abdullah
has said from the time when he became tb.e leader of
the national movement in Kashmir-which started as a
Moslem movement and which he gave up saying: it is
my country, Moslem or otherwise; he would not stand
for that. He went to the Constituent Assembly and
plainly offered three alternatives: you can go to Pakistan; you can remain independent or you can go to
India-and he rejected the first two. I challenge anyone
to shOW me one phrase uttered anywhere by Sheikh
Abdullah-and he has now become the pet idol, although
before he was called a quisling-I ask anyone to show
me one phrase where he says he wants to become part
of Pakistan.

243. If we are told that we did not permit anybody in
Kashmir to say that there should be a plebiscite, I
would say that there is nothing further from the truth
than that. One of the political parties in Kashmir which
was allowed to fight in the election, which was registered as a party, is called the :?lebiscite Front. Its
leaders are out, they campaign, they use even the
mosques for propaganda and we have not denied them
anything. How could we, with 70,000 people a year
going there, with many journalists in the place at any
time, even if we wanted to? What is more, what would
be the reaction upon the rest of India? Our country
would not stand for that llil.d if you suggest to us that
there should be unsettlement, we say that unsettlement
is the worst thing that the Security Council could
Wish for, not only for us but for the Asian continent.
And I look to my Asian friends to think of that problem
as well.

~s-

Jns

3es
teJns

ent
laaim-

on.
cet
on, ,
uf-

ee
qui
1 ~

ici
ant
~ et ,
tre

244. L'instabilite dans une partie quelconque de notre
monde, qui vient de s'ouvrir a la vie nationale, se
fait sentir ch.~? tous. Aujourd'hui, notre voix n'est
pas entendue dans les milieux dirigeants du Pakistan,
mais nous ne manquons pas d'amis dans ce pays.
Nous sommes d'avis qu'il a ses ennuis et que nous
avons les notres. Si nous pouvons 1'aider, nous le
ferons, nous ne ferons rien pour le gener. C' est pourquoi, pendant deux annees, nous avons siege a Washington sous les auspices de la Banque internationale
pour la reconstruction et le developpement pour discuter de la question des canaux et d'autres questions,
et les membres du Conseil de securite trouveront
peut-etre interessant d'apprendre que la plus grande
partie des eaux de l'Indus se jette dans la mer, sans
aucune utilite. Mais nous sommes disposes a nous
mettre d'accord avec le Pakistan et nous avons subi
de cette fa<$on des pertes financiel'es considerables.

244. The instability of any part of our world, which has
just emerged into national birth, is an instability
that will affect everybody. Today our voice is not heard
in high circles in Pakistan but we are not without
friends in that country. Our view is that we have our
own troubles and they have theirs. If we can help them
we Shall do so, we do not want to hinder them. That is
Why for two years we have been sitting in Washington
under the auspices ofthe International Bank for Reconstruction and Development discussing canal waters and
so on and it might amuse the members of the Security
Council to know that the greater part of the waters of
the Indus runs into the sea without going anywhere. But
We are prepared to meet with Pakistan and we have
met considerable financial losses in that way.

65

[ont,over~al

245. We cannot get away from the fact, however, that
our country has been invaded and that for nine years
we have never used any phrases such as: "After the
Security Council, what?" -because that is not the ,'ay
to look at this problem. We are part of the Security
Council even if we are not members, because all of
you here represent us; and therefore we say there
cannot b~ any solution to this problem except by recognizing the "original sin". We are prepared to have discussion.s, to find ways and means, but we cannot find
those ways and means without such recognition. This
is not obsti:lacy; we have tried everything. This is the
only way to deal with this problem and I believe Pakistan and ourselves can come to agreement on that
basis.

245. Cependant, nous sommes obliges de tenir compte .. constitutional,
de ce que notre pays a ete envahi et que depuis neuf
background of
ans, nous n'avons jamais prononce des phrases de ce
Council at tha
genre: "Apr~s le Conseil de securite, qu'adviendra-twas better to c
il?" En effet, ce n'est pas ainsi qu'il faut considerer
rather than to
ce probl~me. Nous faisons, en quelque sorte, partie
blame or appo
du Conseil de securite, meme si nous n'en sommes
pas membre, parce que tous ici vous nous representez; I As for the pre
best take car
et nous declarons par consequent qu'il ne peuty avoir
hostilities. As
aucune solution a. ce probleme si l'on ne reconnait
we could best t
pas la "faute originelle". Nous sommes disposes a
insisting on th
discuter, :l trouver des moyens d'entente, mais nous
a free and fair
ne pouvons y parvenir si cette reconnaissance n'apas
lieu. Ce n'est pas la de l'obstination; Nous avons tout.. i
250. We have
essaye. C' est la. le seul moyen de traiter ce probleme, • should like to s
et je crois que, le Pakistan et nous, nous pouvons
upon a solutio
arriver a un accord sur cette base.
Kashmir to In
plebiscite, I a
246. Mon coll~gue a cite le Coran. Ce n'est pas la.
way of such an
le monopole des musulmans, et je voudrais lui en
fail to be reali
citeI' un passage - mais dans un autre esprit que
than that of de
celui qui l'animait lorsqu'il m'en a cite un. Ce pasKashmir to Ind
sage est ainsi redige, en traduction:
plebiscite.
"Et quiconque commet un crime le commet a ses
depens. Et Dieu sait tout; il est sage.
251. The PRE
list. The next
"Et quiconque commet involontairement une faute
place some tim
au un crime et en charge ensuite un innocent sera
usual way.
coupable de calomnie et d'un crime manifeste."

246. My colleague quoted the Holy Koran. It is not the
monopoly of the Moslem, and I will quote it for himand not in the spirit in which itwas quoted to me. One
part of it, in the English translation, says:
"And whoever committeth a crime, committeth it
to his own hurt. And God is knowing and wise.
"And whoever committeth an involuntary fault or
a crime, and then layeth it on the innocent, shall
surely bear the guilt of calumny and of a manifest
crime."
----

Th

247. Mr. TSIANG (China): In view of the lateness of
the hour, I shall be extremely brief. In the course of
his statement, Mr. Krishna Menon was good enough to
refer to my statement of 24 January [765th meeting]. I
have the verbatim record of that meeting before me,
and I find that Mr. Menon I s recollection, or it may be
his interpretation, of what I said on that occasion to be
inaccurate.

247. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais]: En
raison de l'heure tardive, je serai extremement bref.
Au cours de son intervention, M. Krishna Menon a
bien voulu mentionner la declaration que j'ai faite le
24 janvier [765eme seance]. J'en ai le compte rendu
stenographique sous les yeux et je constate que la
memoire de M. Menon est infidele, ou peut-etre que
l'interpretation qu'il a donnee de mes paroles est
inexacte.

248. Mr. Menon said that I had stated that the rival
charges of aggression made before the Security Council
in 1948 by both India and Pakistan "cancelled out" or
"washed out" each other. I never said anything of the
kind. What I did say on 24 January was:

248. Selon M. Menon, j'aurais dit que les accusations d'agression et de contre-agression portees
devant le Conseil, en 1948, respectivement par l'Inde
et le Pakistan, "s'annulaient" l'une l'autre. Je n'ai
jamais rien dit de tel. Voici les paroles que j'ai
prononcees le 24 janvier:

"No member of the Council ever gave serious
consideration to either charge, the charge of India
or the charge of Pakistan. There never was a proposal made dealing specifically with aggression. In
fact, there was no systematic or serious consideration of that charge and of the counter-charge of aggression. The members of the Council, without consultation, all came to the same conclusion, that the
charge of aggression should be by-passed. That
charge was never taken up, never sifted, never even
given serious consideration; I believe it was very
wise of the Council to by-pass that charge." [765th
meeting, para. 66.]

"(...) les membres du Conseil n'ont jamais pris
au serieux ni l'accusation de l'Inde ni celle du Pakistan. Aucune proposition n'a traite expressement
d'agression. En fait, il n'y aeuaucunexamen systematique ou approfondi de l'accusation ou de la contreaccusation d'agression. Sans se consulter, les membres du Conseil sont tous parvenus a la meme conclusion, a savoir qu'il ne fallait pas tenir compte de
l'accusation d'agrefJsion. Cetteaccusationn'ajamais
ete prise en consideration, ni approfondie; elle n'a
meme jamais fait l'objet d'un examen serieux, et je
pense que le Conseil a ete tres sage de n'en tenir
aucun compte." [765eme seance, par. 66.]

In using the word "by-pass", I meant" refrain from
consideration" .

Par "ne pas tenir compte", j'entendais "s'abstenir de
tout examen".

249. Since making that statement on 24 January, I have
taken the trouble to read over again the. records of
1948,1949 and 1950, andIfindthatmy summary of the
situation in the Security Council in 1948 to be accurate.
Indeed, the Council at that time '.Jy-passed many other

249. Depuis mon intervention du 24 janvier, j'ai pris
la peine de relire les compte rendus des debats de
~.948, 1949, et 1950, etj'aiconstatequemon analyse de
la situation en 1948 etait exacte. En fait, a l'epoque, le
Conseil s'est abstenu d'examiner beaucoup d'autres
66

lpte
neuf
e ce
a-t-

'~;cont"OVerSial

points, such as those reiating to the

questions litigieuses qui avaient trait aux aspects
constitutionnel, politique, social, economique et religieux du probleme qui nous interesse. Le Conseil
etait alors convaincu qU'il etait preferable de s'occupet plus specialemer~t du present et de l'avenir,
plut6t que de consacrer du temps et du travail a
determiner le coupable et a repartir les responsabilites passees. Pour le present, le Conseil estimaitqu'll
fallait avant tout obtenir la cessation des hostilites
et. pour l'avenir, qU'll fallait insister pour que soit
organise d'une fa<;on pacifique etdemocratiqueunpIebiscite libre et impartial.

: constitutional, political, social, economic and religious
background of this controversy or situation. The
Council at that time came to this conviction: that it
was better to concentrate on the present and the future
rather than to devote time and energy to assigning
blame or apportioning responsibility for past events.
As for the present, the Council thought that we could
I
best take care of the present by the cessation of
hostilities. As for the future, the Council thought that
we cot!ld best take care of the future of that region by
insisting on the peaceful and democratic method of
a free and fair plebiscite.

her
rtie
mes
tez;
voir
nait
s a
Ous
pas
tout.. ;
me, •
rons

sill

en
que
las-

250. We have now had another round of long debate. I
should like to say that ifIndia and Pakistan could agree
upon a solution of the problem of the accession of
Kashmir to India or Pakistan other than that of a
plebiscite, I am sure that no one would stand in the
way of such an agreement. If such an agreement should
fail to be realized, then I can see no alternative other
than that of deciding the question of the accession of
Kashmir to India or Pakistan through a fair and free
plebiscite.

250. Nous venons de consacrer une nouvelle serie
de longs debats a ce probleme. Je voudrais faire
observer que si l'Inde et le Pakistan parvenaient a
regler la question du rattachement du Cachemire a
l'un de ces deux pays autrement que par voie de
plebiscite, je suis persuade que personne ne s'opposerait a la solution proposee. Si l'accord nepouvait
se faire, je ne vois d'autre solution que l'organisation
d'un plebiscite libre et impartial, qui deciderait de la
question du rattachement du Cachemire a 1'un des deux
pays.

251. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers on my
list. The next meeting of the Security Council will take
place some time next week and will be arranged in the
usual way.

251. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Aucun
autre orateur n'etant inscrit, le Consell se reunira
de nouveau la semaine prochaine, a une date qui sera
indiquee selon la procedure habituelle.

ses

:lUte
iera

La seance est levee a 19 h. 20.

The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

En
ref.
ma
e le
mdu
e la
que
est
Isalees
[nde
n'ai
j'ai
pris
ldstlent
stetreem:one de
tlais
, n'a r,
It je
enir
r de
pris

s de
e de
~, le

tres

67

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA·ARGENTlNE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A., A!sina 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard. A.M.P. Bldg., 50 Miller
St., North Sydney;
90 Queen St., Melbourne.
Melbourne University Press, Carlton N.3,
Victoria.
AUSTRIA-AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. Wiillerstorff, Markus Sittikusstrasse 10,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la Presse S.A.,
14-22, rue du Persil, Bruxelles.
W. H. Smith & Son, 71-75, boulevard
Adolphe·Max, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA.BOLlVIE
Libreria Selecciones, Casilla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL-BRESIL
Livraria Agir, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo
and Belo Horizonte..
CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE
Papeterie·Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Portail, 14, avenue Boulloche, Pnom-Penh.
CANADA
Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West,
Teronto.
CEYLON.CEYLAN
Lake House Bookshop; The Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P. O. Box
244, Colombo.
CHILE-CHill
Editorial del Pacifico, Ahumada 57,
Santiago.
Libreria Ivens, Casilla 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The World. Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA.COLOMBIE
Libreria America, Medellin.
Libreria Buchholz Galeria, Bogota.
Libreria Nacional Ltda., Barranquilla.
COSTA RICA.COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos, Apartado 1313, San
Jose.
CUBA
La Casa Belga, O'ReiIlY 455, La Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA-TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
~eskoslovensky Spisovatel, Norodn; Trida
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK.DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard, Ltd., Ntlrregade 6,
K/lbenhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Libreria Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciudad Trujillo.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR
Libreria Cientifica, Guayaquil and Quito.
EL SALVADOR·SALVADOR
Manuel Novas y Cia., la. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.
FINLAND·FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskalu,
Helsinki.

FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Soufflot,
Paris (Ve).
GERMANY-ALLEMAGNE
R. Eisenschmidt, Kaiserstrasse 49, Frankfurt! Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Haupstrasse 101, BerlinSchoneberg.
Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wiesbad en.
W. E. Saarbach, Gereonstrasse 25-29,
Koln (22c).
GREECE.GRECE
Kouffmann Bookshop, 28 Stodion Street,
Athenes.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Economico Financiera, Edificio
Briz. Despacho 207, 6a Avenida 14-33,
Zona 1, Guatemala City.
HAITI
Librairie "A la Caravel/e", Boite postale
lll-B, Port·au·?rinc".
HONDURAS
Libreria Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG-HONG-KONG
The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INDIA·INDE
Orient Longmans, Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and New Delhi.
New
Oxford Book & Stationery Co.,
Delhi and Calcutta.
P. Varadachary & ·Co., Madras.
INDONESIA-INDONESIE
Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahori 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
"Guity", 482, avenue Ferdowsi, Teheran.
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie's 800kshop, Baghdad.
ISRAEL
Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35 Allenby
Road, Tel-Aviv.
ITALY-ITALlE
Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni, Via
Gina Capponi 26, Firenze.
JAPAN-JAPON
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome,
Nihanbashi, Takyo.
LEBANON-L1BAN
Librairie Universelle, Beyrouth.
LIBERIA
J. Momolu Kamara, Monrovia.
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
MEXICO·MEXIQUE
Editorial He~mes S.A., Ignacio Mariscal
41, Mexico, D.F.
NETHERLANDS.PAYS·BAS
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, lange Voorhout
9, 's-Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELLE.ZELANDE
United Nations Association of New Zea·
land, C.P.O. 1011, Wellington.
NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag, Kr. Augustsgt. 7A, Oslo.

Orders and inq uiries from countries where sales agents have
not yet been appointed may be sent to: Sales and Circulation
Section, United Nations, New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,
United Notions Office, Palais des Nations, Ceneva, Switzerland.

Litho. in U.N.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Co·operative Book Society;
Dacca, East Pakistan (and at Chittagong).
Publishers United Ltd., Lahore.
Thomas & Thomas, Karachi, 3.
PANAMA
Jose Menendez, Plaza de Arango, Po·
noma.

PARAGUAY
Agenda de Librerias de Salvador Nizza,
Calle Pte. Franco Na. 39-43, Asundon.
PERU·PEROU
libreria Internadonal del Peru, S.A.,
lima and Arequipa.
PHILIPPINES
Alemar's Book Store, 749 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodrigues, 186 Rua Aurea, Lis
baa.
SINGAPORE-SINGAPOUR
The City Book Store, Ltd., Winchester
House, Collyer Quay.
SPAIN-ESPAGNE
Libreria Bosch, 11 Ronda Universidad,
Barcelona.
Libreria Mundi·Prensa, Lagasca 38, Madrid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A-B,
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S.A., .Lausanne, Geneve.
Hans Raunhardt, Kirchgasse 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND-THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Raad,
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY-TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi,
Beyaglu, Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLlCREPUBLlQU5 ARABE UNIE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
Librairie Universelle, Damas.
UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME-UNI
H. M. Statianery Office, P.O. Box 569,
Londan, S.E.l (and at H.M.S.O. shops).
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS.UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service, Colum·
bia University Press, 2960 Broadway,
New Yark 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Representacion de Editoria1es, Prof. H.
D'Elia, Av. 18 de Julio 1333, Monte·
video.
VENEZUELA
Libreria del Este, Av. Miranda, No. 52,
Edf. Galipon, Caracas.
VIET-NAM
Papeterie-Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Por··
tail, Boite postale 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA.YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalozba, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Drzovilo
Preduzece,
Jugoslovenska
Knjiga.. Terazije 27/11, Beograd.
(58B2)

Les commandes et demandes de renseignements emanant de
pays 011 it n'existe pas encore de depositaires peuvent etre
adressees a la Section des ventes et de la distribution,
Organisation des Nations Unies, New-York (ftats·Unis d'Amerique), ou a la Section des ventes, Organisation des Nations
Unies, Palais des Nations, Geneve (Suisse).

Price: $U.S. 0.70; 5/- stg.; Sw. fr. 3.00
(or equivalent in other currencies)

3106-May 1958-1,800
