UNI2-'EDNATIO.ZVS

TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 6 JULY 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1363)

.,.. . .. .

.,.,

,

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

*

.

.

I

.

.

.

.

.

.

:’ 1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I

1

Statement by the President , . . . . , . . . . 1 , . . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , , . . I . ..‘. . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 6 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8036) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :...........
I. . . ..a

1

S/PV. 1363

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of #he Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sect&y Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York, on Thursday, 6 July 1967, at 5 p.m.
---.__
Presiclelzt: Mr. Endalkachew MAKONNEN

(Ethiopia).

fieserzt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 363)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 6 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8036).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to take this first
opportunity of expressing to Ambassador Tabor of Denmark my sincere appreciation and that of all of his
colleagues in the Security Council of the valuable services
he has rendered as President during the month of June. I
am sure that I speak with the full concurrence of my
colleagues when I pay tribute to the statesmanlike manner
in which he presided over our difficult meetings. As his
immediate successor and as one who has a great deal to
learn from the example of efficiency that he has set, it gives
me great pleasure to express to him my sincere admiration
and gratitude for his tireless courtesy and his dedication to
the cause for which the Council stands.
2. Mr. TABOR (Denmark): Mr. President, I wish to
express my gratitude and my very warm appreciation of the
kind words you have just addressed to me. Permit me to
take this opportunity of thanking you, and indeed all the
members of the Council, for the co-operation extended to
me by all of you and the assistance given me as President of
the Council during our very difficult deliberations on the
Middle East crisis in the month of June. We are today
embarking upon a new problem, and may I say, Mr. President, that I am happy that the guidance of the Council’s
deliberations is in your able hands. I wish to assure you that
you can always depend upon my full co-operation in the
tasks ahead of you.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I am sure the members of the
Council would wish me to thank the representative of
Denmark for the statement he has just made.

Statement by the President

4. The PRESIDENT: This meeting of the Security Council
has been convened at the urgent request of the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
5. It will be recalled that yesterday I received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo transmitting the text of a message addressed
to me by the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Those communications have been distributed as
Security Council document S/8031.
6. Early this afternoon I received a further letter from the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in which he requested me to convene an urgent
meeting of the Security Council in order to consider the
question raised by his Government. The text of that letter
has been circulated as Security Council document S/8036.
After receiving the letter this afternoon, I immediately
contacted all members of the Security Council and consulted them about the time when a meeting of the Council
should be convened. I have endeavoured to meet the
situation in accordance with the wishes of the majority of
Council members.
Adoption

of the Agenda

The agendu was adopted.
Letter dated 6 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of rhe Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8036)

7. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
participate without vote in the discussion of the item just
included in the agenda at the request of his Government.
Since there is no objection to that proposal, I now invite
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. ldzumbuil
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), took a place at the
Council table.

8. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now begin its
consideration of the item included in its agenda this
afternoon at the request of the delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, The representative of that

country has asked to make a statement, and I now call on
him.

17. One inevitably links up these two facts with the aerial
invasion of which we are all aware and in which a person is
implicated who has from the outset been the focal point of
various attempts made by the international conspiracy to
overthrow every Congolese rdgime which is determined to
smash the monopolies of certain financial powers.

9. Mr. IDZUMBUIR

(Democratic Republic of the Congo)
I am extremely sorry that, at a
time when we were all looking forward to a little rest and
reflection after the lengthy discussions that have just taken
place in the Security Council and the General Assembly,
my delegation finds it necessary to detain you still longer
and to say something that will give you cause for further
concern.
(translated

from

French):

18. What actually are the aims of this conspiracy? Judging
from the time chosen for this invasion, one cannot but
connect it with the following circumstances. A few months
ago the regime of President Mobutu successfully initiated a
campaign to solve the country’s basic problems, political
stability and economic independence. A referendum on the
Constitution has just been held, putting an end to the
political confusion and establishing order. A popularlyinspired political movement with genuinely nationalist
objectives and sound structures has just been set up on his
initiative. An unprecedented effort has just been made on
his instigation to return to the Congolese people what is
theirs, with due regard to the rights of international
co-operation. New rules for the exploitation of the Republic’s principal mining resources have been drawn up,
smashing a monopoly from which only a few foreign
financial groups benefitted. A revamping of the monetary
system has just been decreed, which has the support of the
International Monetary Fund and should make it possible
for the Congolese currency to take its rightful place as a
valid instrument of national and international trade.

10. Allow me, Mr. President, before beginning my statement, to thank you for the diligence and promptness with
which you granted the request of the President of the
Republic that the Council should be seized of the aggression committed against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 5 July 1967.
11. You will remember that in October 1966 the Security
Council discussed the dangers and threats to the Congo
inherent in the activities of the mercenaries who had been
recruited in certain countries of western Europe and
regrouped in Angola at the very frontier of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
12. At that time also one section of the Congolese army,
composed of former Katangese gendarmes, the men who
had constituted the backbone of the secession in Katanga,
had mutinied. The mutineers were supported by a section
of mercenaries, most of whom had been in the service of
the secessionist leaders in Katanga.

19. It is this series of measures to make the Congo a
prosperous country, a peaceful country, a country with a
great future, which displeased those who hanker for the
colonial era, the old men’s clubs of which the President of
the Republic spoke, members of the huge international
conspiracy which has ramifications throughout the world.

13, The time chosen for the present meeting of the former
Katangese gendarmes leaves no doubt as to the purpose of
the Machiavellian plan fostered by the international conspiracy of certain fascist and colonialist circles, With God’s
help that plan has failed. The mutiny of Stanleyville failed
by dint of the determination of the Congolese Government
and people to defend their freedom, their individuality and
their dignity.

20. What has the conspiracy decided to do? It has decided
to make things difficult for the new rkgime. It has decided
to bring it down. It has decided to make it knuckle under
and to replace it by a m&e docile regime headed by
someone who would be a puppet rather than a leader, who
would receive his instructions not from the Congolese
people but from foreign peoples or clubs, not from
Kinshasa but from foreign capitals.

14. Today this danger has again become a reality. The
invasion by foreign paratroopers of the city of Risangani,
the former Stanleyville, on 5 July 1967 is not an isolated
event or an accident. It is part of a carefully prepared plan,
which was to be preceded or accompanied by other acts,
such as the sabotage of certain of the country’s vital
communications and of certain equally vital power stations.

21. However, this conspiracy forgot one thing, It forgot
that the r6gime of President Mobutu has the support of the
Congolese people and that to succeed in the Congo one
must reckon with the Congolese people since, in the final
analysis, the people will have the last word.

15. It is not by chance that, during the last week of June,
a number of foreigners, with the complicity of certain
Congolese nationals, dynamited a bridge connecting the
two sections of the railway line used for the transport of
raw materials from the Katanga mines. They also dynamited the high-tension pylons supplying electricity to the
ore-processing plants in the same region.

22. In October 1966;when we discussed the problem in
this very room, we heard denials, disclaimers and protests
of innocence. This time, and even before we came to the
Council, certain foreign capitals already felt it necessaryto
proclaim to the world their innocence, their non-con
plicity, their complete ignorance of any participation in the
invasion of 5 July 1967.

16. Some of those responsible for the plan have been
arrested thanks to the vigilance of the local police and the
co-operation of the neighbouring Governments, and here I
should like to pay a special tribute to the Government of
Zambia for arresting two Congolese accomplices who hoped
to find refuge in its Territory.

23. You will certainly recall the proverb “he whom the
shoe fits shall wear it”.
24. What is behind these protests of innocence? Whom
are they intended to convince and who is supposed to be
2

Charter? Is it not better to prevent all the harm done by
those nationals than to be obliged to crave indulgence for
them and ask that allowances be made when they face their
judges in the State they have wronged?

deceived? An objective analysis of what has just happened
leaves no doubt about where the mercenaries were recruited, where they were trained, what were their regrouping stations and what may have precipitated their invasion
plans.

29. In conclusion I should like the Security Council to call
upon all Member Governments to take measures to put an
end in their territories and in the territories under their
jurisdiction
to all activities of that international mafia
which plots against the sovereignty of Member States of
this Organization, to prohibit in their territories the
recruitment of mercenaries whose sole intention is to sow
civil war, death, suffering and poverty among the peoples of
Member States.

25. Where were they recruited? It is not difficult to find
an answer. As early as last October we reported cases of
recruiting in different countries of western Europe. France
was the only country to launch an operation to put a stop
to the recruiting of mercenaries in its territory. The fact
remains, however, that at the same time recruiting continued in certain other countries virtually with the knowledge, if not the complicity of the public authorities. We
were told later that measures would be taken, but in the
meantime what was done was done; the damage had been
done. The recruiting was conducted openly at the time in
restaurants, bars and public establishments by means of
posters stating where to report and which persons to
contact and giving full particulars of the qualifications
required, which left no doubt as to the purpose of the
recruiting agents.

30. All we are asking is that these States comply with their
obligations under the Charter, obligations which have found
expression in various resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly on the subject, inter alia, those calling upon
Governments to refrain from intervening in any way in the
internal affairs of sovereign states, which to my mind
involves an obligation to prevent in their tdrritories activities which jeopardize the sovereignty of the States Members
of the Organization.

26. It is astonishing that in those countries which have
highly developed intelligence services, these services failed
to find the clue which would have led them to the clubs
which the recruiting was intended to benefit. No, the
intelligence services were perfectly aware of the situation,
but the exclusive club which the mercenaries were intended
to serve was too powerful-so powerful that it was difficult
and even impossible for the public institutions of some of
those countries to take any action whatever against it. What
is more, it looks as if the public institutions of certain
countries had offered to co-operate. It wasprobably in the
interest of both groups and that is why it is difficult for the
Congolese authorities to take at face value the assurancesof
friendship and good intentions from certain Powers, while
the same Pokers allow people to organize networks for the
recruitment of mercenaries, agree to their being supplied
with travel facilities, allow them to pass through their
territories or territories under their jurisdiction, despite the
fact that they are fully aware of the ultimate intentions of
the organization behind this activity and the aims it is
pursuing in the Congo.

31. We in the Congo believe that the invasion of our
territory by foreign paratroopers leaves no doubt as to the
reality of the dangers and threats which we brought to your
knowledge in this very room in October of last year.
32. We believe it is incumbent upon you, the members of
the Council, to remind all States of their fundamental
obligations, particularly in virtue of the Charter, and to call
upon them to discharge those obligations by taking
effective measures to put an end to the recruitment and
training of these mercenaries, whose aim is to violate the
sovereignty of sovereign States generally, and of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular.
33. Mr, President, you have received the message that the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has sent
you in your capacity as President of the Security Council.
At this stage we ask you to secure the co-operation of all
Member States in guaranteeing to the Congolese people
which has lost so many of its young men since 1960, life
and everlasting peace. ’

27. What, I ask myself, have we done to those Powers?
Did they not extract enough profit during the colonial era
from all their exploitation of my country’s mineral wealth?
Did they not make enough profit to beautify their cities
and embellish their monuments? Have they not enough
blood on their consciences? Have not enough people been
killed to satisfy their cupidity? Is it not shameful for a
civilization which calls itself Christian to persecute so
relentlessly a small country whose only desire is to live in
peace?

34. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council
has listened very carefully to the statement by the
representative of the Democratic Republic of- the Congo,
Mr. Idzumbuir, on a topic which must inevitably give rise to
serious concern,
35. At a later stage the Soviet delegation is intending to
make a formal statement of its position on the substance of
the item under consideration; but even at the present stage
it cannot refrain from drawing attention to one aspect of
this question in the situation that has arisen. We all know
that here in the Security Council, and later in the General
Assembly, the United Nations has been and still is
considering the situation which has arisen in the Middle
East as a result of Israel’s aggression against the Arab States.

28. People will, of course, tell me that local and national
legislation in certain countries does not prohibit those
activities. Is there any country which has no laws to prevent
its nationals from engaging in activities inconsistent with
the international obligation to respect the sovereignty of
other States? Is not this respect for the sovereignty of
other States a fundamental obligation which all of us
present here assumed when we signed the United Nations
3

type of actions that have been alleged would contravene
not only the spirit but also the letter of the United Nations
Charter. The strong opposition of the Government of the
United States to intervention by one State in the internal
affairs of another has been demonstrated repeatedly. Such
interference, whether it be with armed forces or through
subversion or other less obvious means, cannot be countenanced, If any foreign Government is in fact aiding and
abetting those in the Congo who are seeking by force to
wrest control of certain areas from the legitimate authorities, such action would clearly violate the Charter and
accepted principles of international law. All Member States
should, in our judgement, refrain from any such activities
and take ippropriate measures to discourage their nationals
from participating in them.

36. May I recall that the Soviet delegation has repeatedly
stressed, inter alia, that the aggressor must not be allowed
to count on obtaining any gains or reaping any fruits from
his crimes? For us and, we imagine, for all Members of the
United Nations, this is a matter of fundamental importance.
Yesterday it was the Arab States which were the victims of
an aggressive attack; today the Security Council is considering another dangerous situation that has arisen in
central Africa, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
37. In this specific context we should like to draw
attention to the fact that the forces of aggression must not
be encouraged, and must not be allowed to expect their
criminal acts to go unpunished or will be connived at. The
forces of aggression must not be given prizes; and the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, must take
this circumstance into account, draw the appropriate
conclusions and take the necessary steps to put an end to
the activities of the forces of aggression.

42. As these charges are serious ones, the Council will
quite naturally wish to be fully informed of the facts of the
situation and we trust that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will make every effort
to ascertain the full facts and keep us informed of
developments as they occur. In the meantime, the United
States believes that it is incumbent on all of us to do
nothing that would further exacerbate the situation there.

38. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): The United
States too will, I am sure, be speaking in more detail on the
substance of this problem, as our consideration of the
complaint received today from the representative of the
Congo (S/8036/ proceeds. However, I should like today to
make a few brief comments.

43. Since the day the Congo became independent, the
United States has been prominent among those that have
supported and assisted the Government of that nation to
develop strength and stability in order to ensure the
security and well-being of the Congolese people. We have
made these efforts both through the United Nations alld
through mutually agreed bilateral arrangements. This record, if I may say so in all humility, is one of which my
Government is proud and it is for this reason as well that
we are deeply disturbed over any threat to the steady
progress which has been made in the Congo.

39. First, I should like to welcome you, Mr. President, to
the Presidency of the Council. We are all, I am sure, very
well aware of the tremendously valuable contributions
made by Mr. Makonnen to the work of the Council in his
capacity as Permanent Representative of Ethiopia, and I
believe we would all share the view that the Council is
indeed most fortunate to have the exceptional qualities
possessedand demonstrated by him at its service during this
very difficult period.

44. We firmly support the efforts of the Central Govemment in the Congo to restore order and to exercise its
legitimate authority throughout the country. We deplore
any attempts by outside forces to interfere with those
efforts. I am sure that this will also prove to be the attitude
of other members at this Council table and feel confident
that within a short time it will again be possible for all the
people of the Congo to live in peace and free from fear, as
they so richly deserve.

40. In the same context I should like to join in the
appreciation which you, Mr, President, have already expressed so eloquently for the truly outstanding service of
your predecessor during the month of June, Ambassador
Hans Tabor of Denmark. The Presidency fell to him in what
has without question proved to be one of the most
historically important months in the history of the Security
Council and-I think it is fair to add on behalf of us all-one
of the most exhausting months. Through all the days and
nights on which we met, Mr, Tabor’s skill, his devotion to
duty and his sense of fairness never left him and, without
question, he deserves much of the credit for the important
successof the Council in achieving a cease-fire, Here again, I
believe that all members of the Council would agree that we
should express thanks to him for the admirable service
which he rendered to us and to the United Nations during
that very difficult time,

45. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): My
delegation is very pleased that the representative of
Ethiopia is presiding over the Council. Apart from the
personal and fraternal feelings which bind us, YOU,
Mr, President, repiesent Addis Ababa, you represent Ethiopia, you represent the headquarters of the Organization of
African Unity. To the Republic of Mali, the Organization of
African Unity represents that indispensable African unity
without which our continent cannot survive for long and
we must have no illusions in that respect.

41. We readily agreed to an urgent meeting of the Security
Council this afternoon to consider the complaint from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
charging that forces from outside its own country have
fomented disturbances in the eastern part of the Congo
and, with the co-operation of dissident local military
elements, have apparently gained control of several important cities. These charges are indeed serious ones and
they deserve our most careful consideration. Certainly, the

46. We believe that it is in the Organization of African
Unity, to which your country is host, that we shall find the
catalyst, the means and the strength on which the African
States will draw just to be able to live-and I say “just to be
able to live” because some nations even deny them that
right.
4

47, Thus, Mr. President, as the representative of Ethiopia,
you have been chosen to symbolize that African unity of
which Emperor Haile Selassie is one of the greatest
champions. I should like to take this opportunity of
asserting that Africa can and must make a valuable
contribution to the international community. The Africa
that is described as savageand primitive, by that token, will
contribute an element of wholesomeness and naturalness-and I stress the word naturalness-to our community,

territory
1967.

by force to the bases they occupied on 4 June

54. If that could happen, it follows that all kinds of abuse
and aggression may be tolerated. We must understand that
the bankruptcy
demonstrated
by our Organization on
4 July is an augury of tragic events of which the current
Congolese situation is only the beginning.
55. However, as we have always emphasized, particularly
at the Council’s 1346th meeting, we do not and never shall
support the principle-especially
in this building-that
young nations should wait to be put through every trial and
tribulation
at the whim of one Power or another. The
bankruptcy of the United Nations to which I refer was
desired and engineered by some Members of this Organization, and even though, temporarily,
they can boast of
illusory success, how can they understand the moral
revulsion they inspire ! It is most unfortunate that every
day, self-interest seems to be triumphing over idealism and
morality in this Organization. And it is very demoralizing,
particularly for young States.

48. Because it is primitive, no one can deny that our
continent is closer to human nature. We believe that man is
by nature a warm and loving creature, as I have already told
the Council, although I do not mean to say that those
qualities are exclusively reserved for the African countries.
However,we must point out that civilization, or what some
like to call civilization-material
and technological
progress-cannot be imagined without the host of unknown
factors which we all know exist. That is why we believe
that Africa, which is regarded as poor because our own
capabilities have not yet enabled us to evaluate and exploit
its resources,is as rich a continent as the others; that is why
some consider it a reservoir against the time when the
resourcesof other continents will have been exhausted.

56. Thus it is not surprising that we can see a connexion
between the present situation of the African traitor,
Tshombe, and the aggression being carried out against the
Congo. Considering the spectacle the United Nations made
of itself in the General Assembly on 4 July 1967, is it now
going to endorse the idea that might makes right in
violation of all the tenets of the Charter? Those who may
not know that Israel’s aggression against the Arab countries
is a form df imperialist aggression against all peace-loving
countries and particularly
against the young third world
States of Africa and Asia. It would be a mistake to interpret
it otherwise. The Congo is one of the richest countries on
the African continent
and its wealth has made it a
permanent attraction for those groups which care nothing
for morality and law and whose only aim is imperialist
exploitation by any means available.

49, We all know that our continent possesses definite
material wealth and we also believe that we have riches of
another kind precisely because we are primitive and savage.
I refer to our general sensitivity, love, feeling, and our
morality.
50. Thus I wish to point out that we do have something to
contribute, particularly to the United Nations, in respect of
morality and justice. I have taken the liberty of directing
those remarks to you, Mr. President, as the representative
of Ethiopia, and my delegation hopes that this Council will
be able to accomplish very fruitful work under your
enlightened guidance.
51. My delegation does not intend to speak on the
substanceof the problem which the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has just described.
However,while we reserve the right to speak again, we wish
at this point to express our full sympathy and support-our
staunchest support-to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which once again has been the scene of distressing
events brought about through imperialist wheeling and
dealing.

57. Yesterday it was the United Arab Republic, an African
country, a dynamic member of the Organization of African
Unity; today it is the Democratic Republic of the Congo
which will shortly play host to all Africa at the coming
summit conference. Is that not ample proof to all African
countries, to all African brothers, of the determination of
some groups to doom them to servitude and submission? It
seems very ironic, but also very sad, that at a time when
Israel is hanging out its victory banners and continuing to
annex territory in the Gaza Strip and other Arab lands,
with typical arrogance, such subversion alid aggression are
being unleashed against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo because of Tshombe, murderer of the patriot Patrice
Lumumba,
who was a martyr to the noblest of
causes-African independence.

52. A few days ago, I might even say a few hours ago, the
United Nations, exploiting the full confidence which all
nations, particularly the young nations, have in it presented
a sadand shameful spectacle in dealing with what is for the
Organization a routine problem.
5% Therefore, how can we help draw certain conclusions?
On 4 July 1967 our Organization stooped so low as to
honour the idea that aggression pays. Yes, this Organization, which claims to be dedicated to peace and justice, was
incapable, of identifying the aggressor in a conflict of
unspeakable proportions and consequences; secondly, the
United Nations was incapable of condemning aggression;
thirdly, it could not even bring itself to demand the
withdrawal of the Israel troops now occupying Arab

58. Yet, those who blamed the Secretary-General in the
Middle East crisis have the gall to complain loudly that our
distinguished Secretary-General-who,
more than anyone
here, llas an ullswerving devotion to the ideals of our
Charter-is respollsible for the situation in the Congo. These
days, we have been fed outrageous insults, we have been
spared no atrocity.
Most of all, it has been boldly
insinuated that the Secretary-General-a
man who, as we all
5

64. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): It does not require many
words from me, Mr. President, to extend to you our
congratulations and to express to you the pleasure which
the representative of Nigeria takes in your assumption of
the duties of President of the Security Council. It is an
h&our which we share with you. We are confident that
you will do great justice and honour to the position on
your own account, on behalf of Ethiopia, on behalf of all
of us in Africa, and even on behalf of all the Member States
on this Council.

know, lives and works only for peace and to safeguard the
noble ideals of the Charter-was responsible for the Middle
East crisis because he took a lucid, reasonable and firm
decision, worthy only of a man of his stature.
59. At this point I should like to reaffirm the full
confidence and esteem which my delegation and my
Government have for the Secretary-General, who embodies
the sense of sncrificc and justice.
60. As I have already said, the Congo today is the victim
of the same kind of aggression which struck the United
Arab Republic yesterday, It is aggression against Africa, and
until the United Nations courageously and honestly takes
the decisions it must take, all African countries and all
young nations must realize that their right to live in peace
and tranquility will be denied. I still remember, as though it
were yesterday, that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo appealed to this
Council, during his visit here in 1966, to leave the Congo in
peace in order that it should be allowed to build and to
develop. They are the demands and aspirations of all
African States, But some do not want them to be realized.
My delegation hopes to speak in greater detail at a later
stage of the debate.

65. This Council has now heard the account of the serious
matter which has been brought to our attention by the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
his moving and very eloquent statement.

61. The PRESIDENT (translated jkm fierzch): I should
like to thank my colleague and friend, the representative of
Mali, for the expressions of friendship and fraternity that
he was good enough to address to me and my country. I
can assure him personally, and his great country as well,
that those feelings are reciprocal.

66. On the basic considerations raised by the subject
before this Council, there can be no doubt where my
delegation and Government stand, both here and in Africa.
I think I should spare the Council an exposition of our
detailed views on this issue at this particular meeting, I only
asked for the floor to suggest that perhaps at this stage of
our meeting today it might be profitable for the Council,
having heard the representative of the Congo, to adjourn,
This would enable further contacts among delegations to
take place and would give us time to consider the details, as
well as the further steps which might be taken by this
Council in the light of the serious matters we have heard
about here. My suggestion is, of course, predicated on the
hope that you, Mr. President, might perhaps make further
contacts with members of this Council
and fix an early date
on which we might reconvene.

62. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from Fknch): I
am very happy to associate myself with those of my
colleagues who have already expressed their gratitude to the
retiring President for his very able conduct of our debates
during a most difficult Reriod. We are also pleased,
Mr. President, that in these parlous times the Council is
working under the guidance of such an experienced
diplomat, a man whose demonstrated ability and authority
are appreciated by everyone here, and if I may add,
particularly by the representative of a. country which has
long enjoyed friendly relations with his country.

67. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I certainly agree
that it would be well to continue our discussion when we
have had time to reflect on the report which has been made
to us today and when we have further information before
us. I would not, however, wish this opportunity to pass
without saying how delighted my delegation is that YOU,
Mr. President, have assumed the direction of our affairs. We
regard you, if I may very respectfully say so, as a very
worthy representative of a great and historic country, and
we know from our experience of your time amongst us that
you will continue to earn the respect and indeed the
admiration of the membership of this Organization.

63. Mr. President, when at the request of the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo you asked us
to meet in this emergency Security Council session, the
French delegation immediately responded favourably. We
found Mr. Idzumbuir’s statement most interesting and we
thank him for having presented it so objectively and calmly.
We should, of course, be very pleased if he could
supplement the very valuable information he has given us
on the facts of the matter and the course of events in the
Congo. Our colleague and friend, Mr, Idzumbuir, was good
enough to mention the efforts my country made a few
months ago to close a mercenary camp in the Department
of Ard&che, so can have no doubt about my delegation’s
approach to that very serious situation, or about the
concern of all other delegations, I am sure. We hope, then,
that the additional information we shall receive concerning
the causes of the events in the Congo and their repercussions will enable the Council to discuss the matter and
exercise its responsibilities as intelligently as possible.

68. I would also wish to say something that 1 have had
opportunities of saying before-and here I am sure 1 speak
for every member of this Council and for the very many
people who have watched our proceedings in recent weeks.
I wish to express my very respectful gratitude and
admiration for the way in which Ambassador Tabor of
Denmark conducted our proceedings at a critical and
difficult time.
69. May I be permitted, before we disperse, to make one
trivial comment? While we have been listening to the
speeches this afternoon with rapt attention, I have COnlposed these immortal lines which I dedicate to the
representative of Denmark:
For a speech or a sermn,
We might choose Mount Hernwn,
But for deeds and for labour,
We swear by Mount Tabor.

6

I dedicate these important lines to the distinguished
Ambassador and it can be seen that I have well occupied
my time this evening.
70. I would only, with great restraint, make one comment
on one or two of the speeches we have heard this evening. I
would say it is perhaps odd that the representatives who
refused a week or two ago to deal with the question of the
Middle East in this Council, when the question was
relevant, insist on raising it today, when it is not.
71. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from l+ench): In my
country there is a saying that the word is the only thing
which, though an infant, may give birth to its mother. We
also say in my country that when you arrive somewhere
and you find food prepared, it is difficult to know whether
the food really is meant for you; however, when words are
spoken it is usually fairly easy to guess whether they are
meant for you.
72. I should”therefore like to reply to the observations of
the distinguished and eminent poet of the United Kingdom.
On the first day of our consultations concerning a
cease-fire, when my delegation urged that the question of
the immediate withdrawal of troops should be incorporated
in the draft resolution to be submitted to the Council, I had
the opportunity of discussing this point with the President
of the Council, who was then the representative of
Denmark, and to say to him: “You talk about a cease-fire;
but there are two armies facing each other; there are armed
soldiers, equipped with destructive weapons and ready to
fight. You are asking for a cease-fire, but you are not asking
those soldiers to withdraw. What are they going to do with
those weapons? Play with them? ”
73. The Danish representative is here now and can correct
me if I am mistaken. My point was that in calling for a
cease-fire between two opposing armed camps it is imperative not only to demand a cease-fire, but also to insist on
the most practical factor in a cease-fire, i.e., that the
weapons should be removed, that the armed confrontation
should be eliminated, and that both sides should withdraw
to their original positions.
74. That happened on Monday, the first day of our
consultations with the President of the Security Council.
That was my delegation’s position.
75. Having said that, I should like to add that I am not a
prophet. If, in certain circumstances, having been warned
by X or Y one can be sure, and even has proof, that there is
going to be a clash, if one is perhaps involved in the
situation and later finds good reasons for not allowing the
clash to occur, he can urge all the more strongly that it be
prevented. But that was not true in my case because, I
repeat, I am no prophet. I had no idea that events would
take that course, that Israel was to launch its aggression on
a particular day at a particular time. Some countries had
had wind of this from one source or another. For example,
the United Arab Republic had assured the representatives

of the Soviet Union and the United States that it would
never initiate aggression against any one, that it would
never be the first to attack. But I was not privy to that
b
secret.
76. The PRESIDENT: Before I address the Council on the
question of the organization of our work, and assuming
that there are no other speakers on the item before us, I
should like to say that one thing which the President of a
Council does not want to be is unpopular, especially on the
first day of his ascendancy to the high position of President
of a Council of this distinction. At the same time, I should
like to address an appeal to all members of the Council to
help me in my work and to help the Council to get on with
the job at hand by keeping as much as possible within the
limits of the item before us. I know that it is difficult to
keep exactly within limits in discussing international problems because they are often interrelated, and problems that
have been in our minds as recently as yesterday and are stii
in our minds are bound to come up whenever we discuss
questions of a similar nature in other parts of the world.
Nevertheless, although I realize that that is inevitable in
many cases, I should like to appeal to all representatives to
keep as much as possible within the context of the subject
matter which is before us. I feel that this would be in the
interests of our work and I would appeal to all representatives to co-operate in this respect.
77. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated porn French): I thank
you for all that you have just said, Mr. President. It was
most wise and worthy of you. Allow me, however, to recall
that I studied at a French school and I learned what is
taught in all schools in the world, including French and
British schools, that you cannot make omelets without
breaking eggs.
78. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to thank the representative of Mali for his wise contribution.
79. Coming back to the organization of the work of the
Council and pursuing the suggestion that has already been
made by a number of members of the Council in the course
of our discussion, I should like to know the Council’s wish.
I would venture to suggest that since today we have had the
benefit of receiving the communication of the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and also of
hearing preliminary comments from a number of delegations, the best thing for us to do would be to allow
ourselves some time for consultation and for studying the
report that has been placed before us by the delegation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. If the Council
agrees, we might hold our next meeting tomorrow after=
noon at 4 o’clock, by which time we shall be in a position
to resume our consideration of this very important matter
that is before us.
80. Since there is no objection,
tomorrow afternoon at 4 o’clock.

the Council will meet

The meeting roseat 7.10 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nolions

UNITED
publications,

the world.
01 Geneva.

Consult

COMMENT

your

SE PROCURER

Ler
publications
des
depositaires
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

KAK

nOJlYqMTb

11:1~all1111
;lrClITl’TMS
HUrEGJIiIlC
lIpOj(ailiC

COMO

be

obtained
or

from bookstores
ond distributors
United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

write

LES PUBLICATIONS

110 11CCX pdlOllZU
II:lIl
LllIlllllTC
IlO

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
ddns
les librairier
et les ogences
auprhr
de volre
librairie
ou odressez-vous
b:
ou Genbve.

OPt-AHI43Al4MH

Yllp%
LlapCCy:

throughout
New York

to:

Nations
Unies
sont
entier.
Informez-vous
der ventes,
New York

O~T~IIII~EII~IIIIOihrAnllcllllldX

OKbE@lHEH,HblX

HAL(Mfi

MOilillO
li)‘IlllTl
H I(llll;lillMX
~Iara31uiax
II
CIlpUlliIl
06 ll:1&RllllllX
n llalIICJf
liIIIl~liliOY
OpiWlIl3ElI(Iif~ 06T1C~llllClllIIdX
Ihqllil,
CCIil\HH
II0

IIaqnfi
IkLDOfirlTe

Hbv.bllopli mn Xmeoa.

n3Xnxnir,
CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Los publicocioner

in U.N.

moy

PUBLICATIONS

booksfore

LIBAAHMR

de

en todos
porter
del
Yentas,
Nuevo
York

Litho

NATIONS

Ias Nociones

Unidar

mundo.
Consulte
o Ginebro.

Price:

$U.S.

DE LAS NACIONES

0.50

estirn

en venta

o su librero

o dirijase

(or equivalent

UNIDAS
en librerior

y cosos

a: Nacioner

in other

currencies)

Unidor,

distribuidoras
Secci6n

de

08359-November

1970-2,100
