S

UNITEO
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/18705
19 February 1987
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Argentina, Congo, Ghana, united Arab Emirates and Zambia:
draft resolution

The Security Council,
Deeply concerned at the continuing deterioration of the situation in South
Africa and the worsening of the human suffering that the apartheid system is
causing in that country,
Outraged at the Pretoria racist rbgime's further intensification of its
repressive rule through the imposition of a state of emergency, vesting limitless
powers in its security forces , resulting in the arbitrary arrest, detention without
trial and torture of over 30,000 people and the killing of over 2,500 men, women
and children in the last 20 months, thus further aggravating the already gravely
deteriorating situation,
Recalling its resolutions on South Africa, in particular, resolutions
418 (1977), 558 (1984), 569 (1985) and 591 (19861,
Considering as totally reprehensible the use by the South African regime of
repressive measures, including total news blackout,
Acknowledging the legitimacy of the struggle for a free, united, non-racial
and democratic society in South Africa,
Emphasising the urgent need for the intensification of international support
and assistance to the struggle of the South African people,
Convinced that apartheid cannot be reformed and must therefore be dismantled,
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the prevention and removal
of all threats to international peace and security posed by South Africa's racist
policies and military attacks against, and destabilisation of, independent States
Of the region, as well as the illegal occupation of Namibia,
Notinq with appreciation the voluntary measures taken by some States against
South Africa,

87-04249 63892 (El

/. . .

S/18705
English
Page 2
Bearing in mind the obligations of States underArticle 25 of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Convinced that the Pretoria regime's intransigent refusal to co-operate with
the international efforts in search of a peaceful solution to the escalating
conflict in South Africa compels the international community to impose, as a first
step, mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
d
Acting therefore un er Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in
discharge of its responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace and
security,
1.
Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent refusal to comply with
the decisions of the Security Council and the resolutions of the General Assembly
on the policies and practices of apartheid, the decolonisation of Namibia and on
its acts of aggression against and destabilization of neighbouring independent
States:
2.
Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed South African
people for the elimination of apartheid and for the establishment of a free,
united, non-racial and democratic society in their country;
Declares that racist South Africa's intransigent refusal to comply with
3.
the relevant decisions of the Security Council and the resolutions of the General
Assembly constitute a direct .challenge to the authority of the United Nations and a
violation of the principles of its Charter;
4.

Determines:

(a) That the policies and practices of apartheid pursued by the Pretoria
racist rbgime, which are the root cause of the grave and deteriorating situation in
South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole , constitute a serious threat to
international peace and security;
Ib) That the continued illegal occupation of Namibia as well as the repeated
armed attacks perpetrated by South Africa and destabilization of neighbouring
SlZteS constitute grave acts of aggression and a violation of their sovereignty and
territorial integrity:
5,
Decides, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and in
conformity with its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
Security, to impose the following mandatory sanctions against South Africa, in
accordance with Article 41:
(a) Prohibition on the importation of krugerrands;
(b) Prohibition on the importation of South African military articles;
(c) Prohibition on computer exports to South Africa;

/. . .

S/18705
Enylish
Page 3

(d) Prohibition on the importation of products from South African parastatal
organisations;
(e) Prohibition on loans to the South African rggime;
(f) Prohibition on air transportation with South Africa;
(9) Prohibitions on nuclear trade with South Africa;
(h) Prohibition on the acceptance, receipt, or holding of deposit accounts
from the South African regime or from any agency or entity owned or controlled by
that rbgime;
Ii) Prohibition on importation of uranium and coal from South Africa;
lj) Prohibition on new investment in South Africa;
Ik) Termination of tax treaties and protocols with South Africa;
(1) Prohibition of government procurements from South Africa;
[m) Prohibition on the promotion of tourism to South Africa;
(n) Prohibition on government assistance to, investment in, or subsidy for
trade, with South Africa:
(of Prohibition on importation of South African agricultural products and
food;
(p) Prohibition on the importation of South African sugar;
0~) Prohibition on importation of iron and steel from South Africa;
Ir) Prohibition on exports of crude oil and petroleum products to South
Africa;
(s) Prohibition on co-operation with the armed forces of South Africa;
6.
Calls upon all Member States, in conformity with Article 25 of the
Charter, to implement the present resolution;
7,
Requests the specialized agencies to ensure the effective implementation
of the present resolution;
8.
Urges States not Members of the United Nations to act in accordance with
the provisions of the present resolution;
9.
Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of the provisional rules
of procedure, a Committee of the Security Council to monitor the implementation of
this resolution;
/. . .

S/18705
English
Page 4
10. Calls upon a31 States to report to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on measures taken to implement the present resolutionr
11. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on the
progress of the implementation of this resolution and to submit his first report
not later than 30 June 1987;
12.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
