A/58/PV.68

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

68

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 3 December 2003, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Saint Lucia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Alexandre
(Haiti), Vice-President, took the Chair.

anniversary of the International Year of the Family in
2004”.

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.

The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Third Committee which is before the
Assembly today.

Agenda item 106
Social development, including questions relating to
the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family
Report of the Third Committee (A/58/497)
The Acting President: The Assembly will
consider a report of the Third Committee on agenda
item 106 entitled, “Social development, including
questions relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family”
(document A/58/497).
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Mr. Abdulla Eid Salman Al-Sulaiti of Qatar, to
introduce the report of the Third Committee.
Mr. Al-Sulaiti (Qatar): I have the honour to
present for consideration the first part of the report of
the Third Committee, submitted under agenda item 106
entitled, “Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family”. This report
has the symbol A/58/497, part I. In section 3 of the
report, the Third Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Preparation for and observance of the tenth

It was so decided.
Statements will
explanations of vote.

therefore

be

*0363798*

to

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Third Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind Members that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that “When the same draft resolution
is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain
its vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-63798 (E)

limited

A/58/PV.68

manner as was done in the Third Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 18 of its report.
The draft resolution, entitled “Preparations for the
observance of the tenth anniversary of the International
Year of the Family in 2004”, was adopted by the Third
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/15).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States to speak in
explanation of vote after the vote on the resolution just
adopted.
Ms. Corkery (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to be among the many
sponsors of the resolution contained in A/58/497
entitled, “Preparations for the observance of the tenth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family in
2004”. The United States adheres to the widely
accepted view of the role of the family as the basic
social unit. Further, the United States finds there to be
a strong correlation between the growth of societal
problems and family disintegration.
The United States intends to continue advocating
the importance of stable families as the core of society.
As President Bush said recently, “Strong families make
our Nation better. They teach our children values and
help them become responsible citizens.” The United
States believes that the anniversary year must identify
measures to overcome those societal problems that
undermine stable families. Therefore, the United States
looks forward to local, national, and regional 10th
anniversary commemorations with such goals in mind.
In this vein the United States expects robust Secretariat
assistance to such commemorations and activities, as
mandated most recently in Assembly resolution
57/164, of 16 January 2003. What is the Secretariat
programme for managing this mandate from the United
Nations Membership?
The medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005,
contained
in
document
Supplement
No.
6
(A/57/6/Rev.1), lays out the following Secretariat
strategy for advancing work on family issues: first, to
provide “assistance to Governments and the global

2

community to further the implementation of major
intergovernmental ... policies and programmes to
advance families ... issues”; secondly, the goal to be
accomplished is the “enhanced capacity of Member
States to advance work on social integration, including
issues related to ... families”; and thirdly, to gauge the
programme’s goal achievement by any “increase in the
number of family-related policies and programmes
adopted at the national level”.
This strategy translates into the following
Secretariat support functions: joint consultations,
advocacy and promotion, research, and technical
cooperation.
To be more specific, the mandate requires
Secretariat
support
for
national
coordinating
mechanisms and programmes for observing the
anniversary year; relevant projects by the United
Nations five regional commissions; and, more
specifically from the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs (DESA), an inter-university network of
family scholars, an interactive Internet forum, a
directory of national machineries regarding family
issues, promotional materials — such as media kits,
posters, and United Nations Radio programming — and
a study on the global situation of families as promised
for December 2003 by the Secretary-General in his
report contained in document E/CN.5/2003/6.
Indeed, the United States looks forward to rapid
implementation of today’s mandate by the Secretariat,
in particular by DESA and the Commission for Social
Development, among other United Nations entities.
Of course, follow-up to 1994’s United Nations
International Year of the Family was to have been
ongoing by the Secretariat, as prescribed by the
Secretary-General in his 1995 report in document
A/50/370. The basic objectives of the follow-up,
according to General Assembly’s 1997 resolution 52/81
were to strengthen and support families in performing
their societal and developmental functions and to build
upon families’ strengths, in particular at the national
and local levels.
The United States delegation was pleased that
today’s resolution can be implemented within existing
resources. Reportedly, the mainstreaming of family
issues into the recently created Focal Point on the
Family within DESA’s Division for Social Policy and
Development means that family issues will draw from
the Division’s wider resources as necessary.

A/58/PV.68

Indeed, that will be the case — not only through
the 2004 anniversary year, but also beyond. Today’s
resolution does more than mandate assistance for
anniversary year activities. It establishes a further,
deeper mandate to be met by Secretariat programming:
it strengthens DESA’s programme of work on family
pursuant to International Year of the Family +10
objectives in various ways into the future. Indeed, the
Focal Point on the Family will continue to require
resources as mainstreamed within DESA’s programme
budget.
Beyond the United Nations in New York, other
entities of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations are rightly encouraged to continue their
partnership
roles
with
the
Organization
in
implementing the goals of the anniversary year. We
draw particular attention to the impressive nongovernmental organizations high-level seminar on the
family organized by the International Year of the
Family +10 Committee at United Nations Headquarters
for the 4 December 2003 anniversary launch.
For its part, the United States will programme
activities to reaffirm the statements on the family found
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to
amplify global recognition of family, among other
activities. It looks forward to promoting those activities
widely.
In closing, it is important to reflect that the
people of the world are inextricably linked to one
human family. The United States cares about this
family, as do others, and it seeks to collaborate with
like-minded States for United Nations advocacy of the
importance of family to the wider international
community.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 106.
Agenda item 60 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/58/L.7/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held its debate on this agenda
item, together with agenda item 10, at its 23rd to 27th
plenary meetings on 6, 7 and 9 October 2003.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/58/L.7/Rev.1.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the delegations of Australia,
Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, Georgia, Egypt,
India, Kazakhstan, China, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
Thailand, Ukraine, the Republic of South Africa, Japan
and the Russian Federation, it is my honour to submit
for consideration by the General Assembly the draft
resolution entitled “Responding to global threats and
challenges”.
Today’s world civilization unfortunately is ever
more frequently obliged to counter various challenges
and threats, which are global in nature. The alarming
growth of the scale and brutality of international
terrorism; illegal drug trafficking; transborder
organized crime; continuing bloodshed in regional
conflicts; a menacing deterioration of the environment;
and the spread of poverty, illiteracy and illnesses —
continuing obstacles to sustainable development as a
whole — are only some of the problems, the solution to
which is impossible without the agreed upon collective
efforts of the entire international community.
The fundamental areas and methods for
responding to new threats and challenges were agreed
upon in the Millennium Declaration, adopted two years
ago by Heads of State and Government of United
Nations Member States. In light of the unprecedented
increase in the pace of international life it is clearly
necessary to continuously adapt the actions of the
international community to rapidly changing situations
in a more focused and coordinated manner in order to
mobilize all components of the United Nations system
and the efforts of all States, regional organizations,
civil society and the private sector towards daily
collective work designed to seek out effective answers
to the threats and challenges of our time. That was the
objective of General Assembly resolution 57/145,
which was unanimously adopted a year ago and called
for the United Nations to play a coordinating and
leading role in drawing up an integrated and effective
strategy for responding to the global threats and
challenges of the twenty-first century in the context of
moving towards the objectives enshrined in the
Millennium Declaration.
Many Member States and regional organizations
responded to that resolution and submitted their views

3

A/58/PV.68

to the United Nations Secretary-General. Subsequently,
as is well known, the Secretary-General put forward an
initiative for the establishment of the High-Level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change, which will very
soon begin its work.
The draft resolution submitted today for
consideration by the United Nations General Assembly
has been prepared following a series of informal
consultations in October and November. We would like
to thank all delegations who participated in the
discussion.
The proposals put forward have been taken into
account by the sponsors in the text proposed for
consideration. The preamble reaffirms the coordinating
and leading role of the United Nations in the
establishment of a cohesive and effective system of
response to global threats and challenges, and
recognizes the importance of a comprehensive
approach to their elimination on the basis of the United
Nations Charter and international law, and welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Millennium Declaration and the
observations it contains regarding ways and means for
further responding to threats and challenges.
The operative part takes note of the increased
interaction on the part of the international community
to counter global threats and challenges, and contains
recommendations to continue efforts in this direction
with the leading role played by the United Nations.
Paragraph 4 welcomes the establishment by the
Secretary-General of the High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change in order to prepare proposals
for collective action, and expresses the readiness of the
General Assembly to consider as a matter of priority at
its fifty-ninth session the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the results of the work of the
Panel.
The sponsors hope that the draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/58/L.7/Rev.1,
entitled “Responding to global threats and challenges”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/58/L.7/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/58/L.7/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 58/16).

4

The Acting President: We will now have an
explanation of vote after the vote by Spain.
Mr. Carriedo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): As
regards operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution,
my delegation would like to state once again the well
known position of the Government of Spain, according
to which terrorism is a unique phenomenon that should
not be further qualified.
As President Aznar pointed out in his statement
to the Security Council on 6 May, terrorism is unique
despite its thousand faces. It takes on different aspects,
but it has one substantive identity. There is no such
thing as domestic terrorism and international terrorism,
old or new, first- or second-class terrorism. The
classification is something that academics may wish to
discuss, but it is not a political concept, and despite any
alleged intentions, it just spreads confusion. All types
of terrorism, which are manifestations of violence, are
fundamentally the same and must be combated with the
same hostility and with the same lack of sympathy.
That was recognized by the Security Council
itself in resolution 1456 (2003) of 20 January 2003,
where it used the term “terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations” and thus avoided qualifying it in any
way.
The Spanish delegation trusts that these
considerations will be taken into account at future
sessions of the General Assembly in examining this or
other draft resolutions.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 60.
Agenda item 43 (continued)
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Draft resolution (A/58/L.20)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on this item at its 51st
plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003. In connection
with this item, the Assembly has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/58/L.20.
The General Assembly will now take a vote on
draft resolution A/58/L.20. First I would like to

A/58/PV.68

mention the additional sponsors for the draft
resolution, namely Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany,
Mauritania, Nepal and Tunisia.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.20?
Draft resolution
(resolution 58/17).

A/58/L.20

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 43?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 24 (continued)
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The Acting President: It is my understanding
there is no request to consider this item at the present
session. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item to the
fifty-ninth session, and to include it in the provisional
agenda of the fifty-ninth session?
It was so decided (decision 58/513).
The Acting President: This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 24.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/58/107/Rev.1)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has before it a note by the Secretary-General issued as
document A/58/107/Rev.1. As indicated in that
document, since the terms of office of Argentina,
Benin, Finland, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Peru and Sierra
Leone will expire on 31 December 2003, it will be
necessary for the President of the General Assembly to
appoint, during the current session, seven members to
fill the resulting vacancies. The members so appointed
will serve for a period of three years, beginning on
1 January 2004.

After consultation with the Chairmen of the
Groups of African States, Asian States, Eastern
European States, Latin American and Caribbean States,
and Western European and Other States, the President
has appointed Argentina, Germany, Mexico, Nigeria,
Romania, Senegal and the Syrian Arab Republic as
members of the Committee on the Conferences, whose
terms of office take effect from 1 January 2004. May I
take it that the Assembly takes note of these
appointments?
It was so decided (decision 58/409).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/58/L.23, A/58/L.24,
A/58/L.25 and A/58/L.26/Rev.1)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will resume its consideration of agenda item 38 entitled
“Question of Palestine” to take action on draft
resolution A/58/L.23 to A/58/L.26/Rev.1. Members
will recall that the General Assembly held a debate on
this item at its 65th and 66th meetings, on 1 and 2
December 2003.
We shall now proceed to consider
resolutions A/58/L.23 to A/58/L.26/Rev.1.

draft

Before giving the floor to the speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Shacham (Israel): Israel will vote against the
draft resolutions contained in documents A/58/L.23,
A/58/L.24, A/58/L.25 and A/58/L.26 Rev.1. The
ritualistic recycling of these outdated draft resolutions
year after year remains utterly oblivious to the realities
in the Middle East and contradictory to the letter and
spirit of signed accords.
Draft resolutions A/58/L.23 and L.24 refer
respectively to what are termed the “Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian

5

A/58/PV.68

People” and the “Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat”. Since their inception, these bodies have
obstructed dialogue and understanding through a
preset, one-sided portrayal of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
They are engaged in activities that hinder, rather than
promote, progress towards achieving a peaceful,
negotiated and mutually acceptable solution. Moreover,
the Division for Palestinian Rights, being a body
within the Secretariat mandated to advance the
interests of one side to a conflict, is absolutely contrary
to the impartiality and the objectivity required of the
Secretariat by the United Nations Charter, and is an
example of the bias and lack of legitimacy associated
with the United Nations treatment of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. In addition, these bodies expend
valuable resources which could be better invested in
responding to the real needs of the Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza, let alone other conflicts
throughout the globe.
Draft resolution A/58/L.25 endorses the “special
information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat”. This programme, through its various
seminars, missions and exhibits, also promotes a
distorted and one-sided perspective of the conflict.
Draft resolution A/58/L.26/Rev.1 claims to
support a “Peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine”. Yet the draft resolution, in content and
purpose, actually goes against the agreements already
achieved between the parties and undermines the peace
process it professes to support. As is so common in
General Assembly resolutions on Arab-Israeli issues, it
pretends that Israel has responsibilities with no rights
and that Palestinians have rights but no responsibilities.
This draft resolution openly seeks to predetermine
issues that must be resolved through negotiations,
violates existing agreements and undermines the
integrity and the foundations of the peace process.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in the explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/58/L.23 to A/58/L.26/Rev.1.
We turn first to draft resolution A/58/L.23,
entitled, “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”.
I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following

6

countries have become
Namibia, Oman and Togo.

sponsors

of

A/58/L.23:

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,

A/58/PV.68

Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America

Draft resolution A/58/L.23 was adopted by 97
votes to 7, with 60 abstentions (resolution 58/18).

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uzbekistan

[Subsequently the delegations of Ghana, South
Africa, Turkmenistan and the United Arab
Emirates informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour, and Georgia had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution
A/58/L.24,
entitled,
“Division
for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of A/58/L.24: Namibia
and Oman.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Draft resolution A/58/L.24 was adopted by 98
votes to 6, with 63 abstentions (resolution 58/19).
[Subsequently the delegation of Turkmenistan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour, and the delegation of Georgia had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/58/L.25, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of A/58/L.25: Namibia
and Oman.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,

7

A/58/PV.68

Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Honduras, Rwanda, Tonga, Uganda,
Uzbekistan
Draft resolution A/58/L.25 was adopted by 159
votes to 6, with 6 abstentions (resolution 58/20).

8

[Subsequently, the delegations of Georgia and
Turkmenistan informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/58/L.26/Rev.1,
entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine”.
I would like to announce that since the
introduction of draft resolution A/58/L.26/Rev.1, the
following countries have become sponsors: Namibia
and Oman.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South

A/58/PV.68

Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, Uganda, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Honduras, Nauru, Rwanda, Tonga
Draft resolution A/58/L.26/Rev.1 was adopted by
160 votes to 6, with 5 abstentions (resolution
58/21).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Georgia,
Turkmenistan and the United Arab Emirates
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Price (Canada): Canada has consistently
supported the rights of the Palestinian people,
including the rights to self-determination and to a
Palestinian State, while emphasizing the importance of
the negotiating process in the fulfilment of those rights.
However, we question the value added by the work of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and of the Division for
Palestinian Rights in the pursuit of that ultimate goal.
Therefore we have maintained our abstention on the
draft resolutions contained in documents A/58/L.23
and A/58/L.24.
Mr. Carnelos (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries of the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia and
the associated countries of Bulgaria and Romania, as
well as the European Free Trade Association country
member of the European Economic Area, Iceland, align
themselves with this explanation of vote. I would like

to explain the votes by those countries on draft
resolution A/58/L.23, entitled “Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People”, and draft resolution A/58/L.24, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
During the past year the Middle East was again
struck by great tragedy and violence, resulting, inter
alia, in an alarmingly high number of civilian
casualties. The European Union condemns the recent
acts of terror and violence, which only serve to
endanger the peace process towards reconciliation. We
are convinced that the framework of the peace process
represents the only reasonable hope for ending a
conflict that has already caused far too much suffering
for the peoples involved.
The European Union remains committed to the
Quartet’s road map, which was presented to the parties
on 30 April 2003. Israelis and Palestinians must
address the core issues that divide them through
sustained negotiation, moving quickly towards
implementation of the road map, in order to realize the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side within secure and recognized borders.
The European Union regrets the fact that the
terms of reference of the two United Nations bodies
dealing with the question of Palestine that are the
subject of the two draft resolutions I have referred to
do not sufficiently reflect the spirit of the peace
process. It is for that reason that, as in the past, we
have abstained on the voting on those two draft
resolutions.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I can be brief.
The United Kingdom, like its partners in the
European Union, voted in favour of draft resolution
A/58/L.26/Rev.1, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine”. We did so because we support
the need to find a just and peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestine conflict. But the United Kingdom
regrets that the draft resolution was not better balanced.
The United
absolutely.

Kingdom

condemns

terrorism

Both sides have obligations they need to fulfil in
order to make progress on the road map. The United
Kingdom continues to stand ready to help both sides in
their endeavour to find peace.

9

A/58/PV.68

The Acting President: We have now heard the
last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, we would like to express our gratitude and deep
appreciation to the many States that voted in favour of
the important draft resolutions just adopted. In order to
be brief, I would also like to thank beforehand the
countries that will support the draft resolutions
introduced under the agenda item entitled “The
situation in the Middle East”. In particular, we would
like to thank friendly countries that have sponsored
those draft resolutions, as well as the Member States
and observers in the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
There is undoubtedly great political value in the
adoption of these draft resolutions by such an
overwhelming majority. That majority was achieved
despite the intense pressure exerted, which we know
full well to have exceeded the pressure exerted in years
past. We would like to state that opposition to those
draft resolutions is in a political sense an Israeli
opposition only, which is, regretfully, backed by the
United States of America.
We reiterate our thanks and appreciation to all the
countries that have backed those important resolutions.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude this stage of
its consideration of agenda item 38?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/58/L.27 and A/58/L.28)

Mr. Shacham (Israel): Israel will vote against the
draft resolutions contained in documents A/58/L.27
and A/58/L.28.
Regarding draft resolution A/58/L.27, Israel has
stated its position on its capital, Jerusalem, on many
occasions, and it is a matter of public record.
Moreover, Jerusalem is an issue expressly reserved for
permanent status negotiations between the parties,
which we are currently endeavouring to reconvene.
Both Israel and the Palestinians have committed
themselves to resolving issues relating to Jerusalem
exclusively through negotiations. The attempt to use
this forum as an alternative to the negotiations violates
the agreements between the sides and undermines the
foundation of trust and cooperation that is so necessary
for the permanent status talks to reach a fruitful
outcome. That is why Israel finds the language in this
draft resolution on Jerusalem to be unacceptable.
Concerning draft resolution A/58/L.28, on the
Golan, Israel has stated on many occasions and at the
highest levels its willingness and interest in resuming
its negotiations with Syria without preconditions. As
we have stated previously, the Middle East peace
process is based, first and foremost, on the principle of
direct negotiations. The letter of invitation to the
Madrid Peace Conference of 30 October 1991 calls for
“the parties to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace settlement, through direct
negotiations ... based on United Nations Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The objective of this process is real peace”.
However, the language of this draft resolution attempts
to predetermine the outcome of those negotiations and
thus stands in contradiction to any genuine notion of a
negotiated settlement.
For those reasons, Israel will vote against these
two draft resolutions.

The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this item at
its 66th and 67th plenary meetings, on 2 December
2003.

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.

We shall now proceed to
resolutions A/58/L.27 and A/58/L.28.

draft

The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/58/L.27 and A/58/L.28.

I call on the representative of Israel, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote before the voting. May
I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

We turn first to draft resolution A/58/L.27,
entitled “Jerusalem”. A recorded vote has been
requested.

10

consider

A recorded vote was taken.

A/58/PV.68

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Costa Rica, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, Uganda,
United States of America

Abstaining:
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua,
Rwanda, Solomon Islands, Tonga
Draft resolution A/58/L.27 was adopted by 155
votes to 8, with 7 abstentions (resolution 58/22).
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/58/L.28 is entitled “The Syrian Golan”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,

11

A/58/PV.68

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay
Draft resolution A/58/L.28 was adopted by 104
votes to 5, with 61 abstentions (resolution 58/23).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Democratic
Republic of Korea informed the Secretariat that it
had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Estremé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine Republic voted in favour of draft resolution
A/58/L.28, on the Syrian Golan, because we believe
that its essential aspect is linked to the illicit nature of
the acquisition of territory by force. Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations
prohibits the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity of a State. That is an imperative norm of
international law.
At the same time, I wish to clarify the position of
the Argentine delegation with respect to operative
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution. Argentina’s vote
does not necessarily prejudge the contents of that
paragraph, particularly the reference to the line of 4
June 1967.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): My delegation voted in
favour of draft resolution A/58/L.28, entitled “The
Syrian Golan”. That vote expresses the support of the
Brazilian Government for the draft resolution’s driving
force: the call for all parties to resume peace talks
aimed at establishing a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East. Nonetheless, regarding operative
paragraph 6, I should stress the Brazilian Government’s
position that the border between Israel and Syria is a
matter of negotiation between the two parties on the

12

basis of the parameters established by Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Mr. Carnelos (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, the
associated countries, Bulgaria and Romania and the
European Free Trade Association country belonging to
the European Economic Area, Iceland, align
themselves with this explanation of vote on the draft
resolution just adopted.
I should like to explain my country’s vote on
draft resolution A/58/L.28, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”. The European Union is deeply concerned
about the continued deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East. The current spiral of violence must cease.
There can be no military solution to the Middle East
conflict. A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement
of the situation in the Middle East — including on the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks — must be based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003); on the Madrid terms of
reference, in particular the principle of land for peace;
and on the implementation of the road map and all
existing agreements between the parties. We shall
continue to work relentlessly with the regional parties
and within the Quartet towards that goal.
The European Union also wishes to point out that
a final peace settlement will not be complete if it fails
to take into account the Israeli-Syrian and IsraeliLebanese aspects. Negotiations should resume as soon
as possible with the aim of reaching an agreement. In
that regard, the European Union welcomes the Arab
peace initiative endorsed at the Arab League Summit in
Beirut, which offers the prospect of a comprehensive
peace settlement for the whole Middle East region.
We believe that the draft resolution on the Syrian
Golan contains geographical references that could
undermine the process of bilateral negotiation. For that
reason, as in previous years, the European Union
abstained from voting on the draft resolution.
Mr. Maalouf (United States of America): The
United States remains committed to a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East on all tracks.
Our opposition to the General Assembly draft
resolution regarding the Syrian Golan (A/58/L.28)
stems from the perspective the draft presents regarding
the situation in the Middle East: it implies that only

A/58/PV.68

Israel has obligations and responsibilities to make
peace. This one-sided draft resolution is not consistent
with Syria’s professed desire to resolve the Golan issue
through negotiations, as mandated by Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Syrian President Assad recently reaffirmed his
support for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Syrian actions must reflect those
words. Regrettably, all too often they do not. Syrian
support for terrorist groups dedicated to the
perpetuation of the Arab-Israeli conflict exacerbates
regional tensions and threatens regional peace. The
impact of Syria in Lebanon is harmful to Lebanon’s
prospects for full restoration of its sovereignty.
Lebanon’s sovereignty has been mentioned in
numerous past Security Council resolutions.
We urge Syria to address those issues and to do
what is necessary for a resumption of the peace
negotiations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to thank the
delegations that voted in favour of draft resolution
A/58/L.28 on the Syrian Arab Golan. The resolution
reaffirms once again that occupation, together with the
establishment of settlements and violation of the rights
of peoples, must be rejected by everyone.
Through today’s vote, the General Assembly has
sent Israel a clear message about the need to respect the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations
concerning the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, as well as the need to withdraw from
all the Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. Israel’s
decision to impose its jurisdiction, its laws and its
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null
and void and has no legality whatsoever. Israel’s
continued occupation and de facto annexation of the
Golan constitutes a stumbling block in the way of
achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region. Israel must heed and abide by the
international community’s voice. A settlement can be
achieved only if Israel withdraws from occupied
territory to the line of 4 June 1967 and if it restores the

legitimate rights of
Palestinian people.

peoples,

in

particular

the

We listened to the statement just made by the
representative of the United States of America. It was a
highly regrettable statement because the United States
is a sponsor of the peace process that began in Madrid,
and a sponsor is expected to be impartial and just. But
to be biased and blindly unfair, as the United States has
been, is completely unacceptable.
As shown in the statement made yesterday by its
President, Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, Syria is and always
has been sincere regarding its commitments to the
international community. The United States is the one
most familiar with the commitments and agreements
that Syria has signed with the United States through
negotiations sponsored by the United States in which
Syria committed itself to a just and lasting settlement.
What we heard from the representative of the United
States was a false and distorted statement that twisted
reality. Introducing a foreign issue into the item and the
draft resolution under discussion is absurd and
deserves no comment. The Syrian presence in Lebanon,
which is not the subject of our discussion today, is
based on Lebanon’s request on relevant agreements.
Syria wants Lebanon to enjoy its full sovereignty and
independence, and this has constantly been reaffirmed
by Syria. The interjection of this issue by the
representative of the United States of America for
personal reasons, I suspect, is absolutely unacceptable.
I invite the United States delegation to think over what
its representative said so irresponsibly before the
General Assembly.
The Acting President: I have been informed that
it would be advisable to keep items 37 and 38 open in
the agenda of the fifty-eighth session. Therefore, we
have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda items 37 and 38.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I was
obliged to ask for the floor to comment on what was
said by the representative of the United States. We
would like to express our regret regarding the
irresponsible remarks of the United States
representative. His remarks have, moreover, nothing to
do with the question under consideration, that is, the
Syrian Golan occupied by Israel since 1967, in
contravention of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.

13

A/58/PV.68

I would like to reiterate that Syrian-Lebanese
relations are governed by friendly ties and goodneighbourly relations. The presence of Syria in
Lebanon is based on agreements concluded between
Syria and Lebanon. We urge the representative of the
United States to give thought to the irresponsible
remarks he made because they are rejected.
The Acting President: Before moving to the next
item, I would like to make an announcement regarding
the programme of work of the plenary for Friday,

14

5 December 2003. In addition to agenda items 28 and
40 (f) relating to Afghanistan, the General Assembly
will take up, as a second item, agenda item 35,
“Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait”. As the third item, the
General Assembly will take up agenda item 40 and its
sub-items (a) to (e) relating to humanitarian assistance,
in order to take action on draft resolutions A/58/L.22
and A/58/L.32 to A/58/L.35.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
