12

General Assembly-Sixth Session

4. Urges the governments concerned to seek agreement with a view to an early settlement of their outstanding differences in conformity with the resolutions
of the General Assembly on Palestine; and for this
purpose to make full use of United Nations facilities;
5. Considers that the Conciliation Commission for
Palestine should continue its efforts to secure the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly on Palestine and accordingly should be available
to the parties to assist them in reaching agreement on
outstanding questions;
6. Requests the Conciliation Commission for Palestine to render progress reports periodically to the Secretary-General for transmission to the Members of the
United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary staff and facilities for carrying out the terms
of the present resolution.
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.

513 (VI). Assistance to Palestine Refugees: re•
ports of the Director and the Advisory Com•
mission of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December
1949, as amended by resolution 393 (V) of 2 December 1950,
Having examined the report 6 of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
refugees in the Near East and the special joint report7
of the Director and the Advisory Commission of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency,
Having considered the three-year programme 8 of
relief and reintegration recommended bv the Director
and the Advisory Commission of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency,
1. Commends the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for the development of a constructive programme which will contribute effectively to the welfare
of the refugees;
2. Endorses, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III) of 11 December
1948 or to the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution
393 (V) of 2 December 1950 relative to reintegration
either by repatriation or resettlement, the programme
recommended by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for the relief and reintegration of Palestine
refugees, which envisages the expenditure of $US 50
million for relief and $200 million for reintegration
over and above such contributions as mav be made bv
local governments, to be carried out over a period o·f
approximately three years starting as of 1 July 1951 ;
Recognizing the concern of the United Nations in
the problem of the Palestine refugees,
"Ibid., Supplement No. 16.
'Ibid., Supplement No. 16 A.
• Ibid.

----------------

3. Urges thr governments of the countries in the
area to assist. with due regard to their constitutional
processes, in the carrying out of this programme and
to extend to the United Nations l{dief and Works
Agency, a subsidiary organ established by the General
Assembly, their co-operation in the elaboration of
specific projects and in the general performance of its
functions;
4. Invites the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency to explore with the governments concerned arrangements looking towards their assuming administration of reintegration projn-ts at the eariie,t pos,ible
date;
5. Requests the United Nations Relief and \Vorks
Agency to explore with the governments concerned
the desirability ahd practicability of transferring t!H:"
administration of relief to those governments at the
earliest possible date, and considers that the United
Nations Relief anci Works Agency should continue
to carry the cost of the supply programme, subject to
paragraphs 2 and 6, and to provide assistance for the
health, welfare and educa1io11 programme along with
the duty of making such inspection and such verification of accounts as may be necessary ;
6. Considers that relief expenditures should be reduced in suitable proportion to reintegration expenditures;
7. Decides that the amount of $20 million provided
foi:_ direct relief in resolution 393 (V) of 2 December
19:,0 should be increased to $27 million for the fiscal
year ending 30 June 1952;
8. Decides that, consequent upon paragraph 2 above,
the amount of $30 million provided in resolution 393
_(V) of 2 December 1950 for reintegration should be
111creased to not less than $50 million, and credited to
the reintegration fund provided for in that resolution
for the fiscal year ending 30 June 1952;
9. Approves the budget recommended by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for the fiscal year
1 July 1952 to 30 June 1953, of the equivalent of $118
million of which $100 million shall be available for
reintegration and $18 million for relief;
10. Authorizes the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency to transfer funds allocatt>d for relief
to reintegration ;
11. Urges the governments of Member States to
make voluntary contributions to the extent necessary to
~arry through to termination the programme set forth
111 paragraph 2 above;
. 12. Requests that negotiations regarding contributi_ons for t~e proposed three-year programme be carnecl o~t _with Mem~er and noi;-memher States by the
N egot1atmg Committee for l:.xtra-Budgetary Funds
established by resolution 571 B (VI), adopted by the
General Assembly on 7 December 1951;
13. Expresses its appreciation of the assistance
afforded tn the United Nations Relief and Works
~gency by the specialized agencies and the Cnited :K'a-t10ns Internati,mal Children's Fm0rgency Fund ancf
urges them to render all services possi!Jlt• to strengthen
the programme. of refugee relief and reintegration, anti
to c?-operate_ with the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Rel_1ef and Works, 1:'-gency in ensuring that
the total a~s1stance of the l 111kd Nation,; to Palestine-

Resolutions adopted on reports of the A.d Hoe Political Committee
refugees is rendered with the maximum of co-ordination and efficiency ;
14. Expresses its appreciation to the numerous religious, charitable and humanitarian organizations
whose programmes have afforded valuable supplementary assistance to Palestine refugees, and again requests
them to continue and expand to the extent possible the
work which they have undertaken on behalf of the
refugees.
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.
514 (VI) .. Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report 9 of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16
July 1950 to 15 July 1951.
370th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.
515 (VI). Libya: annual report of the United
Nations Commissioner in Libya; annual re•
ports of the Administering Powers in Libya
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 and 387 (V) of 17 November 1950 resolving
that Libya be constituted a united, independent and
sovereign State, and providing for the adoption of certain measures to this end,
Recalling further its resolution 398 (V) of 17
November 1950 on technical assistance for Libya after
achievement of independence,
Noting the report 10 of the United Nations Commissioner in Libya of 30 October 1951, and his supplementary report 11 of 8 January 1952, prepared in consultation with the Council for Libya, as well as the reports 12
submitted by the Administering Powers in accordance
with resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949,
Noting with appreciation the part played by the
United N ati<?n~ C~mmissioner, the Council for Libya
and the Admm1stermg Powers towards the implementati<:m _of the ~bov<': r~soluti<?ns o! the General Assembly
w1thm the t1me-hm1t specified m those resolutions,
Noting that on 24 December 1951 the United Kingdom of Libya was established as an independent and
sovereign State, all authority in Libya having been relinquished by the Administering Powers to the Government of the United Kingdom of Libya,
1. Congratulates the people and the Government of
the United Kingdom of Libya on the establishment of
Libyan independence in accordance with the provisions
of the pertinent General Assembly resolutions ;1 3
• Ibid., Supplement No. 2.
•• Ibid., Supplement No. 17.
11
/bid., Supplement No. 17 A.
"See documents A/1970 and Add. 1; A/2024 and Add. 1.
12
See, inter alia, resolutions 289 A (IV) 387 (V) and 388

A (V).

'

13

2. Note~ that free and democratic national elt!ctions
will be held in Libya in the near future in accol-dance
with the provisions of the Constitution of the United
Kingdom of Libya;
'.
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
study, in consultation with the Government of the
United Kingdom of Libya, ways and means by which
the United Nations, with the co-operation of all governments and the competent specialized agencies, and upon
the request of the Government of Libya, could furnish
additional assistance to the United Kingdom of Libya
with a view to financing its fundamental and urgent
programmes of economic and social development, giving consideration to the possibility of opening a special
account of voluntary contributions to that end, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventh
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Economic and Social Council any assistance necessary to
enable it to carry out this task;
5. Requests also the Secretary-General to give in
his studies special attention to the economic problems
of the United Kingdom of Libya, and notes in that
connexion Economic and Social Council resolution 367
B (XIII) of 14 August 1951 in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to continue to report,
as part of the annual world economic report, on economic developments in Africa, with special attention
to the measures being taken under the technical assistance and other programmes of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to continue to extend to the United Kingdom of Libya, upon its request, such technical assistance as they may be in a position to render in accordance with the principles of their technical assistance
programmes ;
7. Considers, since the United Kingdom of Libya
has been established as an independent and sovereign
State and has applied for membership in the United
Nations, that it should now be admitted to the United
Nations in accordance with Article 4 of the Charter
and the General Assembly's previous recommendations
on this subject.
370th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.
516 (VI). The appropriate adjustment of the
frontiers between Egypt and the United King•
dom of Libya, with particular reference to
paragraphs 2 and 3 of annex XI of the Treaty
of Peace with Italy
The General Assembly
Takes note of the intention of the Government of
Egypt 14 to enter into negotiations with the Government
of the United Kingdom of Libya with a view to settling in a friendly and good-neighbourly spirit the question of the appropriate adjustment of the frontiers
between Egypt and the United Kingdom of Libya,

,. See O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Ad Hoe Political Committee, 54th meeting.
