UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/4
24 January 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3330th meeting, held on 24 January 1994, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Afghanistan":
"The Security Council deplores the continuing large-scale fighting in
Afghanistan, which is creating mass suffering among the civilian population
and is jeopardizing efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to those in
need.
"The Council notes with concern that the ongoing conflict in
Afghanistan disrupts efforts to establish a political process that would
lead to a broad-based government, is producing another wave of refugees and
displaced persons and detracts from efforts to foster regional stability.
"The Council notes General Assembly resolution 48/208 requesting the
Secretary-General to dispatch as soon as possible a United Nations special
mission to Afghanistan to canvass a broad spectrum of Afghanistan’s leaders
to solicit their views on how the United Nations can best assist
Afghanistan in facilitating national rapprochement and reconstruction. The
Council welcomes the reaffirmation of support for such a mission issued on
12 January 1994 by the Secretary-General and his intention to dispatch this
mission.
"The Council calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities in
Afghanistan and the beginning of a process to create a broad-based
government acceptable to the Afghan people.
"The Council appreciates the humanitarian assistance that the
international community and the countries neighbouring Afghanistan have
been providing to the most recent wave of refugees as well as displaced
persons within Afghanistan and encourages them to increase their assistance
even further.

94-03920 (E)

240194

/...

S/PRST/1994/4
English
Page 2

"The Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General, his
Personal Representative and the United Nations agencies active in
Afghanistan to alleviate the suffering caused by the conflict in that
country. The Council attaches great importance to the continuation of
their work.
"The Council also commends the efforts of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and a number of
concerned States to promote peace in Afghanistan through a political
dialogue among the Afghan parties."

-----
