S/PV.8931

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8931st meeting

Wednesday, 15 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ousman/Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2021/1015)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39636 (E)
*2139636*

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2021/1015)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, and Ms. Wafaa Saeed, Director of the
Coordination Division, United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/1015, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
At this meeting, we will hear a briefing by
Mr. Haysom, Ms. Saeed and Ambassador Hai Anh
Pham, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of Viet Nam, on
behalf of the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief on developments in South Sudan.
During my last briefing (see S/PV.8859), I conveyed
hope that South Sudan was ready to make significant
strides in advancing the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. Since then, regrettably, there has been
reduced momentum on implementing critical aspects
of the agreement, albeit with some progress in the
following areas.
On 29 November, South Sudan concluded its fifth
national governors’ forum. The forum brought together
2/18

15/12/2021

leaders from all 10 states and 2 administrative areas
to enhance policy coordination and best practices in
governance. It marked the first high-level meeting of
all members of Government since the signing of the
peace agreement in 2018. I commend South Sudan’s
leaders for their commitment to dialogue in the forum,
including debating contentious issues.
Parliamentary appointments have continued,
with members of the Other Political Parties coalition
resolving divisions over parliamentary seats, paving
the way for the appointment of their members to the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly and the
Council of States.
By December, President Salva Kiir had reconstituted
and appointed members of nine state assemblies, and
while we commend the parties for achieving the required
35 per cent benchmark for appointing women in Central
Equatoria state, a requirement of the Revitalized Peace
Agreement, we note the shortfall in all the other states.
I welcome the adoption of the Constitution-making
process bill by the Council of Ministers. Once
approved by Parliament, it will guide the permanent
constitution-making process — a prerequisite
for elections.
We are encouraged by the conclusion today of
a three-day conference on transitional justice. It
provided an open forum for dialogue between State and
non-State actors in identifying strategies for enhancing
restorative justice and accountability.
On 4 November, the Government held its first
ever interactive dialogue with the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
Separately, I note the 30 November launch of the joint
committee to implement the action plan for the armed
forces on addressing conflict-related sexual violence.
Furthermore, I welcome the Government’s
decision of November to rejoin the Sant’Egidio process
and encourage the holdout groups, especially the
National Salvation Front, to join the process without
any preconditions.
The steps taken so far in the implementation
of the Revitalized Peace Agreement are welcome.
However, they are not sufficient if the momentum
to realize peace is to be sustained. The failure of the
parties to reach an agreement on command ratios
have promoted a fracturing of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition (SPLM/A21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

IO). Since my last briefing, mediation efforts that
began in Khartoum — seeking to bridge the divide on
chapter II issues and to heal the SPLM/A-IO split with
its Kitgwang faction — have been undermined by the
political crisis in the Sudan.
Let me underline that Government bears a
special responsibility to facilitate the establishment
of the necessary unified forces, including through the
provision of resources. This is only an initial step in a
complex but essential process of constructing a national
army that that is a symbol and mirror of the unity of
its people.
On 8 December 2021, I met with President Salva
Kiir and I raised concerns over the reduced momentum
in implementation of the peace agreement. I am happy
to announce that after our meeting, the Joint Defence
Board announced progress on the implementation of
the transitional security arrangements. Funds have
now been released to the Joint Defence Board for
screening soldiers at training centres preliminary to the
graduation of unified forces. The delivery of food and
medicines has also commenced.
The President has announced that elections will
be held in 2023. While I note that members of the
presidency are yet to coalesce around an electoral
timetable, the next year presents a dramatic challenge
if South Sudan is to graduate through its transition. It
will require both technical and political preparations,
including an agreement on the Constitution, as well as
on the rules governing the election.
We expect the domestic political temperature to
rise as elections draw closer. I am therefore deeply
concerned at the restrictions on civic space, including
in response to calls for non-violent demonstrations
by the People’s Coalition for Civil Action. I urge the
Government to promote the fundamental human rights
of all South Sudanese, including freedom of expression,
to create a platform for democratic dialogue in a free
and fair electoral process.
I am also concerned by the slow operationalization
of Parliament. As the year concludes and South Sudan
heads towards a legislative recess, there is risk of a
logjam on critical bills to facilitate constitution-making,
elections preparations, the establishment of national
justice institutions, adopting the national budget and
progressing public financial reforms. While a number
of laws have been drafted and passed by the Council
of Ministers, the standing committees to consider and

S/PV. 8931

debate these bills are yet to be established. UNMISS and
partners have already intensified support for legislative
and constitution-making processes, including capacitybuilding support for women parliamentarians, the newly
formed youth caucus and the national constitutional
amendment committee.
We also continue to work on building the justice
chain, including through the deployment of mobile
courts, without which our efforts to promote criminal
accountability and contain extrajudicial killings would
be difficult.
It is clear that there are headwinds in all of these
tasks. I call on the parties to muster a renewed sense
of political will and build trust so as to avoid a state of
paralysis and, in a worst-case scenario, a collapse of the
peace agreement.
I am also concerned that multiple regional crises
are reducing the political bandwidth for international
attention on South Sudan, at a time when international
support is urgently needed. This concern was shared
at a recent conference held in Uganda, attended by key
stakeholders and guarantors, including several Special
Envoys on South Sudan. The subsequent decision of the
President of Uganda to host a South Sudan leadership
retreat in January is welcome and should be supported
in order to give impetus to the peace process.
In regard to our concern over the protection of
civilians, the permanent ceasefire is largely holding.
In fact, partly because of UNMISS, the number of
civilian casualties attributed to localized violence has
been roughly halved this year, compared to the same
period last year. Civilians still bear the brunt of conflict
in South Sudan, perpetuating cycles of trauma and
revenge that undermines the prospects for longer-term
reconciliation and societal healing.
The Mission is doing all that it can, within our
capabilities, to support the Government in its primary
responsibility to protect civilians. Our concern is to rise
above fire-fighting modalities and build more durable
solutions to conflict.
The Mission continues to adapt its strategy of
responding to conflict hotspots in an integrated
manner, including through the flexible deployment
of what we call temporary operating bases. These
bases have enabled the Mission to deploy rapidly to
hotspots for conflict resolution and create conditions
for the provision of humanitarian assistance, such as in

21-396363/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Tambura, Western Equatoria, or to provide a stabilizing
environment, as in Warrap and Jonglei, or to provide a
security umbrella for the safe and dignified return of
displaced people, as in Koch, Unity state.
Meanwhile, UNMISS continues to oversee the
protection-of-civilians site in Malakal. Planning
continues for its eventual redesignation, but only once
political and security dynamics allow. I am pleased
to report a continuous reduction in restrictions on
UNMISS patrols since the formation of a high-level
coordination committee between the Mission and the
Government of South Sudan earlier this year.
The briefing by the Director of the Coordination
Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which the Council will hear
shortly, will highlight the dire humanitarian situation,
which in turn is reflected in anger and frustration of a
politically and economically marginalized youth.
Recently, I visited Bentiu, in Unity state, which
is reeling from the worst floods in six decades. The
situation is truly shocking. Flood waters are not receding,
and hundreds of thousands of people are displaced
and in desperate need of assistance. I commend the
tireless efforts of our UNMISS peacekeepers alongside
the humanitarian community. All have been working
around the clock since September to construct over 70
kilometres of dykes to keep the menacing water at bay
and prevent a disastrous collapse of infrastructure.
All of that demonstrates South Sudan’s high
vulnerability to climate change. I can share with the
Council that a newly established UNMISS-United
Nations country team working group on climate
change and security will develop integrated strategies
to address such climate-related security risks.
In the broader Horn of Africa region, which is
facing complex political, security and humanitarian
challenges, it is essential now more than ever to ensure
that South Sudan remains stable. I am pleased to
mention that, during my engagements with the African
Union Commission and the African Union Ad Hoc
Committee for South Sudan in Addis Ababa last week,
there were strong commitments made to re-engage, at
the highest levels, in support of the peace process.
What is at stake here is the continued viability of
the Revitalized Peace Agreement. Allow me to reaffirm
the commitment of UNMISS and the entire United
4/18

15/12/2021

Nations family to the Government and the people of
South Sudan to that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Saeed.
Ms. Saeed: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council today.
Since the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs briefed the Council in September
(see S/PV.8859), the humanitarian situation in South
Sudan has deteriorated. Special Representative Haysom
just outlined the political and security dynamics. I will
focus on the drivers of humanitarian needs, the response
by humanitarian partners and the action required to
alleviate the suffering of millions of South Sudanese as
we move into 2022.
The people of South Sudan have faced the highest
levels of food insecurity since independence in
2011 and the renewed conflict, which began in 2013.
According to the latest Integrated Phase Classification
(IPC) analysis, between April and July of this year, at
the height of the lean season, 7.2 million people were
estimated to be at crisis phase — Integrated Phase
Classification 3 or above — 2.4 million of whom are
at the emergency phase — IPC 4 or above. There are
also 108,000 people in six counties — namely, Akobo,
Pibor, Aweil South, Tonj East, Tonj North and Tonj
South — facing catastrophic levels of acute food
insecurity. In five of those locations, conflict was the
major driver of displacement leading to the loss of lives,
livelihoods and assets.
Increased food insecurity, illness and poor access
to clean water, hygiene and sanitation heightened
malnutrition levels among children under 5 years old.
About 1.4 million children under the age of 5 and
480,000 pregnant or lactating women were estimated
to be acutely malnourished and in need of treatment in
2021 — the highest number since 2013.
Insecurity and subnational violence continued to
disrupt the lives of hundreds of thousands of South
Sudanese. According to the International Organization
for Migration’s displacement tracking matrix, around
300,000 people were newly displaced between March
and October of this year, bringing the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) to 2 million.
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Women and girls continue to face extreme levels of
gender-based violence, exacerbated by armed conflict,
organized violence, coronavirus disease restrictions
and forced displacement due to flooding. Much of the
violence goes underreported, with limited response
services available to survivors.
In Tambura county, Western Equatoria, while
the situation is improving with security provided by
the Government, 13 of the 20 health facilities are not
operational due to violence by armed actors, and only
eight out of 53 schools in the county are open. In the
Maganis area of Upper Nile, fighting between the
Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
in Opposition has displaced people, including into the
Sudan. Around 70,000 South Sudanese have crossed
over into the Sudan this year, driven by food insecurity
and violence.
The effects of climate change are also being felt
in South Sudan, with flooding and dry conditions
disrupting livelihoods and food security and increasing
the risk of displacement and violence, as we have also
just heard from Special Representative Haysom. Since
May, humanitarian needs have been exacerbated by
catastrophic flooding for the third consecutive year,
impacting some 835,000 people in 33 of 78 counties.
More than 80 per cent of affected people are in Jonglei,
Unity and Upper Nile states.
Nyawuora, a 40-year-old mother of nine children,
is one of many whose life and livelihood are devastated.
She moved to the Bentiu IDP camp in July with her
family after floods destroyed their house and all
their belongings. Nyawuora and her children are now
depending on humanitarian assistance to survive. She
is one of some 19,000 people displaced by flooding
who have sought refuge alongside town residents and
more than 100,000 internally displaced people in the
IDP camp. In what is essentially an expanding city, tens
of thousands of people are already facing a hepatitis-E
outbreak and the serious risks of an increase in waterborne diseases due to poor sanitation conditions.
Conflict, as well as violence directed at aid workers
and their assets, operational interference, bureaucratic
impediments, and physical access challenges continue
to impact the humanitarian response. South Sudan
remains one of the most dangerous places in the world
for aid workers. After several days of violence in Leer,
Unity state, a nutrition aid worker was killed a few days

S/PV. 8931

ago. The total number of aid workers killed in 2021 so
far is four.
Following earlier suspension due to the interference
by armed youth, humanitarian partners were able to
resume aid operations in Pibor and Renk as a result of
intense engagement by members from the community
and the Government. The United Nations Mission in
South Sudan facilitated humanitarian access through
long-range patrols and the setting up of temporary
operating bases in several locations, as per the examples
provided by Special Representative Haysom.
Humanitarian partners assisted some 5 million
people across the country between January and October
with food, medical and nutritional care, water and
sanitation, protection support and shelter. Humanitarian
partners also conducted a massive multisectoral response
that averted famine. More than 500,000 people across
the six food-insecure counties were provided with food
assistance, protection, health and water, hygiene and
sanitation services. More than 46,000 children under
the age of 5 and pregnant and lactating women received
therapeutic nutritional services.
To enable that response, humanitarian partners were
compelled to reprogramme in-country support, which
saw the reduction of food rations to IDPs, refugees and
communities at crisis level — IPC 3 — outside of the
six at-risk counties.
The delivery of adequate basic services, particularly
health, education and the expansion of social protection,
is vital to sustain livelihoods, strengthen resilience and
enable the conditions for those who wish to return to
their areas of origin.
However, we must also realize that, for many of the
now 2 million people who have been displaced over the
years, return might not be an option. The possibility
that many internally displaced persons — including
those in former protection-of-civilian sites such
as Bentiu and Malakal — might choose to remain
could see those sites becoming permanent urban or
suburban settlements. That needs to be recognized, and
steps should be taken to support people wherever they
chose to stay. Long-term planning will be required to
address this new phenomenon.
The scope and the scale of the humanitarian needs
and the challenges I have outlined are outstripping
our ability to adequately respond. Although the 2021
South Sudan humanitarian response plan is funded at

21-396365/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

about 68 per cent, that belies the fact that many sectors,
such as health, nutrition, protection, water, hygiene and
sanitation, are severely underfunded.
The pooled fund mechanisms are playing an essential
role, with $35 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund and $69 million from the South Sudan
Humanitarian Fund provided this year. I thank those
donors that have supported us so generously this year.
More is needed by more donors to act as champions for
South Sudan and to provide early funding to the 2022
humanitarian response plan, which requires $1.7 billion
to support 8.4 million people in need.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight three key points.
First, adequate and early funding is required to
sustain the gains made so far, particularly in averting
catastrophic food insecurity levels.
Secondly, the Government and non-State actors
need to abide by their obligation to facilitate safe and
unhindered access and to protect aid workers.
Lastly, while the implementation of the peace
process has brought about some positive impact, it
remains slow. And I think Special Representative of
the Secretary-General referred to the momentum of
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
As such, violence continues to erupt, and all actors
with influence must work to ensure the protection of
civilians across South Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Saeed
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Pham.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): On behalf of His Excellency
Ambassador Dang Dinh Quy, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, I have the
honour to brief the members of the Security Council
since the Chair’s previous briefing to the Council on
15 December 2020 (see S/2020/1237). In my statement,
I intend to provide a brief overview of the developments
in the Committee since the beginning of 2021, notably
the visit by the Chair and his delegation to South Sudan
in mid-November of this year.
To date, the Committee has met in person on three
occasions during informal consultations, and also on
three occasions in closed video-teleconferences (VTC).
6/18

15/12/2021

On 29 January, during a closed videoteleconference, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Panel of Experts, in a meeting open to South Sudan
and regional States, regarding the Panel’s interim report
(see S/2020/1141).
On 26 February, during a closed VTC, the Committee
received a briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
On 26 March, again during a closed VTC, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts
on the Panel’s final report (see S/2021/365), which
was submitted pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution
2521 (2020), and discussed the recommendations
contained therein.
On 18 June, the Committee held its first in-person
meeting since February 2020, during which the
Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of Experts,
in a meeting open to South Sudan and regional States,
concerning the Panel’s final report.
On 15 October, during informal consultations,
the Committee received a briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
Finally, on 2 December, during informal
consultations, the Chair briefed the Committee on his
most recent visit to South Sudan, which took place from
16 to 20 November.
In relation to the Chair’s visit to South Sudan, the
Chair and his delegation met with relevant stakeholders
in South Sudan, including His Excellency President
Salva Kiir Mayardit, First Vice-President Riek Machar
Teny, Vice-Presidents, the Speaker of the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly, members of the Council
of Ministers, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
diplomatic missions and civil society representatives,
including women’s groups and religious leaders, both
in Juba and Wau.
Most of the discussions focused on the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, in particular
chapter 2, on the security arrangements, as well as
the implementation of the key benchmarks set by the
Security Council in paragraph 2 of resolution 2577
(2021), in which the Council requested the South Sudan
authorities to report to the Committee no later than
15 April 2022 on the progress achieved.
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Since the beginning of 2021, the Committee has
received one exemption request to the arms embargo,
which was granted. Also, two exemptions requests
were received concerning the travel ban and assets
freeze measures, all of which were granted.
In conclusion, the Chair of the Committee would
like to take this opportunity to express his gratitude
to the members of the Committee, South Sudan and
regional countries for their active engagement in the
work of the Committee under his chairmanship. He
would also like to thank the Secretariat, particularly
the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, for
its invaluable assistance with the everyday work of the
Chair. He wishes all the best to the incoming Chair of
the Committee.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Pham for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom and Ms. Saeed for their
presentations. And I thank my colleague from Viet Nam
for the briefing, and I welcome South Sudan’s presence
in our discussion today.
We want to begin by conveying our deepest
appreciation to the troops, police and civilians who
serve, under great personal risk, to protect civilians in
South Sudan.
Today I would like to address three aspects of the
situation in South Sudan: the humanitarian needs, the
subnational violence and the erosion of civic space, and
the slow progress towards implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan.
First, the catastrophic floods in South Sudan
have endangered over 850,000 people. When that
flooding is paired with food insecurity, ongoing
violence, mass displacement and a global pandemic,
it creates a dire humanitarian situation. We encourage
the international community to support the United
Nations and humanitarian partners and address gaps
in humanitarian funding and resources. We also
urge national and subnational levels to do everything
possible to facilitate humanitarian access and protect
workers who deliver aid.

S/PV. 8931

Secondly, the United States remains deeply
concerned by the ongoing subnational violence in
Upper Nile, Unity, Warrap, Lakes, Jonglei and Western
and Central Equatoria states. The violence has led to
looting, mass displacement and hundreds of civilian
deaths. We are disturbed by human rights abuses
reported in Lakes, Warrap and Tambura, including
killings on the basis of ethnicity.
The
recent
report
by
an
international
non-governmental organization detailed horrifying
attacks on civilians, including the murder and
mutilation of pregnant women, the killing of the elderly
and disabled and the murder of civilian captives. The
Government of South Sudan must hold those responsible
accountable — not only those who perpetrated these
abuses, but also those who mobilized and ordered
the fighters to carry out these gruesome attacks. The
Government must take measures to protect civilians,
humanitarian and development workers, journalists,
internally displaced persons, women and children.
The United States is also concerned about the
eroding civic space in South Sudan, which has forced
human rights defenders and other activists to flee the
country. The targeting of civil society discourages
participation in the participatory processes outlined
in the 2018 agreement, including transitional justice,
constitutional development and preparations for
elections. We call on the Government of South Sudan
to respect the rights of all citizens in accordance with
the Transitional Constitution.
Thirdly, and finally, it has been more than three
years since the signing of the peace agreement, and its
signatories have been slow in making progress. We urge
the Government of South Sudan to fully implement
the agreement. That means swiftly implementing an
inclusive constitution-drafting process, public financial
management reform, transitional security arrangements
and transitional justice mechanisms, including the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan, in order to ensure free
and fair elections in 2023.
We stress that elections need to be preceded by an
inclusive, transparent constitution-drafting process.
The result should be free and fair elections that reflect
the will of all South Sudanese, including women,
youth, people with disabilities, displaced persons and
members of all political groups.
Let me be clear — the provisions of the arms
embargo are not responsible for delays in the training

21-396367/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and graduation of the Necessary Unified Forces. The
purpose is to create space to advance the peace process
and for South Sudanese civil society to participate in
its own democracy and governance. The arms embargo
helps protect civilians by curbing the flow of weapons
into the country.
Should the South Sudanese Government require
any arms or materiel in order to implement the peace
agreement, there are clear exemption procedures in
place. The Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, received only one
arms-embargo exemption request this year, as Council
members just heard, and that request was granted.
We regret that the Panel of Experts could not
participate in the Committee’s trip last month because
the slate of proposed candidates has been on hold since
June. The Panel’s reporting is vital to the work of
the Committee.
The United States remains committed to the
people of South Sudan and to working closely with the
transitional Government, our fellow Council members
and all stakeholders to enable peace and prosperity for
the country and the region.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): It is
an honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — Kenya, the
Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1). We thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom, Ms. Saeed, Director
of the Coordination Division of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and His Excellency Mr. Hai Anh Pham, on behalf of
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan. for
their detailed briefings. We welcome the presence of
the representative of South Sudan. We also note that the
Security Council has been receiving periodic written
reports from the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, for which we are grateful.
Today’s meeting takes place exactly one month
following the visit by members of the Security Council
to South Sudan. We extend our gratitude to all those
who made the visit a success, especially the warm
hospitality of the people and the Government of South
Sudan, Ambassador Dang Dinh Quy and his team, as
well as the support of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and the Secretariat.
8/18

15/12/2021

Furthermore, we appreciate the opportunity to
obtain first-hand experience of the situation on the
ground and engage directly with relevant stakeholders,
including His Excellency President Salva Kiir
Mayardit, members of the reconstituted Transitional
National Legislative Assembly and the Council of
Ministers, UNMISS, diplomatic missions and civil
society representatives, including women’s groups and
religious leaders.
The A3+1 welcomes the ongoing progress in
South Sudan and recognizes the existing challenges
and opportunities, most of which are reflected in the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2021/1015).
We also offer the following perspectives.
First, the advances on the political front during the
past three years following the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan are promising. In that respect,
we urge all relevant stakeholders to continue with
the full implementation of the revitalized agreement
and underscore the importance of the principle of
inclusivity in representation in governance institutions,
including the minimum 35 per cent quota for women’s
participation, along with youth representation.
We also commend the Government for the
reconstitution and appointment of members of the
State assemblies in various regions, as well as the
Council of Ministers for the review and adoption of
the Constitution-Making Process Bill 2020/2021. The
adoption of the Bill is a first and significant step. We
encourage the authorities to make headway in fully
operationalizing the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly in order to ensure that the permanent
constitution-making process can move forward and that
other critical legislations are enacted.
Secondly, we are pleased that the permanent
ceasefire continues to hold, but we note worrisome
incidents of ethnic and intercommunal clashes in some
parts of the country and tensions among factions of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army in
Opposition. It remains necessary that security measures
be strengthened and enhanced, specifically advancing
transitional security arrangements, including the
unification of the armed forces and the graduation of
the Necessary Unified Forces, as well as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Thirdly, the security challenges cannot be delinked
from the prevailing socioeconomic and humanitarian
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

difficulties. The dire humanitarian situation has been
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and the adverse effects of climate change,
which have resulted in devastating flash floods that
contributed to new mass displacements, waterborne
diseases and increasing food insecurity. Those
challenges underscore the deeply enmeshed root causes
of South Sudan’s crises and the need for urgent, yet
durable, responses and solutions. Accordingly, we
applaud the continuing efforts of the Government to
tackle those underlying issues and the support provided
by the international community.
The aforementioned also leads us to repeat our
call for full respect of international law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and compliance with the statusof-forces agreement. We commend all humanitarian
partners, agencies and their workers for their efforts in
delivering assistance to those in need, and we urge the
Government to ensure their protection so that they can
conduct their work in a secure and safe environment.
Similarly, we call for the consideration of the lifting
of all sanctions and other unilateral coercive measures
in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic to enable the
Government to meet the people’s needs.
South Sudan’s transition is at a very important
stage, and it will benefit tremendously from the
inclusion of those who remain on the periphery. The
A3+1 therefore looks forward to the non-signatories
resolving differences and joining the peace process. We
also reiterate our full support for the meaningful work
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the Community of Sant’Egidio to assist in that regard.

S/PV. 8931

of truth-seeking mechanisms and providing reparations
for victims will help to reconcile and unite the South
Sudanese people.
The continued engagement and support of the
international community, regional organizations and
South Sudanese partners, in particular the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, are also crucial in carrying
forward the common objective of helping South Sudan
to close important gaps that conspire against its peace,
sustainable development and stability.
We also take this opportunity to commend and
reiterate our support for UNMISS in its instrumental
role in promoting South Sudan’s long-term stability
and socioeconomic development. To be very clear,
the Government holds the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians. Nevertheless, we cannot overlook
the significant and complementary role that UNMISS
has played in the areas of protection and security. We
also remain confident that UNMISS will be able to
implement its three-year strategic vision. However, that
can be achieved only if the Mission is made to be fit for
purpose, including through concrete support towards
the implementation of the revitalized agreement.
In conclusion, Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirm our commitment
to continue accompanying the sisterly nation of South
Sudan in its journey towards lasting peace, sustainable
development, stability and prosperity.

Having recently commemorated its tenth
anniversary of independence, South Sudan continues to
demonstrate its commitment to achieving the aspirations
of its people. Undoubtedly, structural problems linger,
and challenges lie ahead. As the country transitions to
peace, accelerating and scaling-up the implementation
of the revitalized agreement remains key, especially
advancing decisively with regard to security and
transitional justice arrangements.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): First, I want to join
others in thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Ms. Wafaa
Saeed for their briefings this morning. I think they
were refreshingly clear and were illustrative of both the
challenges overcome and those remaining, which are
concerning. I would also like welcome our colleagues
from South Sudan to the table today. I also express our
appreciation to Viet Nam for its briefing on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, and
for the excellent chairmanship of the Committee for the
past two years. Its leadership and collegiality were very
much appreciated.

In the area of transitional justice, we are satisfied
that the Cabinet approved the establishment of the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan and believe that it
is of the utmost importance to assist the country in
implementing chapter V of the Agreement vis-à-vis
truth, reconciliation and reparations. The establishment

While I will not delve into the issue of sanctions
here, it would be remiss of me not to mention the
recent visit of the Sanctions Committee to South
Sudan. The main message relayed during that visit by
interlocutors — at all levels — is that the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the

21-396369/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

15/12/2021

Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan has been too
slow. We have heard it consistently in this Chamber
over the past few months, and we heard it again today. I
think that we can all see that this needs to change.

agreement. While the reconstitution of the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly is a positive step in that
regard, its inaction to date has been a disappointment,
illustrating that token implementation does not work.

Slow implementation of the peace process, as
described in concerning detail again this morning by the
Special Representative, is contributing to catastrophic
outcomes. We are concerned about the persistent pattern
of subnational violence and the impaired security
apparatus. We regret the culture of impunity around
conflict-related sexual violence and serious human
rights violations, including extrajudicial executions.
These are facilitated by a lack of sufficiently robust
accountability mechanisms and inadequate support for
survivors. They urgently need to be addressed. Slow
implementation also inflicts additional trauma on a
population that has already endured more than enough.
It also compounds efforts to address a dire humanitarian
situation, as we heard this morning — now exacerbated
by record levels of flooding.

Not long ago, the Council marked South Sudan’s
tenth anniversary since independence with statements
reflecting the great hopes of a nation. Those hopes
can transform into the better future we all strive for,
but only when trust in the State exists. However, trust
must be earned. Through delivering on basic needs and
social services and protecting and promoting human
rights, we know that South Sudan can move forward.

We know that around the world climate-related risks
directly translate into peace and security threats. The
prolonged and intense flooding experienced in South
Sudan this year, the worst in decades, is a case in point.
It has led to population displacement, the disruption of
agriculture and altered cattle migration patterns. All of
that risks accentuating or provoking violence. Ireland
welcomes the role of United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) in engaging in innovative community
peacebuilding measures, which can mitigate such risks
and help to prevent violence. We are also proud to have
contributed to efforts to strengthen the Organization’s
capacity to address those climate-related security
risks in South Sudan through our support for a climate
security adviser with the Climate Security Mechanism.
In September (see S/PV.8859), Ireland emphasized
the need to look to the future in order to grant the
people of South Sudan, and its youth in particular,
what they should legitimately expect — the freedom
to protest in safety, to go to school, to work and, above
all, to thrive. It is time for those with power, authority
and resources in the country to deliver for the citizens
of South Sudan. It is certainly high time for all to move
from rhetoric to reality.
Looking to the future, the holding of inclusive
and democratic elections in South Sudan is a
welcome prospect, but one that is reliant on the full
implementation and operationalization of the peace
10/18

Finally, I wish to affirm Ireland’s praise of, and
gratitude for, the work of UNMISS in taking the first
crucial steps in readying the country for elections, and
I wish to assure the Special Representative that we will
stand by him and his team as he face the challenges
ahead in meeting that important responsibility.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Haysom and
Ms. Wafaa Saeed for their briefings this morning. We
also warmly congratulate Ambassador Dang Dinh Quy
and his team for their diligence in leading the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, as well as for
their leadership in the Committee’s successful mission
to South Sudan last month, despite the inexplicable and
persistent obstacles with regard to the situation of the
Panel of Experts.
Mexico recognizes the important role played by
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
in the coordination of the strategic vision and for the
support it is providing to conduct elections at the end
of the transition period. We will closely follow the
progress in the establishment of the electoral assistance
team, and we hope that an inclusive and legitimate
organizational process will lead to free, fair, credible
and peaceful elections.
In that regard, we note that the establishment of the
specialized committees is necessary for the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly to move forward and
adopt the law for the constitution-making process,
which is a prerequisite for holding elections. We call for
increased efforts to ensure that the National Assembly
and state assemblies operate without impediments and
with a minimum 35 per cent women’s participation.
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Progress must also be made in the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which has
thus far been minimal and selective. We call on the
Government of South Sudan to accelerate measures,
particularly in the area of security, such as the
unification of forces and aspects of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. Progress is
also needed in passing legislation to make available the
necessary resources to implement those provisions.
In short, claiming to justify delays in the
implementation of the Agreement by invoking the
arms embargo merely casts doubt on the Government’s
sincerity in complying with the Revitalized
Peace Agreement.
As mentioned previously, South Sudan is
unfortunately prone to constant flash floods, which
this year have affected nearly 850,000 people. The
magnitude of these events makes recovery impossible
before the next rainy season hits the country, which
triggers a domino effect of growing numbers of
internally displaced persons, worsening food insecurity
and clearly increasing disease. That of course
exacerbates intercommunity tensions and clashes over
scarce resources.
Precisely because of the seriousness of this
situation, as Ms. Saeed has explained to us, the increase
in the number of humanitarian-access-related incidents
is alarming. We deeply regret the threats of destruction
and looting of humanitarian supplies and resources
in Pibor, Renk and Tonj. We urge the authorities to
redouble their efforts aimed at ensuring the security of
and unhindered access for humanitarian personnel.
In conclusion, my country expresses its concern
about the reports of extrajudicial executions in Lakes
and Warrap states, as well as widespread acts of sexual
violence and human rights violations. We demand that
the authorities respect the human rights standards and
norms set forth in the international instruments to
which South Sudan is a party and strengthen the rule
of law in general.
The progress in setting up the Commission for
Truth, Reconciliation, and Healing is certainly a
positive sign, and we encourage further progress on this
and the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South
Sudan. In the end, the creation of spaces in which the
plurality of South Sudanese people can express their

S/PV. 8931

rights freely and without fear of reprisal will be vital in
the run-up to the electoral process.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Director of the Coordination Division, United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador
Hai Anh Pham for his overview of the developments
in the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) since last year. Vietnamese Ambassador
Dang Dinh Quy led the Committee for last two years
with distinction and conviction. I would like to put on
record my delegation’s appreciation for Ambassador
Quy and his team. I also welcome the presence of the
representative of South Sudan at today’s meeting.
The last three months have seen notable progress
in South Sudan. The Council of Ministers reviewed
and adopted the Constitution-Making Process Bill
2020/2021. Now, the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly (TNLA) must consider the Bill. New members
of the TNLA have been appointed, and 9 out of 10 ten
state assemblies have been reconstituted — all of them,
except the state assembly for Western Bahr el-Ghazal.
We welcome these developments and hope that, in the
coming months, the TNLA will move forward with
critical next steps, establish specialized committees and
frame legislation related to election preparation and the
Constitution-making process. We also note that, during
the reporting period, political violence has decreased,
and the parties have been, by and large, faithful to
the revitalized agreement. It is also encouraging that
the economic situation has remained stable, and that
economic activity has recovered across the country.
A visit by the 2206 Committee to South Sudan last
month, under the chairmanship of Viet Nam, provided
an opportunity to better understand the situation on the
ground in the country. South Sudan has clearly made
positive progress in the last few years, which is also
evident in the increased economic activity in Juba.
We continue to underscore that the Security Council
must do all it can to promote and consolidate the
progress made so far. In keeping with the Revitalized
Peace Agreement signed three years ago, the end goal
remains conducting free, fair and credible elections in
the country.
On the security front, it is encouraging that the
ceasefire continues to hold. Localized violence persists,
although it has decreased by 53 per cent compared to

21-3963611/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

last year. However, persistent violence underlines the
importance of the early establishment of the unified
command of the military and the graduation of the
Necessary Unified Forces, which is a critical aspect of
the Agreement. The implementation of the transitional
security arrangements remains critical for the electoral
process at the end of the transitional period, as is the
early resumption of the Rome mediation efforts by
the Sant’Egidio community with the Agreement’s
non-signatories. Early action on these aspects
is important.
The humanitarian situation has been affected by
recent floods. The international community, including
the United Nations, needs to step up its efforts to bridge
the resource and capacity gaps faced by the Government.
The 2021 humanitarian response plan has a shortfall of
nearly 33 per cent, amounting to $550 million.
With regard to the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
we have noted the improved communication between
UNMISS and the Government. This development is
having a positive impact on the facilitation of Mission’s
operations, which is evident from the decrease in statusof-forces-agreement violations. We also take note of
the integrated cross-mission approach, including the
setting up of temporary operational bases.
Since the Mission’s establishment a decade ago,
India has been one of the largest troop contributors
to UNMISS. At present, we have nearly 2,300 troops
serving in the country. The Indian contingent in
UNMISS is also contributing to the sustainable
development and welfare of the people of South Sudan.
Earlier this month, our battalions organized computer
training and veterinary assistance camps in the places
of their deployment.
In this transformative phase, we believe that
South Sudan requires the wholehearted support of
the international community, including from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations. On the bilateral
front, India’s Minister of State for External Affairs,
Shri V. Muraleedharan, visited South Sudan on
20 to 22 October 2021. He held discussions with South
Sudan’s leadership, including the President and Foreign
Minister, on advancing bilateral relations, particularly
with regard to trade and investment. India is committed
to working with the Government of South Sudan in its
quest for peace, progress and prosperity.
12/18

15/12/2021

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I want to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom,
Ms. Saeed, and Ambassador Pham for their briefings.
I would like to start by commending the improved
overall communication between the Government and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the positive actions by the Government designed to
advance the transitional-justice agenda. We hope that
the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan
as well as the Compensation and Reparation Authority
will follow suit, as stipulated in the Revitalized
Peace Agreement.
For the entirety of our membership in the
Security Council, we have been asking for the swifter
implementation of the Peace Agreement. It is still
delayed, and this eventually makes the leaders lose
credibility. The reunification of armed forces provided
for in the Peace Agreement, which is crucial to a stable
South Sudan, is totally stalled due to the huge level of
mistrust among the political actors of the country and
the militia-led conflicts. We need to see more positive
developments in reality, not just on paper. Contrary
to what some believe, delays in the graduation of the
Necessary Unified Forces are not related to the arms
embargo. There are provisions in resolution 2428
(2018) that allow the Government to move on with the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Although the parliament was inaugurated on
30 August, it has made minimal progress so far, which
in turn delays the passage of critical legislation. The
parliament’s work is of crucial importance, if South
Sudan is to have free, fair and credible elections.
With regard to future elections, the crackdown on
civic space and the harassment of human rights activists
are unacceptable. All civil society organizations must
be able to express their views freely and without fear of
retaliation. We remain concerned about the extrajudicial
executions carried out in Warrap and Lakes states. We
call on the Government to investigate those killings,
and to do so in compliance with its international
obligations under international human rights law. We
need to see improvements in the human rights situation
within the country, especially concerning conflictrelated sexual violence.
Sadly, the humanitarian situation is catastrophic,
with more than 60 per cent of the population in need of
humanitarian aid. The country is experiencing its worst
food crisis since its independence, with thousands of
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people facing famine-like conditions in several areas of
the country. Record floods and the socioeconomic impact
of the coronavirus disease are further exacerbating the
dire situation. We continue to call on the Government
to better protect the humanitarian workers, as they are
fighting for the lives of many South Sudanese.
In conclusion, I want to thank Nicholas Haysom,
UNMISS and the relevant United Nations agencies
for their invaluable work in South Sudan. Moreover,
my thanks also go to Ambassador Linda ThomasGreenfield and the United States for their penholdership
and Ambassador Dang Dinh Quy and his team for
their impeccable leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and Ms. Saeed for their briefings and tireless
work of their teams in and on South Sudan. Let me join
other colleagues in thanking Viet Nam for its leadership
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, including today’s
briefing and the recent visit.
I would like to make three key points in response to
what we heard earlier.
First, as we have heard from the briefers, the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan remains too slow. We understand the challenges,
but the lack of progress has real and grave consequences
for the people of South Sudan. The United Kingdom
joins others in calling on politicians to redouble their
efforts in 2022.
Recent progress on public financial management
shows what can be achieved when South Sudan works
in partnership with the international community. We
now urge the Government to adopt the delayed annual
budget. Improving economic transparency and tackling
corruption will support South Sudanese livelihoods
and will help make the country more attractive to
international investors.
The United Kingdom is pleased that the graduation
of the Necessary Unified Forces is imminent. We do,
however, reject the argument that the arms embargo
was responsible for the lengthy delays in graduating its
members. The exemptions procedure exists to ensure
that the arms embargo does not constitute an obstacle

S/PV. 8931

to South Sudan’s legitimate security needs. In noting
the briefing by the representative of Viet Nam, let me
underline the importance of unblocking nominations to
the Panel of Experts so that the Committee can fulfil
its mandate.
Secondly, with regard to human rights, the situation
in South Sudan remains of grave concern. As we have
heard today, civilians, journalists and civil society
organizations continue to face restrictions on their
freedom of speech and association. Silencing those
voices is not the way to deliver peace and stability, nor
is it conducive to a pathway towards transparent and
inclusive elections. We are also disturbed by continuing
credible reports of conflict-related sexual violence
perpetrated in South Sudan. South Sudan’s action plan
on conflict-related sexual violence for the armed forces
must urgently move from planning to implementation.
Lastly, I underline the urgency of strengthening
the response to South Sudan’s severe humanitarian
crisis. We have heard today how climate shocks are
compounding already-high levels of humanitarian
need. I urge South Sudan’s leaders to take immediate
action to tackle barriers to access and threats to
humanitarian workers.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating our call on
South Sudan’s leaders to implement their commitments.
Our sincere hope is that, with the support of the
international community, they will show their people
in 2022 that they are serious about delivering progress
for all.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Nicholas Haysom and Wafaa Saeed for their
briefings and Viet Nam for its work at the helm of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan over the past two years.
I will focus on three points.
We regret that the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan has lost momentum over the
past months. There has been some progress, such as
the appointment of nine state legislative assemblies
by President Salva Kiir, the convening of a governors’
forum in Juba and a reduction in the restriction of
movement of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). The work of the Parliament has yet
to begin, although several priority bills await to be
considered and adopted.

21-3963613/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The implementation of security arrangements
also remains stalled. We regret the fact that the arms
embargo is being used as a pretext to justify the
delays. The command of the unified forces must be
formed without delay and the soldiers must complete
their training.
We take note of the UNMISS briefing on its strategy
for supporting the security sector reform process.
France stands ready to support those efforts, including
through the implementation of innovative methods for
the reintegration of former combatants. We are also
poised to strengthen the technical assistance mandate
of UNMISS, provided that the Government meets the
goals set by the Security Council.
The authorities must redouble their efforts in view
of the general elections. It is imperative to immediately
put in place the relevant security arrangements and
constitutional and legislative framework for elections,
operationalize the national electoral commission
and allocate the necessary resources for the holding
of elections.
We call on all parties to prioritize unity. The
fragmentation of some of the signatory parties to the
revitalized peace agreement poses a dangerous threat
to adhering to the ceasefire. We welcome the efforts
of regional actors in supporting the peace process.
In particular, we encourage the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union, Kenya
and Uganda to remain engaged in facilitating dialogue
among the Southern Sudanese parties.
My last point is that international humanitarian law
and human rights law must be upheld. We expect the
South Sudanese authorities to guarantee human rights,
in particular the freedoms of expression and peaceful
assembly. We are also concerned about the extrajudicial
executions carried out in Warrap and Lakes states and
call on the South Sudanese authorities to fight against
impunity for the perpetrators of those violations.
Lastly, we condemn attacks on humanitarian and
medical personnel. Those violent acts must not go
unpunished, and it is important that the Council hold
their perpetrators accountable.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. We support his work and the activities of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. We listened to
14/18

15/12/2021

the representative of Viet Nam report on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan and Ms. Wafaa Saeed
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on the humanitarian situation in
that country. We also welcome the representative of the
South Sudan to today’s meeting.
We paid close attention to the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2021/1015). The Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan continues to work. The country has
appointed state assemblies and a bicameral parliament
has been formed. A draft law on the Constitution has
been prepared for consideration. We also welcome the
South Sudanese leadership’s commitment to holding
elections in 2023.
At the same time, we believe that the security
environment — which, despite the general decline in
violence, remains challenging — will play a decisive
role in achieving further results. We are concerned
by reports of ongoing local armed clashes between
Government troops and opposition formations; of a
split in the camp of the South Sudanese Vice-President,
Riek Machar, against whom a number of influential
field commanders have spoken out; and of sporadic
intercommunal armed conflict in parts of South Sudan.
The situation in both Equatorias is of particular concern.
Given those circumstances, it is important to ensure
the acceleration of the formation of the Necessary
Unified Forces. We call on the non-signatories
of the revitalized peace agreement to join in the
State-building process. It is necessary to continue the
dialogue initiated with the Kitgwang faction of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition, as
well as the negotiation process through the Community
of Sant’Egidio.
We believe that only the swift and full
implementation of the agreements reached will help
the parties to increase mutual trust and avoid the
repetition of past mistakes. We pay tribute to the
mediation efforts of Mr. Haysom, as well as the work
of the African Union and the States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to assist
the country in the implementation of specific provisions
of the peace agreements.
We are convinced that, as the situation in South
Sudan returns to normal, a review of the sanctions
regime in place against the country will be required. We
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

hope that, in order to ease the arms embargo, the South
Sudanese authorities will be able to make significant
progress in implementing the benchmarks stipulated in
resolution 2577 (2021).
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
readiness of our country to continue to provide the
necessary support to South Sudan in the establishment
of its statehood.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
Haysom for his briefing and, not least, his efforts.
I also thank Ms. Wafaa Saeed for updating us on the
dire humanitarian situation and the representative
of Viet Nam for his briefing on the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan. We welcome the
representative of South Sudan to today’s meeting.
Norway remains deeply concerned about the
situation in South Sudan. People continue to suffer.
The humanitarian situation has never been worse and
is now aggravated by heavy flooding, as we heard in
vivid detail from the briefers. Yet the main obstacle
to a better future is the slow implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. A collapse of the
peace agreement will have dire consequences for the
whole region.
We welcome the recent reconstitution and
appointment of members to most of the state assemblies
and we urge the Government of South Sudan to finalize
that process. We also welcome the President’s decision
to resume the Rome talks with non-signatories.
However, South Sudan’s leaders must demonstrate
real determination to make the whole agreement work.
We stress the need to finalize the implementation of
chapter 2 on security arrangements. It is also urgent
to nominate members to the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly’s specialized committees and
accelerate the passing of critical legislation. Delays
will jeopardize the process towards free and fair
elections. It is crucial that the constitutional reform
process be inclusive and led and owned by the people
of South Sudan.
Norway is deeply concerned by the shrinking
political space in South Sudan. Attempts to silence civil
society activists and the media through arbitrary arrests
and unlawful detention run counter to the spirit of the
peace agreement and the rule of law. Furthermore, the

S/PV. 8931

full, equal and meaningful participation of women
will be essential to building a peaceful and democratic
South Sudan. They must be included in all spheres,
from politics to decision-making and peacebuilding. In
that respect, we continue to call for adherence to the
35 per cent quota for the representation of women at a
minimum. We welcome the workshops organised by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for
women members of Parliament.
Norway is deeply troubled by the many subnational
conflicts, including in Tambura, Warrap and Jonglei.
We reiterate that it is the Government’s responsibility
to protect all civilians. Violence is the main cause
of the high levels of food insecurity and increased
humanitarian need. Violence and conflict, including
direct threats by youth groups, also prevent the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.
It is deeply alarming that violations and abuses
against children continue and have indeed increased
in the third quarter of 2021. Those appalling acts have
been committed by all parties, including Government
security forces. We urge all parties to comply with
their obligations under international law and make
all efforts to end and prevent the six grave violations
against children.
We welcome the protection of civilians and
peacebuilding work of UNMISS, in particular through
the temporary operating bases. We want to note the
marked improvement in access for peacekeepers.
Norway remains committed to supporting UNMISS
and we are pleased that Ms. Christine Fossen was
appointed UNMISS Police Commissioner.
Public financial management reforms aimed at
curbing corruption and improving non-oil revenue
are also crucial for the implementation of the peace
agreement and international support. We call on the
Government to invest more in key reforms that will
bring transparency and accountability to the country’s
public finances.
Finally, the region continues to play an invaluable
role in supporting peace efforts in South Sudan. We
support Uganda’s initiative to organize a leadership
retreat. As we close out this year, let me place on record
our hope that 2022 will bring improvements to the lives
of the South Sudanese people.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special
Representative Haysom and Ms. Saeed for their

21-3963615/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

comprehensive briefings. I also welcome the
participation of the representative of South Sudan in
today’s meeting.
Throughout the year 2021, South Sudan has
continued to achieve progress in the peace process as
the nation marks its tenth anniversary of independence
and the third anniversary of the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. While various challenges
remain, it must be recognized that, overall, South
Sudan is one of the African issues on the Council’s
agenda that has seen positive developments in the past
two years. In that connection, I wish to highlight the
following points.
First, we call on the Government of South Sudan
and the relevant parties to continue to advance the
implementation of the revitalized agreement in order
to sustain a peaceful transitional period, culminating
in national elections. In that regard, it is important
imperative to speed up the constitutional reform process
and transitional security arrangements.
We note with appreciation the efforts of the Council
of Ministers to review and adopt the constitution-making
process bill and hope that it will soon be approved by
the Transitional National Legislative Assembly. We also
call on the Government to further facilitate women’s
participation and leadership to reach the 35 per cent
goal in line with the peace agreement.
All relevant parties in South Sudan must continue
to resolve their differences and engage in dialogue
and confidence-building. We commend and call
for the continued efforts of the United Nations, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and other international partners in
promoting peace and development in South Sudan.
We look forward to the positive contribution of the
UNMISS Integrated Electoral Assistance Team.
Secondly, it is critical to continue to uphold the
permanent ceasefire. We urge the Government of
South Sudan to make stronger efforts to effectively
and sustainably address intercommunal violence,
particularly in tackling the root causes of this issue.
It is also critical to ensure the safety of humanitarian
workers and facilities.
We commend and reiterate our support for the work
of UNMISS, particularly in the protection of civilians.
16/18

15/12/2021

Viet Nam will continue to actively contribute to the
work of UNMISS and further promote the participation
of our female peacekeepers in the Mission. We also
commend the continued efforts of the United Nation
Mine Action Service in mine clearance and riskeducation activities in the country.
Thirdly, it is critical to tackle the increasing
economic and humanitarian challenges. It is concerning
that the high level of food insecurity continues to affect
more than 7.2 million South Sudanese — over half of
the country’s population. We call on the Government
of South Sudan to continue to make its best efforts in
promoting the livelihood of its population and on the
international community to strengthen its support to
South Sudan in averting food insecurity and addressing
natural disasters and the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Finally, as this is the last time that Viet Nam will
speak on this agenda item, we would like to stress the
importance of regular review of the sanctions regime
related to South Sudan, especially the implementation
of the key benchmarks established in resolution
2577 (2021). Throughout last month’s visit of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, we were particularly
encouraged by the willingness expressed by the
Government of South Sudan to meet these benchmarks.
It is our hope that the Government will continue to
cooperate with the Committee and the Council in this
process, which will create the basis for the Council to
review and consider the lifting of measures in 2022.
To conclude, we would like to reiterate our
strong support for the pursuit of peace, stability and
development of South Sudan and its people.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom; Director of the Coordination Division,
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Saeed; and Ambassador Hai Anh Pham for their
briefings. As always, I welcome the presence of the
representative South Sudan at today’s meeting.
South Sudan has continued to make some
progress during the recent period in implementing
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. President
Kiir Mayardit has reconstituted State assemblies and
the Government adopted the Constitution-Making
Process Bill 2020/2021. We hope that the signatories
to the agreement will strengthen engagement, enhance
21-39636

15/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

mutual trust, resolve their differences properly through
dialogue, expedite the implementation of the agreement
and maintain political stability in South Sudan.
South Sudan faces a number of practical
difficulties in implementing the agreement, which
cannot be resolved in one fell swoop. The international
community must demonstrate the necessary patience
and provide the needed support and should try not to
resort solely to finger-pointing and putting pressure on
the parties concerned. China commends the efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the regional countries to facilitate
the implementation of the agreement and calls on the
international community to maintain its support for
the work of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire in South
Sudan was able to hold by and large, but factional and
intercommunal clashes continued to occur from time
to time. The holdout groups that have yet to sign the
revitalized agreement must renounce the use of violence
and join the political process without delay. Unifying
military forces and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process will help improve the security
situation in the country. China calls on the international
community to provide financial support, as is needed,
for this purpose.
South Sudan’s intercommunal conflict has a long
history. It should be addressed appropriately through a
holistic approach that combines prevention, mediation,
justice and other means.
Armed conflict, floods and other events have
conspired to drive a sustained rise in South Sudan’s
humanitarian needs, especially food insecurity. While
increasing its humanitarian assistance, the international
community should help South Sudan develop its
economy and unleash its potential in agriculture,
energy and other areas.
At the recent eighth Ministerial Conference of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China’s President
His Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping unveiled nine projects
to be implemented with Africa in such areas as health,
poverty reduction, trade and investment, which we
believe will lend fresh impetus to the development
of South Sudan and other African countries. China
calls on the countries concerned to lift their unilateral
coercive measures against South Sudan without delay.

S/PV. 8931

The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), led by Special Representative Haysom,
has done a huge amount of work to help implement the
agreement and to protect civilians. In accordance with
the statement by the President of the Security Council
S/PRST/2021/20, the Secretary-General is requested
to establish an Integrated Electoral Assistance Team
for South Sudan’s 2023 elections, which will be led
by UNMISS. The elections are a matter of peace
and stability for South Sudan, and the international
community must fully respect the country’s ownership
in this respect.
During the reporting period, there was a significant
reduction in violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
which is ample proof that enhanced engagement and
communication between United Nations missions and
their host countries helps to create conditions that
enable missions to implement their mandates.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
the Security Council should assess, on the basis of
facts, how South Sudan has been implementing the
benchmarks necessary for adjusting the sanctions
measures, lift sanctions against South Sudan as soon as
possible and help its Government strengthen capacitybuilding in its security sector.
The President (spoke in French): I now call upon
the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Madut Agok (South Sudan): At the outset,
my delegation would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of December. My delegation assures you of its support.
Allow me to welcome Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, to this briefing, as well as Ms. Wafaa
Saeed and the representative of Viet Nam on his visit to
South Sudan.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan, as
issued in document S/2021/1015, of 7 December.
Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, in 2018, the country has continued to
experience relative peace and security in the greater
part of the country.

21-3963617/18

S/PV.8931

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is common knowledge by now that the
implementation process of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan is slow, but steady, with all the parties
committed to its full implementation in both letter
and spirit, notwithstanding factors that hinder its
smooth implementation.
We are aware of the widespread intra- and
intercommunal conflict that continues to adversely
affect communities in the country. These conflicts are
caused by different reasons and factors, among which
was the vacuum by lack of state Governments because of
delays in the implementation matrix for the distribution
of states among the parties to the agreement, as agreed
in the revitalized peace agreement. However, since the
formation of the state Governments, such conflict has
started to decline, especially special in the states of
Warrap and Lakes.
Those positive changes were demonstrated by
the statement of His Excellency President Salva Kiir
Mayardit in his closing remarks at the just-concluded
governors’ forum in Juba, when he congratulated His
Excellency General Rin Tueny Mabor, the Governor
of Lakes state, on the efforts that he had made for the
pacification of the state, which allowed for the free
movement of people and goods without fear.
The leadership of the reconstituted Transitional
National Legislative Assembly is working on the
formation of a leadership team in the Assembly,
including the establishment of the leadership of the
various committees and the subcommittees. Once
those are finalized in due course, the Assembly will
commence with the consideration of items in its order
of business, as required by the revitalized agreement.
The reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, claiming that the implementation of the
transitional security arrangements, especially the
unification of forces and their deployment, was lacking
in progress by, while the leadership of the armed forces
is preparing to graduate the forces, needs more clarity.
The processes are ongoing and will be completed once
the arrangements are finalized.
Over the years, His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit has remained the main champion of
peace, stability and reconciliation in South Sudan. He

18/18

15/12/2021

remains a pillar of peace and compromises, not only
within his party, but he also often extends his good
offices to other parties whenever they have an issue.
That was demonstrated by his involvement in resolving
differences both in the Other Political Parties, a political
organization that is a coalition of other parties to the
agreement, over the selection of members of Parliament
to the reconstituted Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and within another coalition when it could
not agree on who should be the preferred candidate for
the position of Vice-President. Therefore, it is in that
same understanding and spirit that His Excellency
President Kiir Mayardit sent his envoy to meet with the
leadership of the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementArmy in Opposition Kitgwang faction to call for calm
and restraint from measures that would inflict further
suffering on the South Sudanese. It should therefore be
seen more as a preventive measure than a violation of
the terms of the peace agreement.
Climate change is a reality in South Sudan, with
ever-longer periods of drought or heavy rainfall, which
often result in flooding or a great deal of water coming
from the islands, which causes a lot of floods. Those
floods have caused a great deal of displacement and
suffering to people in areas that have been affected. The
ramifications of that will be greater than the Government
can afford. We therefore call on the international
community to assist the Government not only with the
immediate needs of the affected population, but also
with the long-term consequences through adaptation
and mitigation measures. South Sudan is a strong
participant in all climate change-related forums because
our commitment is driven by the impact that we feel.
In conclusion, we call on the Security Council and
the international community at large to stop sitting
on the fence and cherry-picking, while it remains
actively seized of the matter. The financial burden of
the revitalized agreement is too heavy to be left for the
parties to fund alone. Let us put the money where our
mouths are.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-39636
