UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1879) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question ................

1

S/PV. 1879

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1879th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Mr. Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l879)
,

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question
The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

26 January

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

Mr. AI-Shuikhly (Iraq), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. El
Hussen
(Mauritania),
Mr.
Zaimi
(Morocco),
Mr. .Juroszek
(Poland),
Mr.
Jamal
(Qatar),
Mr. Buroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Meduni (Sudan),
Mr. Driss (Tunisia), Mr. Ghobash (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. Sallum (Yemen Arab Republic) and
Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question on its agenda.
Since our last meeting on 22 January, members of the
Council have beeu engaged in informal consultations
on the text of a draft resolution [S/Z29403which. has
now been formally submitted by the delegations of
Benin, Guyana’, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and the
United Republic of Tanzania. I understand that the
representative of Pakistan wishes to make a statement
in introduction of this draft resolution, atid accordingly
I now call on him to speak.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council i187Qth-7877th -meetings],
I invite the represent.ativeSof Algeria, Bulgaria, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the
German Democratic Republic, Guinea, Hungary,
India, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritatiia, Morocco,
Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian A&Republic,
the Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the
Yemen Arab Republic and Yugoslavia, in conformity
with the usual practice and the relevant provisions of
the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure,
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote. In accordance with the decision taken by the
Council [287&h meeting], I invite the representaitve
of the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the discussion.

3. Mi-. AKHUND (Pakistan): On behalf of the delegations of Benin, Guyana, Panama, Romania and the
United Republic of Tanzania, as well as my own,
I submit to the Council for its consideration draft
resolution S/11940. The draft resolution is the result
of two weeks of informal consultations within groups of
interested countries, and thereafter betwee& the
sponsors and the remaining members of the Council.
It is eviderit that it do& not reflect in full the position
ofany particular group, or even of the sponsors, yhose
collective position was set out in. an earlier working
paper. However, it has the merit of reflecting a much
wider consensusof views, and for this we are grateful
to those members of the Council who helped the
sponsors to give the text its present shape and form.
I speak for all of them in conveying our thanks in
particular to the representatives of France and Japan
for their specific suggestions, and to those of China,
Italy, the Libyan Arab Republic, Sweden and the
Soviet Union for their general observations and
advice.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Sharaf(Jordun),
Mr. AUuf (Syrian Arab
Republic) pnd Mr. Khuddoumi (Palestine Liberation
Orgunizution)
took places at the Security Council
table; Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. Grozev (Bulgaria).
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Florin (German
Democratic
Republic),
Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cissk
(Guinea), Mr. Hollui (Hungary), Mr. Jaipat (India),

4. We do not expect the draft resolution that is
before the Council to prove entirely satisfactory to the
parties directly concerned or otherwise involved.
Somewould have preferred amore forthright statement
of the Council’s assessmentof the situation and more
clear-cut provisions for implementing its decisions.
Others would- apparently prefer to leave matters
clouded in some degree of ambiguity, in the belief
that such ambiguity can help to obtain the agreement

The agenda was adopted.
The Middle East problem including
Palestinian question

the

of &I concerned to a generally acceptable settlement. ‘them in the aftermath of the partition of Palestine.
We understand that the establishment of a just and Nor is it for outsiders to decide how and in what,
lasting peace in the Middle East will require a process form and manner the Palestinians should exercise their
of consultation, discussion and .negotiation dnd that national rights. The United Nations recognized the
the Council should not itself undertake that task. right of the Palestinians to have a State of their own
What the Council can do is lay down the essential at the sam’etime as it sanctioned the establishment
of a Jewish State on Palestinian soil. The United
elements for an over-all settlement.
Nations also acknowledged that Palestinian refugees
must be allowed to return to the homes and properties
5. That was what the Council attempted to do when,
nearly nine years ago, it adopted resolution 242 (1967) which they had hid to abandon and, if they chose not
and again, after the war of October 1973,resolution 338 to return, to reieive adequate compensation.
(1973), which, recalling the earlier resolution, called
for the immediate implementation of that resolution
8. The second element is that Israel must withdraw
in all its parts. A number of speakers in the present froth the territories it occupied in the war of June 1967,
debate have laid considerable stresson the importance ,in &her words, from the remaining portions of the
of those resolutions as providing a framework for the Sinai and the Golan Height!,, from the West Bank
Middle East settlement. They have asserted thtit any and the Gaza strip and from Arab Jerusalem. On this
decision taken at the current session should not matter the draft resolution reaffiis in its preamble
override or suEplant those resolutions. While taking the” principle. enunciated in the preamble of resolu’note of their concern, we should .like to say the tion 242 (1967), a principle which is fundamental to
‘following. In the frst place, in the period between the the whole concept of the rule of law on the intemaadoption of resolution 242 (1967) and the outbreak of tional plane on which the United -Nations is based’.
thk October war, a period of some six years, not namely, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
even a beginning was made towards implemefiting
territory by threat or by use of force. The relevant
the settlement visualized in the resolution. ‘Serious operative paragraph of the draft resolution makes it
.and&nest efforts were indeed made to that end, but clear that the only tenable application of this principle
they proved infructuous. We all knoti the history i$ that Israel must withdraw from all the Arab terriof the Jarring mission and the fate of the Rogers tories occupied in the 1%7 war. Countries may, in
the exercise of their sovereignty and in conditions
plan, among others. The language of the resolution
6f comnlete freedom from coercion, agree between
itself was used by one of the parties, namely, Israel,
themselves over territorial arrangements. The situation
to frustrate every effort at peace-making.
is quite different when a country has seized the terri6. In the second place, resolution 242 (1967) suffers tory of another through war. The notion that the United
from a serious lacuna in that it speaks only of a Nations has implicitly sanctioned or should become a
‘*refugee problem” and says not a word about the party to arrangements which would enable Israel to
problem of Palestine which was the origin of the. retain at will portions of territories acquired by the
Arab-Israeli conflict and remains the root cause and use of force is totally repugnant to the Charter of the
core of the Middle East question today. Statements United Nations, finds no sanction in international
made around this table in the course of the current law and practice and is unjustified by the spirit and
debate show that there is unanimity in the Council a plain reading of resolution 242 (1967). Every State
on that point. We are gratified to note that there is has the right to take such measures as it considers
appropriate to ensure and defend the security of its
virtual unanimity also to the effect that the earlier
resolutions of the Council need to be supplemented. lawful borders. To suggest that a State has the right
The draft that is before the Council is intended to to extend its borders in the search for security is to
give licence to international ,predacity. The United
repair the deficiency and give a sense of direction
and impetus to the search for peace.
Nations can under no circumstances countenance,’
much less become a party to, an attempt to guarantee
7. I now come to the draft resolution itself. It is the security of one country at the expense of the
based on three fundamental assumptions concerning territories of others.
the kind.of settlement which would be just to all and
would therefore endure. In the first place, the problem. 9. Lastly, not in order of importance or even of
of Palestinian identity .must be plainly and squarely’ chronology but in terms of political logic, arrangefaced. In this context, let me say that the presence ments and provisions must be made to create condiof the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) here tions in which all States in the region, including the
is a matter of particular satisfaction to my delegation Palestine State, can live together in peace and
arid should be welcomed by all those who have reciprocal respect for one another’s sovereignty, terriexpressed the view that the problem of Palestine is torial integrity and political independence.
at the heart of the Middle East conflict and must ‘be
resolved. It does no good to go on pretending that the 10. With these explanations I commend this draft
Palestinian people do not exist as a national entity,
resolution on behalf of its six sponsors to all members
entitled to all the rights and attributes which such of the Council and to those directly interested parties
which have participated in the present debate. We
status confers and which were infact taken away from
2

are sorry that Israel stayed away from the debate
and has instead been crying havoc all over and hurling
defiance against the alleged bias and dictation of the
United Nations. In truth it is Israel which is maintaining, by the use of force, and wishes to be left
alone to continue, its occupation of the territories of
its Arab neighbours. Persistence in this policy of
force and diktat can only, breed more violence,
engender further bitterness and make ever more
remote the prospect of the peace and co-operation
which the Israeli Government professes to be seeking
and which all the peoples of the Middle East desire
and need. The settlement envisaged in the draft
offers an alternative to such a policy. In putting it
forward,- we wish in no way* to interfere with .theexisting process and mechanisms of peace-making;
but on the contrary hope that the peace effort will
be resumed with the aim now of reaching a comprehensive and over-all settlement. The draft provides
a basis on which such an effort can be made, negotia-.
tions held and mediation succeed. .We .hope that it
will receive the approval of all members, for, it
embodies a reality which cannot be negated. and ,a
balance of rights and obligations on which peace can
be built and viable relations evolve in the Middle East.
i,.
11. The PRESIDENT: The floor is now open for
discussion of the draft-resolution.
“
12. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): My delegation’
has made clear from the’ outset of this debate the
importance which we attach to maintaining the prin-1
cipIes and the provisions of Security Council resolu-.
tions 242 (1967) and 338(1973), which have established
the basic principles for a settlement in the Middle
East and a framework within which negotiations’
towards a settlement should take place.‘My Govem,ment considers that inclusion in the draft resolution
now before us,of a real&nation of those two resolutions is an essential element if this text is to provide
a. real contribution towards the progress of the
negotiations which we all wish to promote.

debate, we feel it is clear that resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) are still accepted as valid by the
majority, although not all, of the members of the
Security Council. I very much hope, therefore, that
the Council will be able to vote in favour of this
amendment and thus provide that degree of balance
in the draft resolution which my delegation regards
as essential.
16.. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): I cannot say that I
am surprised at the amendment just introduced by
Mr. Richard of the United Kingdom, because a little
while earlier he informed me of his intention. I am a
little bit astonished, I must say.
17. As I said in the statement which I just made on
behalf of the six sponsors of the draft resolution, the
text (was drafted with the express purpose of giving
satisfaction to those members who had expressed
concern to us about the precise implications of the
adoption of this draft resolution with regard to the
earlier resolutions-not merely resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973); there are many other resolutions on
the subject of the Middle East and of Palestine. We
thought that we had given satisfaction on that score.
It seems,however, that the United Kingdom considers
that a more formal affirmation is necessary. In view
of the fact that the text which I have just submitted
to the Council is the result of consultation not merely. .
among its sponsors, but also between them and ,a
number of other representatives and groups, it is not
really possible for me, even speaking only for my
delegation, to react to the amendment at this point.
-18. Mr. President, I should like to suggest that a
little time might be allowed for the necessary consultations and I would propose, if there is no objection,
that we might suspend this-meeting for perhaps an
hour so that we can hold those consultations.

.

19. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Pakistan
has proposed that we suspend the meeting for one
hour. As there is no objection, I shall suspend the
meeting now.

13. My Government has therefore instructed me to
submit the following amendment to draft resolution
.S/11940, which I think has’been submitted in English
to all members .of the Council. I am sorry that there
has not been sufficient time so far to have the amdndment translated into the other working languages.
I trust that this omission has not occasioned too great
an inconvenience.

The meeting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed
at 7.10 p.m.

20. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them draft resolution S/11940, submitted by
the delegations of Benin, Guyana, Pakistan, Panama,
Romania and the United Republic of Tanzania, as.
already introduced by the representative of Pakistan.
Members also have before them an amendment
contained in document S/l1942 submitted by the
delegation of the United Kingdom, as introduced by
the representative of the United Kingdom.

14. The amendment would be to include a new
operative paragraph 3 in the draft resolution which
would read as follows:
“3. Re&tirms
the principles and provisions of
its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and declares
that nothing in the foregoing provisions of the
present resolution supersedes them.” [S/Z1992.]

21. In accordance with the usual practice and the
rules of procedure, the Council will, of course, proceed
to vote first on the amendment presented by the
delegation of the United Kingdom. Does any member

15. Having listened to the many important and
helpful contributions which have been made in this
3

.

wish to explain his vote on the amendment before the
voting?

position of my Government that Council resolutions
242 (1%7) and 338 (1973) should be reafXrmed. when
we consider the Middle East problem including the
Palestinian question. At the same time, the draft
resolution before us is an achievement produced by
the efforts of many Council members and is the result
of a delicate compromise. Considering this situation
and the importance of the amendment, my delegation
needs instruction from its Government. However,
because of the lack of time for us to get in contact
with our Government tc receive instructions, my
delegation cannot but abstain and is unable to indicate
its definite position on the proposed amendment if
it is put to the vote, since voting on it seems to be
the general wish of the Security Council.

22. Mr. MOYNIHAN (United States of America):
The United Stateshas madeclear that its responsibility
in the Middle East is such that it is required, even
if it stands alone, ,to preserve the framework for
negotiations established in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
23. Far from preserving that framework, the draft
resolution before us would commence its destruction.
It proposes a fundamental and irremediable diminishment of the circumstances of one of the parties.
Fundamental rights are elided, equitable entitlements
are impaired and fundamental expectations are of a
sudden enshrouded in doubt. These rights, these
entitlements and these expectations were incorporated
in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and it is our
feeling that this case is so clear that it would be
inappropriate, however unintentionally, it would be
incompatible for the same document to alter these
rights, tntitlements and expectations and at the same
time seek to reaffirm them. In that circumstance,
the United States will abstain on the amendment of
the United Kingdom.

28. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (inter@etation from Russian): As the representative of the Soviet Union, I entirely share the view
that was expressed by the representative of Pakistan,
Mr. Akhund, regarding the United Kingdom amendment. He used two English words, “surprised” and
“astonished”, and he very properly characterized the
situation with regard to the introduction of this amendment. During the numerous consultations among the
members of the Security Council, the representative
of the United Kingdom offered no amendments, no
changes to be made in the text of the draft resolution of the six sponsors which has now been put
into its final form and officially submitted by the
representative of Pakistan on behalf of the group of
sponsors in document S/11940. The text had been
agreed among the members of the Council, with the
participation of the representative of the United
Kingdom and without any objections on his part.

24. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interprerution
from French): On 14 January last [1872nd meeting],
my delegation stressed its attachment to Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). That
being the case, I shall vote in favour of the United
Kingdom amendment, which reaffiis those resolutions.

29. We all know that the main purpose of the lengthy
discussion on the Middle East problem in the Security
Council, which lasted several days, and which also
included the question of Palestine, was to create
favourable conditions for speeding up a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East. The only recognized
forum for this endeavour as we all know, is the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. A new
and constructive Security Council decision was
something that an overwhelming majority requested
-both the majority of the Council and the majority
of those who participated in the discussion of this
matter in the Council. The negation of resolutions
242 (f%7) and 338 (1973) was not at all. involved;
nor was the negation of any resolutions which have
been formally adopted by the General Assembly on
the Middle East or on Palestine. On the contrary,
many of the participants in the discussion of this
question referred to those resolutions and requested
that the Security Council should continue along the
very path that was indicated by the General Assembly
in its decisions on the Palestine question. In doing so,
many of the speakers stressed that what was involved
were new, additional constructive Council decisions
which would not be detrimental to the earlier ones.

25. As I indicated at that time, the object of this
debate should be to complement and to complete
those texts, so that in the search for a settlement in
the Middle East all aspects of the situation would’be
taken into account, whether those resulting from the
conflict of 1967 or those concerning the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people, as of all other peoples,
to an independent State.
26. The draft resolution submitted by six members
of the Security Council .which reflects this objective
and which does in fact round out resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) leads my delegation to feel that
there is no contradiction between that text and the
United Kingdom amendment which throws light on
the context in which our work must be done. And
therefore, I repeat, my delegation will vote in favour
of that amendment.
27. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Permit me to make a few
remarks on the proposed amendment of the representative of the United Kingdom. It is a fundamental
4

30. What is the main substance of such new and
constructive
decisions? In the view of the overwhelming majority of the participants in the discussion
of the question, it would be the recognition of the
inalienable national rights of the people of Palestine,
and this found its reflection in the draft resolution
of the six sponsors. It is, if you wish, the very
quintessence of this draft resolution.

it is by any chance adopted by the Council. By this
action Israel and its protectors will be allowed to
sabotage the implementation
of this new draft resolution too, as was indeed done with regard to Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) a& 338 (1973). Therefore it is not difficult to realize what is the concealed
meaning and the main aim of this amendment. Therefore, the delegation of the Soviet Union will not be
able to give its support to it.

31. The representative
of the United Kingdom
himself, in speaking before the Council in the discussion of the Middle East question and the Palestine
problem, spoke in favour of the recognition of the
rights of the Palestinian people, and to remind him of
this I shall now read out a part of his statement in
the Council. Here are the very words he used: “In
any final settlement ‘in the Middle East a way must
be found to take account of the political rights of the
Palestinian people and to enable them to express their
national identity.”
[1873rd meeting, para. 69.1 In
another passage of his statement the representative
of the United Kingdom said that “we must recognize
the fundamental importance of the Palestinian problem
and take account of the legitimate political rights of
the Palestinian people.” [Zbid.., para. 76.1

34. Mr. VINCI (Italy): At this stage of our deliberations I shall confine myself to stating that my delegation supports and will vote in favour of the amendment submitted by the delegation of the United
Kingdom. Speaking on behalf of the Italian delegation
on 19 January [Z876th meeting], I had already advocated a clear reaffirmation of the validity of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The adoption of this amendment is therefore considered an important
and
determining
factor in the fmal position which my
delegation will take on draft resolution S/11940.
35. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): First of
all, I regret that our British colleague submitted this
amendment at the last moment. I think that is not fair
for the Council or for the sponsors of the draft resolution. This draft resolution was prepared after long
negotiations and the sponsors deployed every possible
effort to take into account the position of all the
other members of the Council. They even introduced
the provisions and the language of resolution 242
(1967). I shall not question the intention of the representative of the United Kingdom,
but I think the
submission of his amendment will have the result of
delaying the work of the Council.

32. After such observations in the official statement
made by the representative of the United Kingdom
in the Security Council and in view of the absence of
any ob&ctions on his part during the consultations
among members of the Council held this morning at
which there was final agreement on the text of the
draft resolution of the six sponsors on the settlement
of the Middle East question, the general view of the
members of the Council was that the delegation of the
United Kingdom not only did not object to the recognition of the political rights ‘of the people of Palestine
but, on the contrary, was supporting those rights.
The unexpected amendment submitted by Mr. Richard
indicates the exact opposite. He now wants the
Security Council to give, as it were, carte blanche
to Israel and to its protectors and also after the adoption of the new draft resolution, if it is not killed by
somebody’s veto, to treat the Palestinian problem
only as a problem of refugees and not as a central
political problem in the settlement in the Middle
East, as was demanded
by the overwhelming
majority of the participants in the discussion of this
matter in the Security Council.

36. The position of my delegation concerning resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) has been reiterated
many times, during the last session of the General
Assembly and also during the present debate in the
Security Council. We are convinced that those resolutions have been bypassed by events and developments
both inside and outside the United Nations. They are
irrelevant as a framework for any just and lasting solution to the Middle East question. General Assembly
resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX) reaflirming
the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people,
3376 (XXX), proposing the means designed to enable
the Palestinian people to achieve their national rights,
and 3379 (XXX), condemning Zionism as a racist
movement, reflect the profound changes and develop-ments in the attitude of the United Nations and of
international public opinion and call for a review of the
entire question and the methods of dealing with it.
For that reason, our.delegation intends to vote against
the amendment in document S/ 11942.

33. It is for this reason that I have to stress again
that it is impossible not to agree with the observations
by the representative of Pakistan, who said that the
introduction
of this amendment certainly creates a
very astonishing impression.
Therefore there are
reasons to regard this action of the representative of
the United Kingdom as a direct attempt to undermine
the draft resolution which was agreed on in the
consultations
held today by the members of the
Security Council. The adoption of such an amendment would introduce ambiguity and confusion into
the substance of the new draft resolution, if, I repeat,

37. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
I take the
floor for a second time only to answer the tissue of
misrepresentations
that we have heard from the representative of the Soviet Union. He can throw his arms
out as often as he likes; it does not in fact alter the
5

truth. He knows, and everybody sitting around this
table who was present during the consultations
knows, that it is totally untrue and grossly misleading
of him to suggest that this was a draft resolution
which was agreed to in the course of consultations.
Of course it was not. If it had been an agreed draft
resolution it would have been adopted by consensus
and there would have been no need to have had it
submitted in this way and there would have been no
need for a vote. He knows that to be untrue and yet
he deliberately
comes along and says this to the
Security Council and indeed to all those who see fit
to listen. to our deliberations.
Why does he do it,
Mr. President?

41. The sponsors of this draft resolution are in some
ways in a dilemma. If in fact it does not touch resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), what is the objection
to putting my amendment in? If it does in fact touch
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), then perhaps
some of the fears that some of us may have expressed
in the past about this draft resolution might seem to
have some justification. I therefore-I
hope in a sober
mood, certainly in a more sober mood than that
displayed by my colleague from the Soviet Union
I trust-really
would commend this amendment to the
Security Council this evening.
42. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): It was a pleasure to
listen to Mr. Richard, and to listen to him twice was
a double pleasure. He was addressing the representative of the Soviet Union, but we could not help
overhearing him..

38. Time after time we sit here listening to the representative of the Soviet Union. When his pencil goes
up I draw .breath to see which misrepresentation
is
to come first. I listen with enormous interest to hear
which position of which Government is about to be
distorted out of recognition. I have a great affection
for the representative of the Soviet Union. I wish
he had the same affection for the truth as I have for
him.

43. I think I might take a few moments to explain
the position of Pakistan on this particular matter.
When I spoke last I was speaking in a sense as
spokesman for the sponsors of the draft resolution.
The delegation of Pakistan finds no great problem
with resolution 242 (1967), or for that matter with
resolution 338 (1973), or for that matter with any of
the other resolutions that were adopted years and
years and years ago to deal with the question we
are considering today. Our only complaint is that none
of those resolutions have moved the dispute towards
a settlement.

39. I shall say only two words about the amendment
although, since the representative of the Soviet Union
did me the honour of referring to one of my speeches,
perhaps I should do him the honour of referring to the
speech he just made. He said the negation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) was not involved in
the draft resolution submitted by the non-aligned
members of the Council. That may or not be true. If
in fact it is true, what is the insuperable objection
of the representative of the Soviet Union to reaffirming
the resolution which he has just told us has not been
negated by the draft resolution that is in front of us
this evening? Why should it not go in? It would seem.
a point of sensible clarification which could go into
that draft resolution.

44. I am not of course ignoring the relatively
limited moves that have been made, but none the less
we are pretty much where we were in 1967. That
having been said, we do not regard the resolutions
that have been mentioned or any previous resolutions-resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and so onas having become null and void. We do not believe
that the adoption of the draft resolution before us
in its present form will in any way supersede those
resolutions.

40. As for whether what I have submitted today is
in any sense or any shape or form different from my
attitude throughout this debate I shall just quote one
sentence-although
I realize it is an imposition to read
one’s own speeches to the Council twice-from
the
statement I made in this debate on 15 January, In
speaking of the principles of a settlement, I said the
following:

45. We are asked in the amendment to reaflirm two
resolutions of all those that have been adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly-those
two have been singled out-and
we are asked to
declare that nothing in the foregoing provisions of this
resolution supersedes them. Supersedes what? The
principles and provisions of resolution 242 (1967).

“Those are the basic principles laid down in
Security ‘Council resolution 242 (1967), brought into
effect as provided in its resolution 338 (1973). Those
two resolutions form the widely accepted foundation
for a settlement and my Government will oppose
any unilateral attempt to alter them or detract from
them.” [1873rd meeting, para. 67.1

46. I would recommend that Mr. Richard read again
the wording of the draft resolution that we have put
before the Council. What are the principles and provisions of resolution 242 (1967)? “Withdrawal of Israel
armed forces from territories occupied in the recent
conflict”. We are familiar with the argument that has
gone on for ever over this particular formulation.
Then it continues: “Termination
of all claims of states
of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of every State in the area and their

And I then went on to spell out the third requirement,
one not expressed in resolution 242 (1967), that the
right of the Palestinian people to the expression of
their national identity must also be recognized.
6

right to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries”.

I wanted to stress that during the consultations the
United Kingdom did not introduce any’amendment,
and -everybody had the impression that silence was
a sign of agreement. I therefore felt it was necessary
to disclose the substance of his amendment. And,
indeed, the substance of the amendment is that, instead
of a recognition of the legitimate, inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people, there is again an effort
to reduce the Palestinian problem to one of refugees.
That is the substance of the amendment.
Every
member of the Security Council has to face the
question: Does he recognize the inalienable political
rights of the Palestinian people or not? Such is the
conclusion that emerges from the discussion of this
matter in the Security Council, and that is why it is
unnecessary to take refuge behind former decisions
and reject this pressing political question of principle.

47. We have all that. We have reproduced the
language, the heart and kernel of resolution 242 (1967),
in our draft resolution, and we have done so with the
aim of-as I said earlier this afternoon-meeting
the
views that were put to us in order that at this crucial
juncture, when for the first time the Security Council
has turned its eyes to the problem which is at the
heart of the Middle East conflict, and when for the
first time it has taken it up, there should be the
widest possible consensus. Yet we are asked at the
last minute to consider an amendment. I agree entirely
with the representative of France that there is no
contradiction between this amendment and what is
stated in the draft resolution. Nevertheless, we have
worked on this text to give it a certain balance. It
may not be an agreed draft resolution; but it is a
text which reflects, not the position of the sponsors
-because
the sponsors had, as members know,
originally
put forward a very different working
paper-but
the broad consensus of views of the
majority of ‘members. We have put this forward and
yet we are asked to adopt an amendment which, in
my view, frankly is not merely regrettable but
unnecessary. Its adoption will add nothing whatsoever to our text in terms of the framework. I should
like the representative of the United Kingdom’ to
consider what its rejection by the Security Council
might imply.

52. The PRESIDENT:
Since no other member wishes
to explain his vote before the vote on it, I should
like, in my capacity as representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, to explain very briefly the
Tanzanian
position
on the United
Kingdom
amendment.
53. My delegation regrets that it will abstam in the
vote on the amendment submitted ‘by the delegation
of the United Kingdom for reasons which I believe
should be obvious to all members of the Council.
In the first place, the draft resolution sponsored by
six delegations, including the Tanzanian delegation, is
the result of intensive negotiations and many compromises. The representative of Japan was absolutely
right when he called it “a delicate compromise”.
As
it is, it represents the balance of all considerations
and legitimate rights of all the parties to the conflict,
as ‘well as the concerns of all the members of the
Council. To accept the amendment proposed by the
representative of the United Kingdom would certainly
create unnecessary difficulties for many of those who
have already been able to accept the draft resolution
as it is.

48. The representative of the United States spoke of
“rights”,
“entitlements”
and “expectations”.
It is
necessary to remember that both sides have rights,
both sides have entitlements
and both sides have
expectations-and
they have been waiting for decades
for the fulfilment of their rights, for the recognition of
their entitlements and their expectations. We think that
in our draft resolution we have provided for the
legitimate rights and expectations of all the parties.
49. We shall, with very great regret, not be able to
support the amendment proposed by the delegation
of the United Kingdom, not because we are opposed
to its substance, but because we consider that it is not
relevant at this juncture.

54. Furthermore, we believe that, while embodying
the essential contents of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), the draft resolution sponsored by six delegations is an improvement on those two previous resolutions, not only because it is much clearer, but also
because it addresses itself seriously to the Palestinian
question.

50. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation from Russian): The irritation and the
tone of voice of the United Kingdom representative
in his reaction to my observations on his amendment
shows that my criticism was correct. No parliamentarian witticism of the United Kingdom representative
could conceal the real meaning and purpose of this
amendment: to undermine the new and constructive
decision of the Security Council. That is his aim and,
therefore, no matter how much he is irritated, I cannot
give a different assessment of his amendment.

55. I should like also to add that the Tanzanian
delegation
shares the preoccupations
and the
disappointments
voiced by the representative
of
Pakistan, and to state that, by introducing his amendment at this eleventh hour, the representative of the
United Kingdom
has made our task much more
difficult. We particularly regret this since, as I said
earlier and as was rightly pointed out by the representative of Japan, the text before us is the product
of a delicate compromise which was worked out after
serious and protracted efforts. For those reasons, the

51. And, against, much of what I wished to say
has been said by the representative of Pakistan, but
7

Tanzanian delegation will not be able to vote for
the United Kingdom amendment.

tional conferences on the Middle East contained in
the draft resolution has an implication which may be
interpreted
as covering Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Geneva Conference based on those two resolutions. Meanwhile,
the draft resolution also says “to guarantee... the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all States in the area and their right to live
in peace within secure and recognized boundaries”.

56. And now, as PRESIDENT,
I shall put to the
vote the amendments, submitted by the United Kingdom document S/l 1942, to draft resolution S/l 1940
submitted
by Benin, Guyana, Pakistan, Panama,
Romania and the United Republic of Tanzania.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: France, Italy, Sweden, United
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

61. In fact, in the present Middle East situation the
prevailing task of urgency is the Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories and the restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian people.
Before the achievement of this basic objective, the
above provisions of the draft resolution may be used
by Israeli Zionism to create pretexts for its policy of
aggression and expansion and by the super-Powers to
continue to maintain the situation of “no war, no
peace” in the Middle East which was single-handedly
created by them. In view of the foregoing, the Chinese
delegation has decided not to participate in the voting
on draft resolution S/11940.

Kingdom

Against: China, Libyan Arab Republic.
Abstaining:
Benin,
Guyana, Japan, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America.
The result of the vote was 4 in favour,
and 9 abstentions.

2 against,

The amendment was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the aflrmative votes of nine members.

62. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): When I spoke
in the Council on 15 January [1873rd meeting] I pointed
out that this debate offered a great opportunity to move
the negotiations for a Middle East settlement forward,
but that it also conferred upon us the responsibility
not to imperil the very negotiations we were trying
to help. I reminded the Council then that of the three
main elements or requirements for a settlement-which
have, I may add, been acknowledged by almost every
member of the Council who has spoken in this debatetwo formed the basic principles of resolution 242
(1967) which, together with resolution 338 (1973), had
become established as a widely accepted foundation
for a settlement.

57. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now proceed
to the voting on draft resolution S/11940. I call on
those representatives who wish to explain their votes
at this stage.
58.

Mr.

HUANG

Hua (China) (translation from
the general debate on the Middle
East question in the Security Council, the representatives of many countries expressed in their speeches
profound condolences on the passing away of Premier
Chou En-lai. We have already conveyed their deepest
sentiments to the Chinese Government and people
and to the bereaved family. Allow me, in the name
of the Chinese delegation, to express once again our
heartfelt thanks to them for the kind sympathy they
have extended to the Chinese Government and people.

Chinese): During

63. I added, however, that my Government had
recognized, like many other Governments, that these
resolutions were deficient in that they did not take
account of the third element-the
essential part which
Palestinian interests must play in any settlement. I
therefore suggested that the Council should recognize
that third principle: the need to take account of the
legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to express their national identity.
But I added that this should be done in a way which
supplemented but did not supplant Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and I warned
that my Government would oppose any attempt to
alter or detract from those resolutions.

59. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples in their iust struggle to regain their national
rights and recover their lost territories, firmly condemned the Israeli Zionist aggression and firmly
opposed and condemned the super-Powers for their
contention and expansion in the Middle East. We have
always maintained that the inalienable national rights
of the Palestinian people must be restored and that
Israel must withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories. Basing ourselves on this position, we voted in
favour of General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).
We are also in favour of the relevant affirmation of
the national rights of the Palestinian people in draft
resolution S/l 1940. We appreciate the efforts that have
been made in this respect by the sponsors.

64. The purpose of resolution 242 (1967) was to
provide a framework in which negotiations leading to
a settlement could take place. The draft resolution
recognizes that the Council is not a forum in which
those negotiations should take place, and we must,
I think, be careful in what we do here today to avoid
putting the negotiators into a strait-jacket and closing
doors which might otherwise remain open. All of us

60. However, it must be pointed out that the reference
to the relevant United Nations resolutions and intema8

here recognize, as we have ail had this experience
here, that in undertaking a negotiation there must be
possibilities for movement within that negotiation. It
will not help the negotiating process, in our view, to
spell alit in detail the various; possibilities inherent in
the terms of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
As sponsors of resolution 242 (1967)-a resolution
which, we believe, has a substantial and continuing
contribution
to make to the solution of the Middle
East problem-we
have always been careful not to
express any interpretation of the wording of particular
parts of ,that resolution.

The result of the vote was 9 in favour,
and 3 abstentions.

The draft resolution was noi a$opted, the negative
vote being that of a perma.hent member bf the Council.
Two members (China and the Libyan Arab Republic)
did not participate in the voting.

68. The PRESIDENT:
Secretary-General.

71. It is absolutely vital that efforts to find a way
forwad continue, no matter how great or insurmountable the dbstacles to a peaceful settlement may now
appear. I therefore appeal most earnestly to ail of the
parties concerned to persist in these efforts,‘ and I
shall remain in close contact with them to this end as
well as with the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference
on the Middle East.

67. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put .to the vote
the draft resolution of Benin, Guyana, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania and the .United Republic of Tanzania which is before the Security Council in document
S/l 1940.

72. The United Nations has .been intimately involved
in the Middle East question for more than a quarter
of a century. Many of its Members have made great
efforts during that time, both within the framework
of the Organization grid outside it, to assist in the
search for .a settlement of this immensely difficult
and important problem. The stakes in the Middle
East question are now perhaps higher than ever, and
we shall soon be facing new deadlines which, in the
absence of progress towards a settlement, can only
bring on a new situation of crisis. Not only all of the
parties involved but the world as a whole has a vital
interest in a just and lasting settlement of this problem.
I very much hope, therefore, that further constructive
steps will quickly follow the debate which is now
concluding.

A v;te was taken by show of hands.
Infavovr:
Benin, France, Guyana, Japan, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Sovikt Socialist Republics, United Republic of Tanzania.

United States of America.
of
9

z

..

Kingdom

“,.

:

‘.

now call on the

70. I feel that it is my duty to express the general
and growing anxiety in the international
community
at large at the very great difficulties which are being
experienced in making progress towards a just and
lasting settlement of the Middle East problem. It is
generally recognized that stagnation and stalemate
can only lead to further frustration, and that continued frustration will unavoidably lead to fiirtlier
violence. Such is the nature of the Middle East
problem that there is a widespread awareness that the
consequences of further conflicts in the Middle East
will have ‘very serious repercussions in a far broader
sphere.

66. In conclusion, I should like to make this plea.
We believe that a great deal of progress has been
made over the last few days in bringing positions
together and in narrowing differences. What is needed
now is surely a willingness to look forward to the
future. The need for a just and lasting settlement in
the Middle East, and especially a just settlement of
the Palestinian problem remains urgent. The responsibility of the Security Council to assist and promote
the negotiations towards a settlement remains just as
important. The need for the parties-and
this means
ail the parties-to
re-examine their policies and attitudes and to look for some way of reconciling their
differences in a spirit of compromise, without which
no agreement can be reached, remains no less. My
Government for its part remains determined to do
whatever it can wherever and whenever we may be
asked to help this process and to help to bring about
the ‘just and lasting settlement ifi the Middle East
which we all so earnestly desire.

Abitaining:
Italy, Sweden, United
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I shall

69. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The important
debate which has occupied the Security Council for
the past two weeks has highlighted both the main
elements of the Middle East problem and the extreme
difficulty of reconciling these elements. The debate
has in particular emphasized the Palestinian dimension
of this problem. At the same time, there has been a
reaffirmation of the right of every State in the area to
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.

65. My Government therefore has reservations about
certain aspects of paragraphs 1 and 4 of the present
draft resdiution,
which, we fear, could have a
restricting effect. It was our hope that, by making it
plain that the present draft resolution did not supersede .resoiution 242 (1967), we would have been able
to overcome those doubts. Since the amendment
which we proposed this afternoon has not been
adopted, my delegation will, to its regret, abstain
on the draft resolution now before us.

Against:

1 against,

73. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the Secretary-General
for his statement. I shall now call on those representatives who have asked to speak after the vote.

that must soon proceed to negotiation of all the issues
before them-to
matters of procedure, the question
of additional participation, and the matters of substance
such as withdrawal from occupied territories, the
right of all States in the area to live within secure and
recognized borders, and reciprocal obligations of the
parties to live in peace with one another.
78. When we first began our deliberations
the
United States made it clear that we wished to avoid
confrontation and to produce positive results to aid
in the search for peace. Many, we know, will be
disappointed that we do not have a resolution to use
and refer to, but for our part let me say that we have
none the less profited from the various views that have
been expressed and we have increased our understanding of the enormous complexities before us all.
Armed with the positive suggestions that have been
made, fortified by the seriousness and concern of all
who have participated, the United States pledges to
you all and to the United Nations itself that we will
persevere in the search for peace, that we will make
use of the framework for negotiation that has been
preserved, and that we will do our best. We need the
co-operation of you all to make these efforts succeed.
I hope you will join us and help us in this quest, and
as it recommences; for the United States it is a matter
of special import to know that we have the unfailing
and determined efforts of the Seeretary-General with
us in this matter.
79. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): As I recalled in my explanation of vote
a few moments ago on the United Kingdom amendment, as far as France is concerned the efforts of the
Security Council in the course of the present debate
should have been aimed at ensuring that all aspects
of the question of the Middle East be taken into
account in the search for a settlement. The draft
resolution put before the Council by six of its members-to whom I wish to express our appreciation for
the wise and responsible way in which they have
carried out their task of conciliation-did
meet the
objectives that my delegation had proposed for this
debate. It was thus that we voted in its favour, it
being understood that, as far as we were concerned,
this draft resolution had to complement resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which set the principles for a
settlement and point to the way in which it might
be found. That was the reason why my delegation
voted in favour of the United Kingdom amendment,
which stressed this aspect of complementing the other
resolutions. I regret the fact that that amendment was
not adopted, but in our minds it merely stated what
was implicit in the six-Power draft resolution, which
in its last preambular paragraph does formally refer
to the resolutions of the Council, without excluding
any. It is because it is in this way that we read the
text of the draft resolution that, despite the rejection
of the United Kingdom amendment, I voted in favour
of it. I must deplore the fact that this draft resolution,
which was the result of lengthy consultation,
also
failed to be adopted by the Council.

74. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
The United States has not lightly cast a negative
vote against the draft resolution that, was before us.
We voted “no” only after long and conscientious
consideration and with the realization that we must
keep foremost in mind a greater goal beyond this
Council chamber. I want to make clear our reasons
for voting as we did, and the seriousness with which
my Government first weighed the views expressed
in this debate. As witness to our intent and purpose,
the United States Department of State at this moment
is releasing a statement that more completely sets out
United States views on where this debate has left us
in our search for a Middle East peace.
75. Briefly to state that position: we concluded that
our responsibility to seek further progress towards an
over-all peace settlement in the Middle East required
us, even if we stood alone, to preserve the framework
for negotiations established in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The provisions that
were before us were such that we considered the
negotiating framework would have been altered in
ways that would have been seriously harmful to the
future of the peace-making process. We understand
the reasons behind many of the ideas that have been
presented here and we are not closing the door to the
introduction into the negotiating process of considerations that have not yet been addressed. Rather, we
wish to emphasize that it is better to go forward
with the agreed basis that does exist, to utilize it to
the best of our ability, and to see it evolve in a manner
that will make it more useful, rather than running the
risk of destroying it.
76. On 19 January [1876fh meeting], I made before
the Council a short statement of the United States
position on changes to the agreed framework for
negotiation. I said then that changes imposed, whatever
the intentions and with whatever justification
but
nevertheless imposed, would not work. That is a point
that I would like to make again today. The United
States negative vote on the draft resolution was not
based on antipathy to the aspirations of Palestinians,
but rather on the conviction that the passage of that
draft resolution would not ameliorate their condition
or be the most effective way of addressing the long
neglected problem of their future in the context of
an over-all settlement. It is not a question of whether
but of how to make progress to the goal we all profess.
77. On behalf of the United States, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for your statesmanship and leadership, which have piloted us all through important
and far-ranging deliberations. I wish to congratulate
all members who have spoken here for the thoughtfulness and measured tones of their positions. Surely
this approach is constructive and helpful to the parties
10

80. With regard to the draft resolution proposed by
the six members of the Council, I should like to
stress again that, as far as the question of the return
of refugees contained in paragraph 1 (6) is concerned,
we believe this to be a subsidiary aspect of the question,
since the text already in paragraph 1 (a) aflirmed the
right of the Palestinian people to an independent State
in Palestine. Furthermore,
in accordance with the
terms of paragraph 2, the modalities have to be decided
upon and taken into full account in all international
efforts made within the framework of the United
Nations. But the efforts of the Security Council, as I
also said on 14 January [1872nd meeting], should be
directed towards giving a new impetus to peace, and
again we can only regret the rejection of this draft
resolution, which we termed realistic and equitable,
as proposed to us.

legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
rights which were not set forth in the two resolutions
to which I have referred. Despite the Council’s efforts,
the draft resolution has failed of adoption. However,
it is the judgement of my delegation that although no
resolution has been adopted the fact that many members of the Security Council agreed on a formula
aimed at solving the problem of the Middle East is
in itself a point of departure for future discussions.
85. Faced with the grave situation in the area, my
delegation appeals to the parties concerned to make
every effort to seek the early achievement of a just
and durable settlement of the Middle East problem,
including the Palestinian question. For this purpose it is
the view of my delegation that the Peace Conference
should be reconvened in the very near future to work
for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
area with the participation of all parties concerned.

81. However, we do not believe that this has been a
sterile or vain debate. In the many statements made
in the Council, the framework for a just and stable
solution for the Middle East has become clearer. It
calls for a reaffirmation of the facts as contained in
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), namely, the need
to evacuate the Arab territories occupied in 1967 and
to recognize the right to existence of all States of the
region within recognized and secure boundaries and in
full safety. It also implies a new affirmation which we
consider to be essential, namely, the right of the
Palestinian people to an independent State. Thus,
even if it is not contained in a text that the members
of the Security Council could unanimously support,
all parties to the settlement should hereafter take this
into account.

86.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian):
Mr. President, first of
all I should like to express my gratitude to you
personally as President of the Security Council, and
also to the members of the Council who prepared the
draft resolution.
I want to thank them for their
strenuous efforts in trying to work out a concrete
text so that the Council could adopt a resolution
which would contribute to speeding up the achievement of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.

(interpretation

from

87. The delegation of the Soviet Union ‘cannot fail
‘to express its deepest regret that, because of the
negative vote cast by one of the permanent members
of the Security Council, the United States of America,
the draft resolution, on such an important question
as the situation in the Middle East, which was supported by a majority, was not adopted by the Security
Council. It should be stressed first that the draft resolution to a considerable degree reflected the position
which was expressed by the members of the Security
Council and also by many States Members of the
United Nations not members of the Council in the
course of several days of discussion of the Middle
East problem, including the question of Palestine. A
particularly important aspect of this discussion was
the general recognition, with a few exceptions, of the
qualitatively new character of the Palestinian problem.
A considerable majority of the members of the Council and the overwhelming majority of the Member
States non-members of the Council recognized and
stressed that the Palestinian question was an essential
political problem in the settlement of the Middle East
question. That just position found its reflection also
in the draft resolution.

82. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, first of all,
my delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
the efforts made by you and by the representatives
of non-aligned and other States members of the Council
in formulating the draft resolution on which we have
just voted. I should like also to express the gratitude
and appreciation of my delegation to the SecretaryGeneral for his insistent and untiring efforts in the
cause of peace in the Middle East. It is not an exaggeration to say that without such contributions the Council
would not have had such a balanced and constructive
proposal, which obtained the support of nine members
of the Council.
83. My delegation has observed also that in this
process. the Council has been guided by good sense
and a spirit of compromise. The reason for this is that
all the delegations that have participated in Council
meetings are greatly concerned about the situation in
the Middle East.
84. My delegation voted for the draft resolution
because we found that, as was clearly confirmed by
the statement of the representative of Pakistan, who
introduced the draft resolution, it was not intended to
supplant Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
but to supplement them, and that it also upheld the

88. The majority of the members of the CounCil and
the representatives of more than 20 Member States
non-members of the Council very clearly and definitely
stated that it was necessary to recognize and ensure
the implementation
of the inalienable national rights
11

of the Arab people of Palestine. That was the main
theme which ran through all the discussions in the
Council on the question under consideration.

Middle
East question,
including
the Palestinian
problem. In this connexion it should be pointed out
that those positions are based on the views of the
overwhelming majority of the Member States which
were expressed at the sessions of the General Assembly
and which were incorporated in its resolutions.

89. The second important aspect was that the overwhelming majority of the Member States,.members and
non-members of the Council-12
out of 15 members
of the Council-spoke
out in favour of the withdrawal
of Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories.
That just position found its reflection in the draft resolution, which was killed by the United States veto.
Thus the discussion in the Council of the problem of
the Middle East has confiied
again that the majority
of the Members of the United Nations, members and
nonmembers
of the Security Council, believe that
without an equitable solution of the Palestinian problem
on the basis of respect for the inalienable national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine and without the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the occupied
Arab territories, genuine peace in the Middle East
is impossible.

94. What conclusion can be drawn from all this?
The main political conclusion from the discussion of
the Middle East problem in the Security Council is to
be found in the fact that those who have prevented
the taking of a just decision by the Security Council,
a decision aimed at speeding up the achievement of
peace in the Middle East with the equal participation
of the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian
people, have assumed a very heavy responsibility
before the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the whole of the world community.
95. Those who have torpedoed the adoption of the
draft resolution have again demonstrated before the
United Nations and before the eyes of the world
their support of the expansionist and aggressive
policies of the leaders of Israel, who, in violation of
the pronciples of the United Nations on the nonacquisition of foreign territory by force, for many
years now have been illegally occupying the Arab
territories they have seized. In this context, it is
impossible not to point also to the very important
fact that, as a result of a long and thorough discussion
of the Middle East problem in the Council, it has
been clearly revealed before the eyes of the world
that Israel and those who support it have become
completely isolated internationally.

90. It is necessary to draw attention also to yet
another very important aspect of the discussion of the
Middle East problem by the Council. A majority of
the members of the Council who took part in the
discussion spoke out with considerable conviction and
stressed the need for the continuation of consistent
efforts on the part of the world community and. the
United Nations to bring about a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East so that the hotbed of threats of
war in that region might be liquidated. This general
view was also expressed by the Secretary-General
in his statement before the Security Council.
91. In this connexion many of the participants in the
discussion have also recognized that the Security
Council cannot work out a peace treaty on a Middle
East settlement and that the concrete working out of
the individual elements and of the whole structure of
the settlement should be carried out by the intemational forum which was set up for that ‘purpose,
namely, the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle
East.

96. However, let them not triumph, those who have
placed obstacles in the path of a peaceful settlement
in the Middle East and in the path of the implementation of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people, those who hope by such methods to perpetuate
the occupation of foreign territories seized by the
aggressor.
97. The discussion in the Security Council of the
Middle East problem has again confirmed the correctness of the line taken by the Soviet Union and the
overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
United Nations, with the aim of achieving a comprehensive political settlement of the problem of the
Middle East. Furthermore,
the need to satisfy the
legitimate
national rights of the Arab people- of
Palestine, including its right to create its ‘own State,
has been recognized and confirmed. It has been
recognized and it has been very clearly stated that
recognition of the legitimate and inalienable national
rights of the Palestinians is one of the central issues
in a Middle East settlement, without the solution
of which the establishment of a stable peace in that
region is not possible.

92. The majority of the participants in the debate
have recognized and stressed the need for the participation in the Peace Conference of all the parties directly
concerned, including the participation,
on an equal
footing, of the PLO. In this context it is important to
stress again that it is precisely the Geneva Peace
Conference which provides already existing intemational machinery for holding negotiations aimed at a
peaceful settlement in the Middle East and the forum
where a just and equitable settlement of the Middle
East crisis can and must be achieved.
93. All these positions which I have just indicated
were supported not only by the majority of the States
members of the Council, but also by the delegations
of more than 20 States Members of the United Nations
which took part in the discussion in the Council of the

98. It is high time Israel and its protectors understood that ail this cannot be simply cancelled out,
12

either by a boycott of the Security Council by Israel
or by a negative vote in the Council itself. Israel,
pursuing its aim of disguising its unjustified position
of non-participation
in the discussion of the Middle
East problem in the Security Council, refers to the
non-recognition
of Israel by the PLO. Such an approach should be rejected with determination.
For it
is necessary to consider this question in a different
light and specifically to ask whether the Palestinian
Arabs can adopt any other attitude towards Israel
than the one they have adopted, when Israel and its
protectors continue to ignore the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinians and to deny their right to
set up a national State and home of their own. Let
Israel state, offtcially that it recognizes the inalienable
national rights of the. Arab people of Palestine and
that it agrees to the creation of its national State.

102. We feel that the fact that the United Kingdom
amendment was rejected does not mean that the
Security Council has’ disavowed those resolutions. It
merely means that the Council didpot feel that it was
appropriate to include the United Kmgdom amendment
in that draft resolution which you, Mr. President, and
the representative-of Japan had defined as “a delicate
compromise”.
.103. I should like to add-and
I wish to stress
this-that my delegation nevertheless shares the views
already expressed by other delegations that the
Security Council has held a significant, revealing and
useful debate. The PLO has been given an opportunity
to express its views and has enriched the debate by
its contribution.
The participation of the PLO in this
debate on an equal footing has been a most positive
milestone in the efforts .of the Security Council to
solve the problems of thts conflict. Other parties to
the conflict-Egypt,
the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan-have
also put forward ideas and reasonable
suggestions in order to foster the process of establishing
peace in the Middle East. This debate has confirmed
the opinion held generally here in the United Nations
and everywhere throughout the world that the Palestine
question is at the very heart of the Middle East conflict,
that the Palestinian people is a major part to the
conflict and that it is therefore necessary that the
problem flowing from this be examined with the
participation
of the PLO. It has also been most
convincingly brought out that in any diplomatic effort
to establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East the national rights of the Palestinian people must
be recognized and-takeninto account, namely, the right
to self-determination
including the right to constitute
its own independent
State. The necessity for all
parties concerned to intensify their efforts so that
negotiations leading to a political settlement of the
problems of the Middle East can be renewed was
also stressed.

99. In conclusion, I must emphasize that the peoples
of the Arab countries and the Arab people of Palestine
and its natural friends and allies, represented by the
socialist, non-aligned and all peace-loving States, will
continue, as before, their ceaseless struggle to achieve
a just and stable peace in the Middle East, the triumph
of the principles of reason and justice and the recognition of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people; and this struggle will certainly be crowned with
success.
100.

Mr.

(Romania) (interprelation
from
on 16 January in the Security
Council [1875th meeting], the delegation of Romania
expressed the hope that our present work would result
in a resolution which would as soon as possible make
available means whereby the conflict might beresolved
through negotiations. At the moment, my delegation
would like to express its deep regret over the fact
that the draft resolution submitted by six members of
the Council, including Romania, although supported by
the majority failed of adoption because of the negative
vote cast by the delegation of the United States. Our
regret is all the greater since we know that it was a
balanced and constructive draft resolution, prepared
with a full awareness of our responsibility to peace
and with deliberate care to safeguard the interests of
all peoples and all States of the Middle East. In fact,
the sponsors- of the draft resolution, and more specifitally you, Mr. President, and our colleagues from
Pakistan and Panama, Mr. Akhund and Mr. Boyd, all
very carefully took pains to consult ail members of the
Council and particularly
all parties to the conflict
present at the debate.

French):

DATCU
Speaking

104. This debate, which is now drawing ‘to a .close,
underscores the need further to intensify the efforts
within the United Nations and significantly to increase
the support of the Organization and of the Security
Council in the search for a solution of the Middle
East conflict. We believe that the responsibility of the
Council regarding peace. in that region has not ended.
On the contrary, so long as a just and lasting peace
has not been established, the Council must continue
actively to examine the Middle East problem.
105. Similarly, we are convinced that now more than
ever the Secretary-General,
as the representative of
the Organization and the element representing the
continuity of the Organization’s
activities, should be
encouraged to launch further efforts for peace in the
Middle East. We believe that the parties to the conflict
should take further advantage of the possibilities
available through the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral to start negotiations.
My delegation would
like to welcome the statement made here a few
moments ago by the Secretary-General.

101. As far as the eleventh-hour amendment submitted by our colleague of the United Kingdom is
concerned, my delegation had to abstain in the vote
on it, not because we would challenge resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), but because the amendment
was so worded that its adoption would disturb the
balance that had been so painstakingly achieved in the
six-Power draft resolution after such careful and
arduous negotiations.
13

106. Although these meetings have not culminated
in the adoption of a resolution-which
was our ardent
desire-we
are nevertheless convinced that it is
possible peacefully and by negotiations to solve the
complex problem of the situation in the Middle East.
The Romanian Government considers that, in order to
achieve a political settlement in the Middle East, it
is necessary that, in accordance with resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), Israel withdraw its troops from
all the territories occupied during the 1967 war; that
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
including the right to constitute its own independent
State, be recognized; and that a just and lasting peace
be established that will ensure the existence, territorial
integrity and the right to free and independent development of all States of the region, including the Palestinian State to be created and the State of Israel.

111. The draft resolution co-sponsored by Panamasuggested global solutions to the problem and was a
most balanced document. The day on which the
Palestinians establish an independent State in Palestine+ne
respecting the right of Israel and other
States of the region to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries-will
be the day when the
peace which now seems so elusive will have a better
chance of being brought about and strengthened.
112. In the statements which we made on 12 and
19 January [187&h and 1876th meetings], we gave
the substantive reasons that led us as Latin Americans
to call for the reconciliation
for which we yearn
between the Arab countries and Israel-important
groupings of mankind with which Panama has very
close and special ties of affection and friendship which
we should like to see maintained.

107. In conclusion, I should like to say that Romania
intends to continue contributing in the future to the
search for practical solutions aimed at fostering and
intensifying the process of establishing a just and
durable peace in the Middle East.

113. The sole ontion now left to us at the end of this
debate is to urge-on all those that might contribute to
a prompt renewal of negotiations at the so-called
Geneva Peace’ Conference to do so and to see that
those efforts be resumed as soon as possible, aware
that the world will be able to appreciate whatever is
done to ensure peace in the Middle East. They can,
I know, count on the unflagging co-operation of the
Secretary-General and the goodwill of members of the
Securitv Council.

108.

Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from SpanFor a just and lasting peace to be-established
in the Middle East, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) must be strengthened. That will allow the
Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable national
rights, including that of establishing an independent
State in Palestine within the framework of the Charter’
of the United Nations. Many new crises could be
avoided by the just and timely recognition of the
national rights of the Palestinians to return to their
own homeland and to establish an independent State
in Palestine in accordance with the terms of the
resolutions on this subject.

ish):

114. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): In my :statement on
14 January [1872nd meeting] in the Council debate
on the present agenda item I emphasized my Govemment’s view that the basis for our deliberations must,
first and foremost, be the two Security Council resolutions, 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The principles
embodied in these documents are stil1 fully valid, and
we must not do anything that may change or weaken
those principles.

109. The Panamanian delegation has worked arduously during the last fortnighi, with a sincere desire to
see the debate on the Middle East problem including
the Palestinian question culminate in a balanced resolution acceptable to the parties to the conflict and at the
same time interpreted by the world as a major
constructive effort by this major body of the United
Nations duly to channel the peace negotiations for that
sorely beset region of the world. We believed that the
draft resolution which we sponsored with the delegations of Benin, Guyana, Pakistan, Romania and the
United Republic of Tanzania, which was rejected,
offered mutual concessions and embodied the terms
that would complement the basic resolutions on this
subject, and that it could therefore be accepted by the
parties concerned and the members of the Security
Council.

115. Without referring expressly to resolutions 242
(1967) or 338 (1973), the draft resolution which was
put forward by the six members of.the Council and
on which we have just voted does, in my Government’s
view, contain the most important elements of these
resolutions, in particular the reaffirmation
by the
Council of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States in the area and
their right to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries. This passage thus again, reaffirms the
principle of the secure existence of Israel and all other
States in the Middle East.
116. Another important feature of the draft resolution
is that it contains the necessary complement to the
previous decisions by the Council, that is, the
reference to the national rights of the Palestinians
and their right to self-determination.
The solution of
this problem is a basic prerequisite for a just settlement
of the conflict in the Middle East.

110. However, that was not the case. We are concerned at having failed, because to maintain the
starus quo regarding the acute and fundamental
problems of the Middle East is willingly or unwillingly
to allow situations of force to prevail, which will
inevitably lead to new warlike incidents.

117. Notwithstanding
the fact that the draft resoiution contains these important, positive elements, my
14

delegation, to its great regret, found itself unable to
vote for it. The reason for this is that the United
Kingdom amendment,
for which we voted, unfortunately failed of adoption. This failure of the Council
to include an explicit preference for resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) could, in the view of my Government, cast doubt as to the compatability
of the draft
resolution before us with the basic Security Council
texts in question. The uncertainty thus created with
regard to how the draft resolution should be, interpreted forced my delegation to abstain.

of the Italian delegation on this highly important issue,
namely, the Middle East problem including the Palestinian question. I do not wish, however, in explaining
the vote I have just cast on behalf of the Italian
delegation, to refer myself simply to that statement.
We would not be doing justice to all the participants
in the debate. We could even appear as being ungrateful
to the sponsors of the draft resolution, who have
tried very hard in order to meet the views of’ the
other members of the Council. On the contrary, we
have listened very carefully to all the speakers, and
we have examined with the greatest attention all the
information and opinions provided during the debate
and in the intensive consultations which have followed,
practically until a little time ago. We certainly appreciate the many and significant improvements
introduced in the original text, as will appear from what I
shall say later in my statement.

118. In the Council’s debate my delegation has
emphasized that we consider it a matter of great
importance that the Council should be able to arrive
at decisionsthat could receive broad support. I regret
that it has not been possible to obtain broad support.
This is not due to any lack of efforts on your part,
Mr. President, or on the part of the sponsors. My
delegation expresses its warm thanks to you and to the
sponsors for your patience and untiring efforts. While
it is thus regrettable that no resolution could be
adopted, this does not mean, in our view, that this
debate has not had its value. On the contrary, we
consider this debate most constructive and useful.

122. And I can assure all the participants in the
debate, as well as the six sponsors of the draft resolution, that in taking its final decision the Italian Govemment did so after having duly and very earnestly
considered all the elements I have just mentioned. I
sincerely .hope that from what I will say next that
everyone will be able to understand the reason why
my delegation has been unable to support the present
draft resolution, much as we would have wished to
do so fully, as I indicated in supporting and announcing
our vote in favour of the amendment proposed by the
representative of the United Kingdom.

119. As to the draft resolution, I wish to repeat that
in our view it contains several essential elements which
would form part of an over-all solution. I refer, in particular, to the paragraph dealing with the rights of the
Palestinian people to exercise its self-determination.
I want to reiterate that the Swedish Government gives
its full sup,port to this principle. We would express
the hope that the Council will eventually be able to
reach a decision endorsing this rightful aim and that
that decision will command the broad support which
is necessary to achieve meaningful results. Only in
this way will it be possible to realize the aim that we
are all urgently seeking, that is, the establishment
of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

123. Let me now recapitulate what we had in mind
from the beginning of our deliberations and the opinion
we. hold on the texts which were put to the vote.
The main objective that Italy has consistently pursued
is .a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East.
In this connexion, our position, as repeatedly stated,
is that such a settlement must be based on the following
points: the withdrawal of Israel from all the territories occupied in June 1967; the recognition of the
national rights of the Palestinian people, to whom a
homeland cannot be further denied; and respect of
the sovereignty, the political independence and the
territorial
integrity
within secure and recognized
boundaries of all the States in the area. Our stand
is inspired by the principles stated by the Security
Council itself, that is, in resolution 242 (1967) and
subsequently recalled by resolution 338 (1973), which
has established a framework for negotiations within
which it has already, been possible to achieve
encouraging results.

120. Earlier in this debate my delegation emphatically
stressed that the status quo does not give peace. Time
does not work for peace. The peoples, the Govemments must want and then work for such changes as
will lead to agreements, and we appeal to all parties
concerned actively to seek such agreements. The
peoples in the area must finally have the opportunity
to live without the constant threat of violence, terror
and war. My delegation therefore wants to associate
itself whole-heartedly with the appeal just made by the
Secretary-General.
We owe it to him to acknowledge
gratefully once again the untiring efforts that he has
devoted to the solution of the problems of the Middle
East over the years. We also owe to him our fullest
support for his continued activities in this matter.
We attach great importance, and indeed a great hope,
to the role that the Secretary-General,
with his great
experience and skill, can play in the contribution
towards the solution that we all fervently desire.

124. In the draft resolution that has been submitted
to us, we do not fail to see a positive aspect to the
extent that it tends to supplement the contents of the
resolutions. I have just mentioned with a dutiful
acknowledgement of the political reality-and
not only
the human one--of the problem, a political reality
we have long underlined, of the Palestinian people.
This people rightly aspires, in our view, to the establishment of a national State. From this angle the draft

121. Mr. VINCI ‘(Italy): On 19 January [1876th
meeting], I had the opportunity to state the position
15

resolution is, therefore, to be commended to general
consent, and for my delegation I would point out that
we share its inspiration and its general scope.

of the last version which was acceptable to all of us
as the draft resolution we have just considered, worked
with hope and confidence after hearing the views of
all the parties, including those that are absent.
Together with other colleagues, Benin has tried to
reconcile the divergent views and hoped to make a
modest contribution to the establishment of peace in
that troubled and tom region of the world.

125. However, this same draft resolution, which
shows such an appreciable and commendable effort
by the non-aligned members of the Council and other
countries, still contains some formulations which raise
a number of questions. We feel that some paragraphs
are open to uncertain interpretations’ similar to those
which have in the past made more difftcult the peacemaking. process. In particular, from a technical and
legal point of view, the importance of which can
hardly be underestimated, we must take note once
agrdn of the omission of any specific reference to
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). What is also
missing, in our view, is some clearer wording having
the effect af giving new momentum to the negotiating
process.

129. While keeping the substanceof the original text,
which, as a majority of the Council recognized,
admitted the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and independence within a
State that should have borders defined in accordance
with other existing States, the co-sponsors accepted
,a11the suggested modifications and the majority of
the constructive proposals made so that some of the
errors of the past could be redressed and at the end
of our work the Security Council could pride itself on
having at least broken the log-jam and opened a
freeway to all future efforts to establish in the Middle
East a just and stable peace. But certain members
of the Council preferred it to be otherwise, because
by an irony they feel that this body in charge of
maintaining international peace and security is not the
one to draw the lines that should be followed in order
to achieve peace in the Middle East. Now we have to
break up without a decision of the Council, which is
most regrettable. However, the delegation of Benin
does not feel frustrated or discouraged, because we
have the satisfaction of knowing that we have fultilled out duty. Our conscience is clear because of the
work we have done, and we leave it to history and
.the world community to judge our work.

126. In conclusion, we believe that if there is a
meaning all of us here-and mainly the absent-should
draw from this constructive and illuminating debate,
which has gone on for two weeks and in depth, it can
be construed as follows: a clear indication that what is
needed is a quick resumption of the negotiating process
and a growing acknowledgement that any attempt to
deny to the Palestinian people the right to the expression of their national identity, since it would miss a
main feature of the negotiations, would be bound to
obstruct the efforts towards peace, efforts which, on
the contrary, we should like to see speeded up. Italy
for its part is ready to contribute by all means to
these efforts. In particular my country is prepared,
together with our partners in the European Community, to work out proposals for an adequate system
of international guarantees, which appear to us to be
the necessary complement of an over-all peace
settlement.

130. It would be superfluous to stress that, despite
the decision that was just adopted on a constructive
text, the key to any solution to the crisis in the
Middle East is the solution of the Palestinian problem,
as the overwhelming majority of the members of the
Security Council have stressed in their statements.
Therefore, we should not hope to solve the problem of
the Middle East by selecting deliberate aspects and
overlooking and ignoring some of the essential
components. My delegation is convinced that you do
not have to be a genius to recognize that, even if by
a miracle Israel were to withdraw from all the Arab
territories occupied since the war of 1967, peace
would thereupon be re-established in the region. It
could not be so until the Palestinian problem was
also solved, and it must always be.considered a type
of epiphenomenon. After nine years of ‘stagnation,
one would have to be wearing blinkers not to understand that there can be no true and:lasting solution
in the region until the Palestinian people has been
granted its homeland and as long as .it is still forced
to lead a nomadic-existence. :
.
131. However, to reject the present draft resolutionbecause it is contended thatit would replace previous
resolutions, particularly resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), would be to exaggerate, as the majority

127. Mr. PAQUI (Benin) finterpreration
from
French): In accepting the responsibility of participating
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
the Revolutionary Military Government of the People’s
Republic of Benin set as its target to do all in its
power to contribute to the search for any solution
that’would lead to the strengthening of peace and
international security and to make positive an constructive suggestions to help in the search for and
the establishment of peace in the world. it was from
that approach that the delegation of Benin worked,
together with its other colleagues, and gave its support to all the compromise formulas, as far as they did
not betray the fundamental national revolutionary
options and mission. :
128.. The, work &have undertaken since .I2 January
has given my delegation the,chance’to show its desire
to co-operate, because, .as the entire world knows,
the Middle East is the region where more than ever
before the peace of the world is at present threatened.
Benin, when taking an active part in the preparation
16

whether or not the solution to the crisis of the Middle
East has to pass ,b way of the specific attention
which will be given Yo the solution of the Palestinian
problem.

of the members of the Council have recognized. If
it is true that those resolutions do constitute the basis
for negotiations on the crisis of the Middle East, it is
no less true that they contain certain flaws that the
Security Council should correct if it wishes to help
in the solution of the crisis of the Middle East. We
know, for example, that the weakness of resolution
242 (1967) lies, inter ah, in regarding the problem of
Palestinians as a problem of refugees. The majority
of the members of the Council have agreed that that
problem is a highly political one.

136. The delegation of Benin dares to.hope that that
truth will not be long in coming. The Palestinian
people, fighting to have their rights recognized have
waited, and I trust that they will be able to wait,
because they have faith and confidence in their objectives, and nothing can stifle that trust and confidence.
It is for that reason that my delegation believes that
we must not await a new outbreak of war in the zone
before we accept and understand this intangible fact,
and we endorse the appeal made a few moments ago
by the Secretary-General.

132. That being the case, what would be more
reasonable and what would be more just than to try
to correct this weakness? That is what Benin and the
other co-sponsors have been trying to bear in mind in
the course of the negotiations, because justice and
equity dictate that at least the land reserved for the
Palestinians after the adoption of the famous General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) that led to the:partition
in 1947 should be restored to them. The draft resolution, which was just supported by an overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council and yet will
not be a document of the Council because of the veto,
by recognizing the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination
as well as its right to constitute a
State, only wanted to invite the Council once again
to study the very act of the birth of the State of Israel
in order to find a solution to the crisis and to force
Israel to be content with what was granted it and to
render unto the Palestinians that which was granted
them.

137. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): The
draft resolution introduced by the representative of
Pakistan on behalf of the sponsors and contained in
document S/11940 includes several very important
positive points acceptable to my delegation. I refer
in particular to the following points:
-First, the recognition of the political status of the
Palestinian people and of the PLO as the authentic
representative of the people of Palestine;
-Secondly,
the recognition that the question of
Palestine is the core and the origin of the conflict in
the Middle East;
-Thirdly,
the condemnation of the Zionist aggression by deploring Israei’s persistence in its occupation
of the Arab territories;

133. Among the arguments advanced to block that
draft resolution was the wish not to do .anything
that would alter the chances of the‘ negotiator. The
delegation of Benin considers that if we do not want to
play the ostrich, if we want to negotiate in an objective
manner, then we must tell each of the parties exactly
what it must do and, particularly if it is a State that
refuses to recognize a reality which is obvious to the
rest of the world, that it is wrong’ in trying to overlook and ignore the basic element in the crisis, namely,
the Palestinian question. Without being elirpert in
political science, we can -quite easily understand,
after a calm and objective analysis, that the system of
negotiation is blocked and that it will run the risk
of being blocked as long as there is an unrealistic
attitude adopted whereby the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination
and independence is
not recognized.

-Fourthly,
the reaffirmation
of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right to establish an independent and sovereign State
in Palestine.
138.

My delegation

would like. to express on this

occasion its gratitude and appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to our brothers the. representatives
of Benin, Guyana, Pakistan, Panama and Romania,
for their sincere and indefatigable efforts in preparing
this draft resolution after careful and delicate negotiations. However, the delegation of the Libyan -Arab
Republic did not participate in the vote on the draft

resolution because it employed the language of and
was ,based in part on,the principles of resolution 242

(1967).

134. Furthermore, contrary to what was stated in a
widely- distributed
American periodical,’ the draft
resolution co-sponsored by Benin was not a challenge
to a giant. On the contrary, it was’ intended to help
the giant and to help resolution 242 (1967) by introducing the necessary corrections that are called for in
1976. Therefore it was. a realistic and useful draft
resoktion. But alas, others did not judge likewise.

139. The

.II
position

of my

delegation

T.1
,I
concerning

resolutions 242 (1%7) and 338 (1973) has been reit-.
erated many times ‘in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council. Those two resolutions have been
bypassed, as I said ‘earlier+ by events and developments both inside and outside the United Nations.
They are irrelevant as a framework for any just and
lasting solution to the Middle East problem and to
the Palestinian question. In fact, General Assembly

135. History will decide in future whether the
sponsors or the giant were right. History will say
17

:

I .a:

resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX) reaffiiming
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, along
with resolution 3376 (XXX) proposing means designed
to enable the Palestinian people to achieve their
national rights and resolution 3379 (XXX) condemning
Zionism as a racist movement, reflect profound and
important changes and developments in the attitude of
the United Nations and in international public opinion.
Logically those resolutions call for a review of the
entire question and of the method of dealing with it.

in sovereignty and territorial
integrity. But most
significant, of course, was the affirmation by most
speakers of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians,
for it was the first time in 30 years that the Security
Council had focused its attention on this question.
From resolution on resolution,
it is now overwhelmingly clear that the vast majority of the world
community is of the view that no lasting solution can
be arrived at in the Middle East unless and until the
Palestinian question, the root cause of the whole
problem, has been adequately settled.

140. I should also like to stress the fact that even
this mild text prepared after long discussions and in
a spirit of compromise failed to be adopted by the
Council because of the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Security Council. That means because
of the veto of the protectors and allies of the Zionist
aggressive entity, These facts reaffirm my earlier
statement made during this debate that the unjust and
unlimited United States commitment
to the Zionists
constitutes the main obstacle to the establishment
of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

145. The draft resolution which, regrettably, has not
been adopted by the Council owing to a negative vote
of a permanent member of the Security Council is,
and will continue to be, an important and serious
attempt at a meaningful search for a just, peaceful and
lasting solution. We continue to believe that the
adoption of that draft resolution would have created
the necessary favourable, and indeed indispensable,
conditions for promoting the momentum
towards
genuine and serious negotiations for peace and justice
in the area.

141. Finally, I should like to stress the fact that, in
our opinion, by its vote on the British amendment,
and .by refusing specific reference to resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Security Council considers
that those resolutions are no longer valid as a practical
and realistic framework for a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. In fact, the negative vote on the
British amendment sealed the fate of resolution 242
(1967). It is a kind of coup de grcice for these illfated, ambiguous and irrelevant resolutions.
142. The PRESIDENT:
No other member of the
Council wishes to speak, but before I call on those
delegations which have been invited to participate in
the discussion and which have expressed a wish to
address the Council, I should like, in my capacity
as representative of the UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF
TANZANIA,
to make a statement subsequent to the
voting that has taken place in the Council.

146. The draft resolution, submitted by four nonaligned members and two other non-permanent members of the Council, was the result of long hours of
negotiations and reflects all the basic concerns on the
question. It contains the elements in resolution 242
(1967) as well as those in resolution 338 (1973), and
on those aspects it is definitely clearer and less
equivocal than its predecessors. Above all, unlike
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), it tackles the
very underlying cause of the problem: the question
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. If
it had been adopted and followed by future efforts in
the search for peace, it would certainly have ensured
that the negotiations focused on the crucial and
decisive issues. It is also our belief that those negotiations would have been rendered easier. We continue
to hope, however, that in spite of the failure to adopt
that draft resolution, the elements contained in it will
not be lost from sight in future efforts.

143. It is indeed regrettable that the Security Council
has not been able to adopt any resolution on the
problem, for aunique opportunity has been lost thereby
which could have been used at least to make a start
in changing the dangerous trend of events in the Middle
East. It is nevertheless the firm opinion of the Tanzanian delegation that the meetings of the Security
Council this month on the problem before it have been
extremely fruitful in many ways.

147. We are confident that the Security Council will
not give up, but will soon make another attempt at
agreeing on a resolution of this kind. Needless to
say, I have no doubt that in such future attempts the
Security Council will continue to receive the outstanding and unreserved assistance of the SecretaryGeneral, whose own contribution
‘in the current
consideration
of the problem has been singularly
important.

144. In the course of the debate the Council has
heard a fairly good number of statements, including
especially that of the representative of the PLO. In
those statements, all of which were serious, one could
not fail to note the overwhelming
affirmation
of
certain pertinent Charter principles, in particular the
inadmissibility
of forcible territorial acquisitions and
the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, as well as the right of all States to exist

148. As PRESIDENT
of the Co.uncil, I shall now
call on those delegations which have been invited to
participate -in our discussions and which have
expressed a wish to address the Council before it
concludes its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I call on the representative of Egypt.
149. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): At the outset of
this long debate on the Middle East problem including
18

the Palestinian question, in which the PLO has participated fully, there was hope that the Council’s work
would culminate in a resolution recognizing the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people. By
recognizing those rights and calling for the participation of the PLO in the Geneva Peace Conference,
such a resolution would have added a necessaw,
indeed a vital element, in the ‘search for a peaceful
settlement of the Middle East problem.

154. The draft’ resolution just vetoed would have
affirmed, inter al,%, that the Palestinian people should
be enabled to exercise their inalienable
national
rights of selfdetermination,
including their right to
establish an independent State in Palestine in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and this
because of the Council’s conviction that the question
of Palestine is the core of the conflict in the Middle
East. That being so, it is only natural that the PLO
should take part in all efforts that could lead to such
a settlement, including the Geneva Peace Conference
on the Middle East held under the auspices of the
United Nations, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 3375 (XXX) adopted on 10 November 1975.

159. Many delegations, realizing the importance of
the question being discussed by the Council, requested
the right to express their views during the debate.
This debate has proved to be of great value in many
respects, and I am confident that the significance of
what was stated by the vast majority will not go
unnoticed. The merit of the debate is that it focused
on the new realities of the problem by stressing the
necessity of recognizing the national rights of the
Palestinian people. Moreover, it demonstrated very
clearly that the recognition of the national rights of
the Palestinian people is considered by the overwhelming majority of Member States to be of fundamental importance for any settlement in the Middle
East to be just and lasting.

155. Egypt’s point of view in connexion with the
Council’s debate was and is very .clear. In my statement to the Council on 13 January, I said:
“my Government, by participating in the debate,
considers it not an alternative but rather a prerequisite to the Peace Conference. Therefore... Egypt
calls for the reconvening of this Conference with
the participation of all parties concerned, including
the PLO, on an equal footing with other participants
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
3375 (XXX) in order to deal with the problem in all
its different aspects, on the aforementioned basis.”
[1871st meeting, para. 47.1

151. Speaker after speaker has stressed this recognition. The Palestinian people, like all other peoples in
whose name the Charter of the United Nations was
written, have rights that are of the utmost importance
to all. To view the question of Palestinian people
simply in humanitarian
terms, as a mere refugee
problem, has proved to be the single most costly
mistake in all past efforts intended to achieve a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. History
bears witness to that very fact.

156. Even the United States of America, which saw
fit to cast a negative vote today, has recently stopped
referring to the Palestinian problem simply as a
refugee problem. The logical sequence should have
been that the rights of the Palestinian people are no
less important than the rights of all the other peoples
in.the area and should be acknowledged and guaranteed. It would therefore have followed that they
should also be given the opportunity to express their
legitimate demands on an equal footing with the other
peoples in the area.

152. Thus, it is with a deep sense of regret and puzzlement that we take note of the fact that the draft
resolution recognizing the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people and supported by the majority
of the members of the Council was rejected by the
United States of America. In casting its veto, the
United States will most certainly neither infringe upon
the ,inalienable rights of the Palestinian people nor
change the fact that the Palestinian question is the core
of the Middle East problem. Such a negative yote
will only cause delay and hinder the processes for
arriving at a just and durable peace in the Middle East.

157. The majority view that has clearly evolved
during the debate is that the recognition of the national
rights of the Palestinian people is of vital importance
to any procedure devised to achieve a settlement.
Security Council resolution 338 (1973) set out such a
procedure whose s,uccess depends on how it can come
to grips with the core of the problem it was created
to solve.

153. From the start of this debate, the Security
Council had before it an important opportunity to add
a further positive contribution to the various efforts
aimed at achieving a just solution, by agreeing
unanimously
on a resolution .to the effect that a
permanent and just peace in the Middle East must be
based on the achievement by the Palestinian people
of their national rights. Had the Council been enabled
to act, it would have been simply redressing the Middle
East equation, not by detracting anything but, on
the contrary, by adding a vital prerequisite for a just
and lasting peace in the area.

158. The Security Council’s inaction today with
regard to the implementation
of one of the main purposes of the Charter of the United Nations iS most
disturbing, for it is disturbing to contemplate a world
so unbalanced and so immobiliztid.
Let us hope that
the history. of missed opportunities will not remain
forever unheeded. Losing opportunity
after opportunity will not gain time for Israel or for peace, for
time is most obviously not in Israel’s favour and
Israel, in trying to play with time, is also playing
with fire.
19

159. I believe that there is no need for me here to
restate Egypt’s position in detail, since I had the
occasion to do so in my previous statement before
the Council. However, in order to dispel any shadow
of a doubt, I should like to reiterate the basic elements
of our position: first, the right of the Palestinian people
to an independent State of its own in accordance
with its national .right to self-determination;
secondly,
the total and complete withdrawal of Israel from all
the Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967; and,
thirdly, the reconvening of the Peace Conference at
Geneva in the near future with the participation
of
all parties concerned, including the PLO on an equal
footing with the other participants in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX), in order
to deal with the problem in all its aspects.

one-perhaps
not even the United States--can continue to believe that a viable search for peace can
address itself only to Israel’s claims and ignore Arab,
and particularly Palestinian, rights.
164. The debate in the Security Council during the
last two weeks has reflected a major and profound
evolution in the thinking and positions of all continents and peoples on the issue of the Middle East.
Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe-in
spite of
specific votes-have
spoken strongly and positively
in favour of justice for the Palestinians and their
fellow Arabs. They have pronounced themselves
strongly in favour of the principles of self-determination and the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force. In varying degrees and styles, they
have condemned Israel’s expansionism,
chauvinism
and intransigence.

160. We share the anxiety expressed today in the
statement of the Secretary-General, and I am sure that
all of us around this table and elsewhere will undoubtedly take due account of all that has emerged from
the discussions, each drawing his own conclusion as
to the meaning and implications of the debate rather
than its result. Let us sincerely hope that such reassessment as may take place will not be counter
productive but, on the contrary, will be of a kind
which will open the road to peace and stability in the
area.

165. They have supported the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people. They have categorically
demanded the ending of Israeli occupation and
aggrandizement.
So, in spite of the United States
veto, the Security Council has taken a decision, and
it is a strong and positive decision.
166. As an Arab country which has absorbed for
nearly three decades much of the shock of the Palestinian tragedy and Palestinian trials and tribulations,
Jordan is gratified at this new success for the cause of
justice in the Middle East. We extend our deep
gratitude to all the States which have expressed their
positive support for Arab rights and for the cause of
justice. They have displayed a fundamental realization
of the inseparable bonds unifying the struggle for
justice, self-determination
and freedom by all peoples
in ail continents.

161. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
162. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): The result of the vote
just taken bears little relation to what has happened
in the last two weeks. The last two weeks have
been a landmark in the development of the cause of
justice in the Middle East. A new international
awareness and a new understanding have emerged in
the Security Council during these debates. A profound
and irreversible change has taken place in the thinking
of the international community regarding the rights of
the Arab peoples, and particularly
the Palestinian
people, in the present conflict in the Middle East.

167. Unfortunately,
one major Power continues to
display a lack of understanding and moral sensitivity
far out of proportion to its global responsibility and
influence. By casting a vote against a moderate and
balanced draft resolution representing the irreducible
minimum of recognition of the elements of right and
justice in the Middle East question, the United States
has destroyed a rare opportunity for opening the road
to a revitalized peace process. The Arab parties were
all here at the Security Council. advancing a reasonable
case and expressing readiness for a just peace. It
was not their fault that their adversary’ chose to avoid
this forum of constructive peace process. The United
States has made a historic mistake by missing this
opportunity and by its insistence on maintaining the
old and anachronistic framework for the establishment of peace which was drawn up in the wake of
the Arab defeat of 1967.

163. In spite of the result of this vote, the basis for
any prospective just settlement to the conflict has
profoundly changed. The former obsolete assumptions
of how to bring about peace in the Middle East have
evaporated. Everyone realizes now that peace cannot
be a state of static tranquillity rooted in Israeli military
superiority and continued suppression of Arab rights.
No one ignores any more the centrality of the issue of
Palestinian rights in the continuing conflict. No one
genuinely believes that equivocation on the necessity
of Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab terri‘tories can continue in any serious search for peace in
the Middle East. While all realize that in any just and
realistic settlement. of the conflict there has to be a
balance between the rights and obligations of all the
parties, no one-perhaps not even the United Statescontinues to conceive of it as the same mechanical
and one-sided balance of November
1967. No

168. There is no sanctity in that framework. Resolution 242 (1967) has no more and no less inherent
value than other resolutions of the Security Council
on the Middle East. Why should it, for example, have
more value than nearly half a dozen resolutions on
20

Jerusalem? In fact, resolution 242.V967) lost in value
as time passed and, no progress was- made in the
achievement of peace or a just settlement in the
Middle East. The United States knows this very well
as it has been closely associated with the agonizing
process of attempting to implement resolution 242
(1967).

173.. You, -Mr. President, deserve a special salute
and much credit foryour role of leadership and your
wisdom and untiring efforts in .the conduct of this
debate and in negotiations:which h@peddevelop a new
framework of thinking and action for future peace in
the Middle East.

169. For the past nine years not one single step
towards the implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
has been made. The only steps, minor and partial,
involving some movement resulted from the war’of
1973 and not from the inherent, dynamic force of
resolution 242 (1967). And it was again the long failure
to break the stalemate that caused the war of 1973.’

174. The PRESIDENT: i now call on ihe representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

175. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): The vote
just completed by the Security Council at the end of
its two-week debate on the problem of the Middle
East and the question of Palestine is an important landmark in the history of the handling by the United
Nations of these two tragic situations. In spite of
last-minute
and in spite of the inability of
170. May Ialso recall that the war was again preceded the Council mameuvres
to
adopt
the
draft resolution proposed by
by an Arab attempt in the summer of 1973to bring the six of its members because
of the abuse, once more,
case of the failure to reach any results envisaged -by the United States of America
of its right of
in resolution 242 (1967) to the attention of the Security veto, that draft resolution has gained the
support of the
Council, only to be frustrated by a United States democratic majority of the Council members.
The draft
veto.*
resolution was the outcome of many days of lengthy
and active consultations during -which the sponsors
171. We have been told to preserve the so-called’ exerted tireless efforts to accommodate t‘he views of
agreed framework. What agreed framework? Who all parties in order to bring about a text that, short
agrees to this presumed framework? All the Arab.; of entirely satisfying everyone, nevertheless constiparties either believe or have now realized that the ’ tutes 8 fair and valid basis for the realization of a just
framework envisaged in 1967 is no longer adequate: - and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Israel has not shown any respect for or enthusiasm::
about that framework during the last nine years. The ’ 176. Morally, the draft resolution has been adopted.
United States, while technically not a party, cannot Eleven countries out of 15 representing the entire
boast great achievements in the implementation of family of nations in the Security Council have, in
that framework. The so-called framework received
fact, supported the draft resolution; the two nonduring the last phase of the debate of the Security participating members are no exception. They conCouncil a peculiar form of support from the United
sider, in fact,’ that the draft resolution is too mild
Kingdom. A country that prides itself on its ability
and they would have preferred a stronger affiiation
to accommodate with change: and. changing circum- of the rights of the Palestinian people and the Arab
stances cannot justify such rigid attachment to an old countries .which are the victims of Israeli aggression.
and outdated formula. The balance assumed to have
The tyrannous minority of one, who obstructed the
been the basis for resolution 242(1967) was.essentially adoption of such a fair and balanced draft resolution,
preserved in the draft resoiutiun just voted on. It only
cannot change the course of history, for the inalienable
attempted to correct insufficiencies in resolution 242 national rights of the Palestinian people. have now
(1967) and to take account of-new realities. Therefore,
become recognized by every nation of the world,
the last-minute proposal of the United Kingdom,
except,’ of course, the aggressor itself and the one
injecting as it did an element of confusion and super-Power which has chosen to isolate itself in, its
divisiveness, can hardly be construed asa constrtnctive blind support of it.
contribution.
177. Yet what is there in this draft resolution that
172. We have been asked to preserve the process leads any country, let alone a super-Power and
for peace. Which process? There is no process. There
pe-rmanent member of the Security Council, to cast
is a stalemate. This is why the Arab parties have
a vote against it or even to abstain? Does any of its
come *to the Security Council. Nevertheless, this provisions contradict the Charter of the United Nations
debate by the Council has been fruitfuil and forwardor any principle of international law? The essential
looking. A new framework for future’ peace in the paragraph in the draft resolution is paragraph 1, which
Middle East hasemerged.’A new consensusis emerging is composed of four subparagraphs, forming as a
in the world. Those who have not yet joined it will
whole the basic and balanced elements for the
join it in, the future. The Arabs have contributed to establishment of ajust and lasting peace in the Middle
a new understanding of their case and cause. We are East.
grateful to our friends and to al1 those who tiave
supported the cause of peace and justice in the
1%. Subparagraph (a) affirms that the Palestinian
Middle East.
people should have the basic national rights recognized
21

without exception for every one of the 144 peoples
constituting the United Nations, as well as for the
few remaining nations which are still outside the
Organization either by their own choice or by pressure
from the same tyrant minority. The right of every
people to self-determination is enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, in the first Article, and it is the
backbone of the whole United Nations structure. To
deny such a right amounts to a pure and simple rejection of the main principle on which all international
relations are based. Unless we consider that the
3 million Palestinian human beings living inside and
outside the occupied territories are mere phantoms,
we have to recognize the existence of the Palestinian
<
people.

181. Subparagraph (!x) does not call for much argument in its support. The right of the Palestinian
people to return to their homes and property and,
if they choose not to do so, to receive adequate
compensation has’ been recognized. by the United
Nations since the first days of the Palestinian tragedy,
in General Assembly resolution 194(III), of 11December 1948. The same.right has since been repeatedly
confirmed year after year by the General Assembly,
strangely enough, always under the sponsorship of
none other than the United States delegation.
i
182. Subparagraph (c) is also very clear. It does not
need explanation. It says in 13 words what could be
e’ ually convincingly said in 13 huge books, and that
isi,
4that what was occupied by force must be completely
returned. The occupation of Arab territories is a
continued act of aggression according to the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
Ia:w. The principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by the threat or use of force is indivisible, and all territories thus occupied must be
completely returned. It is really distressing to see a
very small minority of Security Council permanent
members, who are supposed to be the first defenders
bf the provisions of the, Charter and the rule of law,
resort instead to intentional ambiguities and acrobatics
in semantics in order to camouflage their blind sup-.
port for the expansionist aggressor. Otherwise how
can .such‘great Powers as the United ,States or the
United Kingdom explain their betrayal of the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations by
failing to supportaresolution which merely calls for the
withdrawal ofthe aggressor from the territories it has
occupied by force and by aggression, or ,how can they
be opposed to recognition of the national rights of an
uprooted people which has been the victim of aggression and injustice for nearly three decades?

179. If there exists a Palestinian people, such a
people is entitled, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and the most elementary prini
ciples of international law, to exercise its right to
self-determination. The right of the Palestinian people
to establish an independent State in its homeland,
Palestine, stems directly from its inalienable right
of self-determination and is as clearly stipulated at the
end .of subparagraph (a) in full conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations. It is ironic that the
opposition to the right of the Palestinian people to
establish a State on its homeland comes exclusively
from that Zionist entity which owes its very existence
as a State, according to the United Nations, to the
very resolution of the General Assembly which
partitioned the territory of Palestine into two States,
an Arab State and a Jewish State, plus the intemationalized city of Jerusalem. Israel’s denial of the
right of the Palestinian people to establish an independent State in Palestine would amount to a legal
suicide, becauseit wouId bedenying General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, embodying,
the Partition Plan for Palestine and constituting in
fact the United Nations birth certificate of the Zionist
entity.

183. I do not think I need to go into details in regard
to subparagraph (d), for this subparagraph is supposed-’
to meet the concern of those who insist on a so-called
balance between the aggressor and the victim. Nevertheless, I cannot fail to refer to the term “secure and
recognized boundaries” in that subparagraph, which
copies faithfully the language of the ‘often quoted
but never implemented resolution 242 (1967). Here,
as well as there, one is faced with the same element
of intentional ambiguity. What do we mean by secure
and recognized boundaries? The concept of security
cannot be related to any element ‘of geographical or
strategic position or situation, because the term
“secure boundaries” would then be nothing more than
a veiled invitation to expansion and annexation. Any
such interpretation is definitely and wholly out of the
question and is completely rejected by the Charter
and by the principles of international law. Boundaries
can be secure only if they are recognized. They can
.be recognized only if they are legal and not imposed
by the force of aggression. The myth of geographically
secure boundaries was completely shattered along
with many others during the 1973 October war of

180. What is more abhorrent is Israel’s afYirmation
that it would never allow the creation of a third State
between its own and Jordan, for this is the first
instance in memorable history when a State claimed
for itself a right of extraterritorial sovereignty beyond
its borders. We have heard, of course, of the concept
of territorial waters but never of the concept of territorial territory by which a State can dictate beyond its
legal borders what should be or what should not be
established. Obviously Israel cannot fool the world
any more about the real designs behind such strange
assertions, for it is becoming clearer than ever that
what the Zionists are really after is pure and simple
annexation of *dl or .most of the occupied Arab territories. The creation of more Jewish settlements ‘day
after day, using various pretexts, on the ‘Golan
Heights and on the West Bank, as well as in other
parts of the occupied Arab territories, is clear proof
of Israel’s policy of expansion.
22

.
~p&ial and particularresponsibilities in this connexlon
and that he has a moral mandate from the world
public to undertake everything possible in his high
office and within his competence, as he promised in
his statement today, to generate a movement towards
a just and lasting peace.
188. We believe that the debate which has been
184. In any event; the relevant reference in resolugoing
on in the Security Council for two weeks has
tion 242 (1967), as well as’in. subparagraph (d) of the
been
‘a
very important Council activity. The Syrian
draft. resolution which was vetoed today, speaks
clearly of secure ,and recognized boundaries for all Arab Republic, which requested this debate, is very
States in the area. But what might constitute secure happy and satisfied to see that all who have taken
boundaries for one State could at the same time part in the debates, and even those who have abstained
constitute insecure boundaries for another. How then in the voting on the draft resolution today, have
are we to decide which State’s security has priority?. reaflirmed the recognition of the national rights of the
Palestinian people and the necessity of Israeli withThe only security any State can have lies in its legal.&
and in its respect for international law and for the drawal from all the occupied Arab territories. The
principles of the Charter ,of the United Nations.’ In’ debate has established the foundation for efforts to
this age of ultra-modem weapons and sophisticated create a just and lasting peace in the region. The
missiles it is difficult to seehow any boundaries can b$ recognition of the national rights of the Palestinian
people and the total withdrawal of the Israeli forces
secure on the basis of territorial considerations.
: ’ from all the occupied Arab territories have become the
two basic elements which should be taken into account
185. It is really regrettable to see’ one of the two
in
any future efforts towards the creation of such a
greatest super-Powers dedicating its influence and it3
lasting
and just peace.
policy to the servi?e of the aggressor. People. long
ago began to wonder who is really ‘conducting the 189. We express to the Secretary-General our warm
foreign policy of the United States of America. Is it
thanks for his timely statement, in which he drew
President Ford or Mr. Rabin? Who decides about the’. the attention of the world public and the international
action of the United States delegation? Is it
family to the danger of the situation in the region, and
Mr. Kissinger or Mr. Allon? This same question in which he requested that the process towards peace
arises equally in relation to the question of who im-. should not be stopped. We also very warmly thank
plements the policy of the United States in the United
the six countries which sponsored the draft resolution
Nations. Is it Mr. Moynihan ‘or Mr. Hetzog? The
and which exerted great efforts in order to reach a
New York Times of this morning gave’ a very timely
very fair and balanced draft resolution. We equally
answer to this iast question. It said: “‘Mr. Rabin will
thank all those great countries from East and West that
be arriving in Washington at .a time when Daniel
have proved their devotion and attachment to the
Patrick Moynihan is serving as’ the Israeli voice in
principles of justice and peace by voting in favour of
the United Nations Security Council.”
that draft resolution.
186. Why is such a great Power as the United States 190. Mr. President, the conduct of the current debate
of America ‘behaving&r this manner? The bitter fact is under your presidency was a great honour and a source
that the United States is only isolating itself. With a of pride for all the countries of the third world. We
very small number of States it isolated -itself in the extend to you our deep gratitude and our greatest
thanks for ,the efforts you have exerted in spite of
,past in the General Assembly and it is now doing the
same thing in the Security Council. The tyranny of this qany manoeuvres and of the obstacles which certain
minority will not prevent the process of a just peace. countries have tried to put in the way of a fruitful
A just and lasting peace is going to be realized,and ,debate.
,;stabIished. Every inch of the Arab occupied territory
191. I should lie also to thank the representative
will be liberated and the heroic Palestinian people, of
United Kingdom: By insisting on submitting
sooner ,or later, will enjoy every single one of its his,the
amendment,
he in fact gave an opportunity to the
national inalienable rights. The only loser will be the overwhelming majority
of the members of the CounUnited States itself, which has proved o&e more that cil to reaffirm their total rejection of the two resoluit is supported the aggressor and that it lacks any tions, resolution 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as the sole
quality of fairness, any quality which would make it a basis
the establishment of a just and lasting peace
neutral and acceptable mediator in the Middle East in theforregion.
As a result of that amendment, which
crisis.
was soundly defeated, the validity and the moral
value of the vetoed draft resolution have only been
187. Where do we go from here? The United Nations enhanced.
is requestedto take completely into its hands theefforts
to establish a just and lasting peace in the region
192. I shall conclude my statement by quoting once
with, the help of the overwheIming majority of ,Member more from my first statement on 13 January, at the
States.. We believe that the Secretary-General has beginning of this debate, in which I reaffirmed:
liberation. Israel was at that time in-:&t11control of
the Golan Heights in the north and.&he Suez Canal
in the south. Yet that strategic advantage did not
prevent the Syrian and Egyptian armed forces from
launching .a successful attack against the aggressor
an-dpenetrating very deeply behind its lines.

23

“Just and lasting peace can be reahzed only
through a comprehensive settlement within the
framework of the United Nations, taking into
account all the elements and causes of the Middle
East conflict-particularly the injustice, th grievances and the loss which have befallen the .Palestinian people.

debate of the Council. Although the views expressed
during the deliberations of the Counci1 were not all
identical in definition and phraseology, the majority
of them converged on the following basic concepts and
conclusions: fist, that the PLO is the representative
of the people of Palestine; secondly, that the people
of Palestine are entitled to national self-determination
and independence in their Palestinian homeland;
thirdly, that no peace and, hence, no just and durable
solution of the Middle East crisis is feasible without
the consent and participation of the PLO; and fourthly,
that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is inadequate, since it failed to deal with either the question
of Palestine or the national rights of the Palestinian
people to independence and sovereignty. Our early
diagnosis of the failure of resolution 242 (1967) to
constitute a basis for settlement was thus vindicated
by the almost unanimous recognition of its inadequacy
on the part of the Council.

“If the Arab nation is seeking peace based on
justice, it is becausepeace without justice is,capitulation. As long as any part of the Arab territories
remains under occupation and as long as any of
the rights of the Palestinian people are still violated,
there can be no justice, and hence there can be no
peace.“,[f87lsr meeting, paras, 100 and 101.1
193. The PRESIDENT: The next -speaker is the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
194. Mr. KHADDOUMI
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): We welcomed the opportunity extended
to us by the Council to share in its discussions. Our
willingness. to participate in the deliberations of the
Council is both natural and imperative. The people of
Palestine are the principal party to the conflict whose
resolution the Council has been trying to effect. The
Council’s invitation to the PLO to share its views with
the Council signified its recognition that the PLO,
the representative of the people of Palestine, has an
indispensable role to play in and contribution to make
to a just solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It also
signified the Council’s recognition that previous
international efforts undertaken without the participation of the PLO have run their course, indicating
that any just settlement needs both new terms of
reference and our participation. We therefore came
with hope and confidence.

197. However, the United States Government chose
to be singled out as being against the will and consensus
of the Security Council, as expressed by African,
Asian, European and Latin American representatives.
The United States Government, which demonstrated
this evening its prejudiced and unwavering support
of Israel at the cost of impairing the effectiveness of
the Council, can no.longer claim that its step-by-step
diplomacy will yield any productive results.
198. The United StatesGovernment, which professes
to follow an even-handed policy towards the Arab:.,
lsraeli conflict, adamantly and defiantly believes that
the one-sided denial by resolution 242’(1967) of our
national existence and national rights is the only
framework for negotiating a settlement, The United
States Government, which poses as the mediator in
the Arab-Israeli conflict, is so much concerned with
the stated needs and ambitions of one party that it
totally and completely ignores the rights of the other
party, even at the cost of endangering the process of
peace for which we are fighting, in which we are
genuinely interested and to which we are making a
positive contribution.

195. Over the past few days, the Council has listened
to several representatives as they expressed the views
of their respective Governments on the problem of
Palestine and the national rights of the people of
Palestine, for so long deliberately denied by the
Israelis and their supporters. From the outset, racist
zionism and its sponsors embarked anxiously upon
the task of transforming Palestine, both geographically
and demographically, into an exclusively Jewish
State. They tried to erase its name from the map; the
people of Palestine were forcibly driven into, exile
and dispersion; our national institutions were crushed;
our religious shrines were desecratedand our ancestral
heritage in our Palestinian homeland was disfigured
and distorted.

199. The United States Government, which as early
as 1947 voted in favour of a Palestinian Arab State,
today shamelesslyrefuses to acknowledge the Palestinian-right to independence and so.vereignty and acts
as the guardian of an expanded and expansionist
Israel. The United States Government, which
recognized our “rights’* in the Security..Council in
May’ 1948, insists in 1976 on thinking and behaving
counter-clockwise and reducing those “rights” to
“interests”, as though the struggle of peoples for
freedom were regressive rather than progressive by
nature, inspiration ‘and outlook. The. United States
Government, which was instrumental in the creation
and maintenance of Zionist colonialism.and aggression
and which is. equally responsible for the continuing
wars, bloodshed, misc-ry and turmoil, is determined;
it seems, to perpetuate this perilous situation in our

196. Yet, despite this Zionist onslaught and the
injustices inflicted on us, we succeededin surmounting
the problems of dispersion and, more important, we
confronted’the Zionist challenges both on the national
and the international levels. The most recent evidence
of the efficacy and legitimacy of our national rights and
struggle has been demonstrated during the current
24

.’

.(

.,I

1
‘..

:

region. The United States Government, which suffered
heavy blows at ,the hands of the great peoples of VietNam, Laos and Cambodia, should .bring ‘itself to
understand that the will and the determination
of
peoples are always stronger than United States lethal
and sophisticated weapons and the privileged position
it abuses in the Security Council.
200. We believe that the Security Council’s debate
has served its purpose in the sense that it provided an
historic opportunity for the PLO to spell out its views
before this august body. Moreover, our experience
has been enriched by the statements and messages of
aupport from the representatives whose peoples share
the feelings of the people of Palestine and whose
Governments support the just struggle of the PLO.
We are also confident that, through the deliberations
of the Security Council, t.he world has become more
aware of our just struggle. We also cannot fail to note
that increasing sectors of American society are showing
greater understanding of our rights and are expressing
greater solidarity
with our national
liberation
movement.
201. It is regrettable that the Council has been
prevented by the tyranny of the veto from adopting
a resolution affiing
our national inalienable rights,
comprising our repatriation,
self-determination
and
independence
in our Palestinian
homeland.
Our
definition
of our national rights, our irreducible
minimum,
comprises principles whicfi are enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and which have
been specifically recognized and reaffirmed by the
General Assembly. Veto or no veto, it goes without
saying that our national rights in Palestine are inherent;
they derive their validity neither from recognition by
other Powers nor from resolutions. Moreover, our
national rights are non-negotiable. Their implementation could not be negated ‘by the veto cast in the
Security Council by any Power. After all, we have
come to the Council to persuade, not to bargain, to
co-operate, not to capitulate, and to alert, not to
subvert. Yes, I repeat: after all, we have come to
the Council to persuade, not to bargain, to co-operate,
not to capitulate, and to alert, not to subvert. At
best, we believe that the Security Council and the
General Assembly could bring moral pressure to bear
on Israel; but, as is evident from Israel’s attitude
towards the United Nations, its Charter and the
relevant resolutions, a State that is predicated on an
immoral basis camot possibly be susceptible to moral
considerations.

continues to -probe the wounds it created when it
betrayed its mandatory responsibility.
It is high time
we seriously considered this British position in the
light of British interests in our Arab region. Needless
to say, the only valid conclusion to be deduced from
the defunct British amendment is ‘that the Security
Council refused to reatIii
resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
203. Where do we go from here? As you are fully
aware, the PLO is a liberation movement engaged in
combating-militarily,
politically,
economically
and
culturally-the
Zionist occupation of our homeland.
We take pride in the fact that our just aspirations
and our armed struggle brought so much international
support and recognition for the national rights of the
people of Palestine and for the PLO. Freed from the
most sinister attempt to deflect our struggle, we will
intensify our efforts to prevent the Israelis from
consolidating their control over our occupied lands.
204. We shall go back with a firmer conviction that
ours is a long and drawn-out struggle against the
Zionist-imperialist
alliance. We shall go back confident-as
we have always been-that
the Arab
masses will further increase their moral and material
support of our armed struggle. We shall go back with
greater confidence in ourselves, our friends and our
future.
205. However, I need not assure you that the successful consummation
of the Palestinian
struggle for
national liberation is not entirely dependent on Security
Council or General Assembly resolutions. The Security
Council may have other opportunities
to express a
more affirmative and binding stand on this question.
In this connexion the PLO will always be willing
to contribute to the peace-making efforts of the Council while simultaneously engaged in its armed struggle
to liberate Palestine.
206. We are particularly grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his unfailing efforts for the promotion of
a just and durable ‘solution of the Middle East crisis.
We are also indebted to you, Mr. President, for the
wisdom and dedication you have demonstrated in the
course of our deliberations.
207. I should also not fail to address my concluding
words to those countries which have genuinely and
sincerely supported our just cause and our national
rights during the debate. On behalf of the PLO, I
extend to them, through their representatives, our
deep appreciation and I assure them that with their
support and our armed struggle victory is inevitable,
for this is the logic of history and the destiny of all
freedom fighters.

202. And now the British position, as expressed by
the British representative, is a travesty of intemational behaviour and moral standards and codes. It
was the British Government which committed
the
worst piece of treachery in the name of friendship
when it promulgated the Balfour Declaration in 1917.
It was the British Government which facilitated illegal
Jewish immigration to Palestine at our expense. And it
is now the British Government which remorselessly

The meeting rose at 10.30 p.m.
Notes
1 See OJicial
Records
Year, 1735th meeting.

25

of the Security

Council,

Twenty-eight

:
‘.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNlTRD NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMiiIRNT SE PRO-R

LRS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIRS

Les publications dcs Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et Iesagencesdepositaims du
monde cnticr. Informcz-vous aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vousa : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.
HAH

HOJIYPHTB

H3JlaHHX

NB&AHEIB

OPI-AH&i

3AqHH

OIi-bEAHHEHHbIX

aauem
HasxR,

Y(oX‘xo
t‘)-nHTb
II
H BreHTcTaax 80 ncex pattonax nrapa. HasoAxTe
CnpaBxH
xxxmx0~
Mara3xxie
xnx
numu~e
no anpecy
: Opraxx3auxn
Cexrrxx
no npoaame
UanaxxB,
HbSO-ROpK
xnx )KeXeBa.

COMO

CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONBS DE LAS NACIONBS UMDAS

JArfaX

t,prE‘AH3aLW,

O6%~~UReHUbIX

HayxB

HAIUiR
WIHXtUbIX

06 H3aaxxxX
06meztuuexxbtx

Marka

Las publicaciones de las Nacioncs Unidas estrln en venta en librerlas y casasdistribuidotas en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccion de Ventas,
Nueva York o Oinebm.

tithe

in United

Nations,

New

York

oom

83-60801-hl(or

1984-2.200
