llS

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its ,resolutions 2421 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970 and 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971 concerning the reports
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its firs.t, second, third and
fourth sessions,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to
universal economic co-operation among all peoples on
a basis of equality and, thereby, to their well-being.
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board, at its twelfth session, 6 took note of the report
of the United Nation, Commission on foternational
Trade Law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of
its working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction the completion of draft
articles for a convention on prescription (limitation) in
the international sale of goods;7
4. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should·
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention
to the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
that is, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
( b) Accelerate its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, with special
regard to developing countries;
( c) Continue to collaborate with international organizations active in the field of international trade
law;
(d) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
( e) Keep its programme of work and its worki-ng
methods under constant review;
5. Invites the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to seek from Governments and
interested international organizations information relating to legal problems presented hy the different kinds
of multinational enterprises, and the implications
thereof for the unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to consider, in the light of this
information and the results of available studies, including those by the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Economic and Social Council, what
further steps would be appropriate in this regard;
6 Ibid., Supplement No.
15 (A/8715/Rev.1),
para. 239.
7 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/8717), para. 21.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly on the Commission's report on the work of its fifth session.

2091st plenary meeting
28 November 1972

2929 (XXVII). United Nations Conference on
Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Good!-

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter H of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifth session, 8 which contains
draft articles for a convention on prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of .the Commission,
Noting that at its fourth and fifth sessions, held in
1971 and 1972, the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, in the light of observations
and comments submitted by Governments, considered
and revised provisional draft articles on prescription
(limitation) in the international sale of goods that had
been prepared by the Commission's Working Group on
Time-Limits and Limitations (Prescription) in the International Sale of Goods, and that the Commission, at
its fifth sess,ion, approved the draft articles as set
forth in paragraph 21 of its report,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law at its fifth session
recommended that the General Assembly should convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries to
conclude, on the basis of the draft articles adopted
by the Commission, a convention on prescription
(limitation) in the international sale of goods, 9
Convinced that conflicts and divergencies among the
existing national rules governing prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods constitute
obstacles to the development of world trade and that
the harmonization and unification of such rules would
promote the flow of world trade,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for its valuable
work on prescription in the international sale of goods;
2. Dedides that an international conference of
plenipotentiaries shall be convened in 1974, in New
York or at any other suitable place for which the
Secretary-General receives an invitation, to consider
the question of prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods and to embody the results of
its work in an international convention and such other
imtrumcnts as it may deem appropriate;
3. Further derides to consider at its twenty-eighth
session any other matters requiring decision in connexion with the conference and to inolude in the
provisional agenda of that session an item entitled
"United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods";

part one,
H

//,id .. Supplemf'nt No. 17 (A/8717).
para. 20.

i, /hid.,

ll6

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

4. Refers to the conference the draft articles contained in chapter II of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifth session, together with the oommenta,ry
thereon and the analytical compilation of comments
and proposals to be prepared by the Secretary-General
pursuant to the decision of the Commission, 9 as the
basis for consideration by the conference.

2091st plenary meeting
28 November 1972

2966 (XXVII). lntf'rnational conference of plenipotentiaric:,; on the representation of States
in their relations with international organizations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Representation
of States in their relations with international organizations",
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General1°
containing the comments and observations received
from Member States, Switzerland, the Secretary-General, specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, submitted in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2780 (XXVI) of 3 December
1971,
Recalling that in its resolution 2780 (XXVI) the
General Assembly noted with satisfaction that at its
twenty-third session, in 1971, the International Law
Commission, in the light of the observations and comments of Member States, Switzerland and the secretariats of various international organizations and taking
into account the relevant resolutions and debates of
the Assembly, revised the provisional draft articles on
the representation of States in their relations with international organizations, prepared at its twentieth, twentyfirst and twenty-second sessions, and adopted a final
set of draft articles as the basis of a convention,
Recalling further that in its resolution 2780 (XXVI)
the General Assembly expressed its appreciation to
the International Law Commission for its valuable
work on the question of representation of States in
their relations with international organizations and to
the Special Rapporteur on the topic for his contribution to this work,
1. Decides that an international conference of
plenipotentiaries shall be convened as soon as practicable to consider the draft articles on the representation of States in their ,relations with international
organizations and to embody the results of its work
in an international convention and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
2. Further decides to include in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-eighth session an item entitled
''lnternat,ional conference of plenipotentiaries on the
representation of States in their relations with international organizations" in order that the General
Assembly may consider the questior, of participation
in the conference. the date :rnd place of the conference
and other rcbtecl matter•;
1o A/8753 ,•ricl J\,ld l 1.

3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session a memorandum on the methcxls of work of the conference
so that the Assembly may consider the matter with
a view to reducing the costs of the conference.

2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2967 (XXVII). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its fifth session, held in New York from
31 January to 3 March 1972,11
Noting the progress so far achieved by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as
reflected in its report,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task at its fifth session,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXIl) of
18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968, 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2644
(XXV) of 25 November 1970 and 2781 (XXVI) of
3 December 1971 the General Assembly recognized
the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the
definition of aggression,
Considering the uraency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
basis of the results achieved and to arrive with due
speed at a draft definition in a spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation,
1. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work at
Geneva, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330 (XXII), as early as possible after 1 April
1973;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
2 109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2968 (XXVII). Need to consider su~~estions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and 2697 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the
Teview of the Charter of the United Nations",
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sel·cnth
Session. Supplement No. 19 (A/8719).
