A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/36
20 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 39

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.33 and Add.1)]

54/36.

Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights1 and the foundations of any democratic society,
Recalling the Manila Declaration2 adopted by the First International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies 3 in June 1988,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples
for an international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and other
important principles, such as respect for the equal rights and self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy,
justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

A/43/538, annex.

3

Then called the International Conference of Newly Restored Democracies.

00 23592

/...

A/RES/54/36
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 49/30 of 7 December 1994 in which it recognized the importance of the Managua
Declaration 4 and Plan of Action 5 adopted by the Second International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in July 1994, as well as its resolutions 50/133 of 20 December 1995, 51/31 of 6 December 1996,
52/18 of 21 November 1997 and 53/31 of 23 November 1998,
Recalling also the document entitled “Progress Review and Recommendations”, adopted by the Third
International Conference of New or Restored Democracies on Democracy and Development, held at
Bucharest from 2 to 4 September 1997,6 in which guidelines, principles and recommendations were addressed
to Governments, civil society, the private sector, donor countries and the international community,
Noting in particular the recommendations contained in that document addressed to the United Nations
system and the international financial organizations,7
Taking note with satisfaction of the seminars, workshops and conferences on democratization and good
governance organized in 1999, as well as those currently being planned, under the auspices of the International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies,
Taking note of the views of Member States expressed in the debate on this question at its forty-ninth,
fiftieth, fifty-first, fifty-second, fifty-third and fifty-fourth sessions,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate democracy are undertaken in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and only at the specific request of the Member States concerned,
Also bearing in mind that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed
will of the people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and on their full
participation in all aspects of their lives,
Noting that a considerable number of societies have recently undertaken significant efforts to achieve
their social, political and economic goals through democratization and the reform of their economies, pursuits
that are deserving of the support and recognition of the international community,
Noting with satisfaction that the Fourth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies
will be held at Cotonou, Benin, from 4 to 6 December 2000,

4

A/49/713, annex I.

5

Ibid., annex II.

6

A/52/334, appendix.

7

Ibid., sect. IV.
/...

A/RES/54/36
Page 3

Stressing the importance of support by Member States, the United Nations system, the specialized
agencies and other intergovernmental organizations for the holding of the Fourth International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 8
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 8

2. Expresses its appreciation for the activities carried out by the United Nations system, and
endorses the recommendations contained in the report;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, Member States, the relevant specialized agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue
to contribute actively to the follow-up process of the Third International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies on Democracy and Development;9
4. Commends the Secretary-General, and through him the United Nations system, for the activities
undertaken at the request of Governments to support the efforts to consolidate democracy;
5. Welcomes the work carried out by the follow-up mechanism to the Third International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies;
6. Invites the Secretary-General, Member States, the relevant specialized agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental organizations, to collaborate in the holding of the
Fourth International Conference of New of Restored Democracies;
7. Recognizes that the Organization has an important role to play in providing timely, appropriate and
coherent support to the efforts of Governments to achieve democratization within the context of their
development efforts;
8. Stresses that the activities undertaken by the Organization must be in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations;
9. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to improve the capacity of the Organization to
respond effectively to the requests of Member States through coherent, adequate support of their efforts to
achieve the goals of good governance and democratization;
10. Encourages Member States to promote democratization and to make additional efforts to identify
possible steps to support the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies;

8

A/54/492.

9

Ibid., chap. II.
/...

A/RES/54/36
Page 4

11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session
on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Support by
the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored
democracies”.
64th plenary meeting
29 November 1999
