S/PV.8314

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8314th meeting

Wednesday, 18 July 2018, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Söder. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Michon
Mr. Ali
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2018/678)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-22881 (E)
*1822881*

African Union

S/PV.8314

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues
of peace and security in Africa, including on
the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2018/678)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, and His Excellency
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/678, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zewde.
Ms. Zewde: I would like to begin by expressing
my appreciation to you, Madam, for convening today’s
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union (AU).
Today’s meeting is taking place at a time of
unprecedented collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union. As the SecretaryGeneral noted in his briefing to the AU Peace and
Security Council in Addis Ababa last week, of all the
world’s regional organizations, the African Union is the
most important strategic partner of the United Nations
in terms of peace and security, development and human
rights. Our two organizations have given priority to the
2/20

18/07/2018

development of a systematic, predictable and strategic
partnership based on mutual respect, shared values
and comparative advantage. Since the signing of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, in April
2017, and the Joint Framework for the Implementation
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, signed in January 2018, the partnership
has been characterized by closer collaboration, more
regular exchange of information, consultations and
coordinated action, including joint field visits and
joint statements.
The important events taking place this month
between the two organizations, in particular the second
annual conference between the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Chairperson of the AU
Commission and the joint briefing to the AU Peace and
Security Council, both held in Addis Ababa on 9 July;
the joint meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the AU Peace and Security Council, which took
place this morning; and the twelfth annual consultative
meeting between members of the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which will take place tomorrow, not only all serve to
illustrate the importance of the partnership between the
two organizations but also provide an opportunity to
discuss how to strengthen it even further.
The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on
the work of the United Nations Office to the African
Union (S/2018/678). The important recurring themes
in the report, which are illustrated by the strategic
engagements I have just referred to, are the following.
First, the complex peace and security challenges we
face in Africa are such that neither the United Nations
nor the African Union can address them on their own.
Partnership is therefore not a choice but a necessity. The
two organizations recognize their interdependence. We
also recognize the critical role played by subregional
organizations, which are often the first to detect early
warning signs of impending conflict and are important
partners in promoting dialogue and reconciliation,
exercising leverage through personal contacts with
the parties to a conflict and in countering terrorism,
preventing violent extremism and addressing
migration. Having strong partnerships with subregional
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

S/PV. 8314

organization is therefore key to ensuring consistency of
messaging and alignment of positions and action.

United Nations-African Union review of AMISOM,
conducted last May.

(spoke in French)

The increasing use of joint missions, joint briefings,
joint reports and declarations, and joint messages
illustrates progress towards a common understanding
of peace and security issues and a common approach to
addressing them. Indeed, at the second annual African
Union-United Nations conference in Addis Ababa last
week, the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the Commission agreed to make joint communiqués
systematic wherever possible. Building trust has been
essential, and I believe we have made tremendous
progress in this regard over the past year.

Secondly, the need for partnership leads us to
recognize the imperative of even closer collaboration
with the African Union, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. As detailed in the report, there
has been much progress in strengthening collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union
in the area of peace and security. Interactions and
collaboration at all levels, from the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the Commission to the UnderSecretaries-General and Commissioners of the African
Union, including at the level of staff at both organizations,
have become more frequent, constructive and collegial.
Such collaboration is also becoming the norm in field
missions, where the Special Representatives and
Envoys of the two organizations are working more
closely together and are jointly informing the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union with increasing frequency.
In addition, I would like to highlight in particular
the increasing trend towards joint field missions led
by senior United Nations and African Union officials.
Last week, the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the African Union Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security briefed the Council on
their recent mission — their second such mission on
the ground in as many years, this time to the Niger,
Chad and South Sudan (see S/PV.8306). These missions
sought to highlight issues relating to women, peace and
security, and development. Similarly, last April, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security undertook a joint mission to the Central
African Republic and the Sudan, with the aim of
supporting a common vision of peacekeeping in Africa.
I would also like to acknowledge the joint work on
the financing of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) undertaken by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno
and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Special Envoys of the
United Nations and the African Union, respectively,
who conducted consultations with a wide range of
partners. The aim was to propose a transformation of
AMISOM with a view to assisting the transition to
Somalia’s full ownership of its security and therefore
to continuing funding the Mission to that end. In April,
they submitted a joint report that contributed to the joint

Thirdly, the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission continue to stress
the importance of conflict prevention by responding
quickly and decisively, in collaboration with national
stakeholders, including civil society and subregional
organizations, in order to address emerging signs
of conflict while ensuring African ownership in this
process. This means that we must conduct more joint
analyses and assessments and align our early warning
indicators, where appropriate.
We must also engage more actively with those with
influence over the parties to conflict, often neighbouring
countries and community leaders. We must continue to
focus greater attention and resources on peacekeeping
and preventing the resumption of conflict, including by
identifying and addressing the root causes of conflict.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission has done
commendable work across the continent over the past
15 years. The African Union initiative Silencing the
Guns by 2020 also provides a road map for concrete
actions that can be undertaken and supported.
With regard to peacekeeping, the SecretaryGeneral was clear in his briefing to the African Union
Peace and Security Council last week on the challenges
that require us to rethink our approach to peacekeeping
through his new Action for Peacekeeping initiative. The
Secretary-General stressed that the conflicts in Mali,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan — with their blocked
peace processes, multiple actors, tragic acts of extreme
violence and an increasing number of casualties among
peacekeepers — show that the current model is not
adapted to contemporary challenges. A redefinition of
the division of tasks has been proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in order to further deepen cooperation with

18-228813/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

regional organizations and to clarify the mandate of
peacekeeping operations.
(spoke in English)
That leads me to my fourth and last point. It
is also essential that the issue of predictable and
sustainable financing, on a case-by-case basis, for AU
peace support operations authorized by the Security
Council be framed within the context of a common
political strategy, agreed to by the two Councils and
informed by joint analyses and assessments of conflict
situations. Within that context, support to AU peace
support operations should be viewed as a means by
which the Security Council can exercise its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security through effective collaboration with
regional organizations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council, in resolution 2378 (2017),
expressed its intention to give consideration to the
possibility that practical steps that can be taken for
African Union-led peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council could be partly financed
through United Nations assessed contributions. The
Secretary-General has also expressed his support for
financing AU-led peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council, including through United
Nations assessed contributions.
With regard to the conditions outlined in resolution
2378 (2017), we welcome the progress made by the
African Union on the operationalization of the Peace
Fund, the development of a compliance framework
and the development of a reporting framework.
Contributions to the Peace Fund have reached their
highest level since the establishment of the Fund in 1993
and demonstrate the commitment of AU member States
to financial burden-sharing and greater self-reliance.
Further work on priority areas is still required, and we
look forward to collaboration in that regard with the AU
Commission through its interdepartmental task force.
Finally, I would like to express appreciation
for the continued high-level political support of the
Security Council, which ensures our ability to fully
operationalize the strategic partnership in peace and
security, as called for by the Council. The role of the
United Nations Office to the African Union, as the
conduit and main United Nations interlocutor with
the African Union in peace and security, will remain
critical, and we look forward to the Council’s continued
4/20

18/07/2018

support for the work of the Office. I also wish to place
on record our appreciation to the AU Commission
for its strong and steadfast support for enhancing the
strategic partnership.
The President: I thank Ms. Zewde for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: Allow me first of all to warmly
congratulate Sweden on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and I commend your
initiative, Madam President, to convene this timely
and very important meeting on cooperation between
the African Union and the United Nations, which takes
place on the eve of the twelfth annual consultative
meeting between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council. I
am also pleased to note that today’s meeting is being
held only a few days after the very successful African
Union-United Nations second annual conference, held
in Addis Ababa on 9 July.
At the outset, I would also like to thank my sister,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, for the important briefing she
delivered. I would like to tell her that the African Union
Commission recognizes itself fully in all she said. It is
therefore my distinct honour to address this meeting to
highlight the significant progress that has been made
in the partnership between our two organizations and
the coherence in our decision-making, while enriching
each other with the knowledge of our respective
comparative advantages.
Over the years, the African Union has forged a
critical partnership with the United Nations in order
to achieve its vision of a peaceful, prosperous and
integrated continent. That relationship was given new
impetus by the signing in April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security by Secretary-General
António Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. That
renewed commitment has indeed moved the partnership
from an ad hoc approach into a more structured and
predictable one.
The second annual conference of the African
Union and the United Nations, which took place
recently in Addis Ababa on 9 July, reaffirmed the
importance of our partnership and the significance of
multilateral responses to global security challenges.
In that regard, we have committed to enhancing
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

collaboration, cooperation and coordination between
our two organizations, based on the principles of
complementarity, comparative advantage, burdensharing and collective responsibility.
We have also agreed to enhance consultations
prior to decision-making in order to reach a shared
understanding of the issues at hand and attain
consistency in the support for African-led peace
support efforts. As the Council has already noted,
the ever-growing partnership with United Nations
colleagues has allowed us to incorporate an additional
operational tool, which is the joint visits that I started
with Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix to Darfur and the Central
African Republic. That effort will continue in the
coming weeks and months. It is essential that the positive
momentum currently prevailing between our respective
secretariats continue to foster dynamism in cooperation
and coordination between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
In the field, the partnership between our two
decision-making bodies is manifest in our collaborative
peacemaking efforts in several conflict and postconflict situations, including in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Great
Lakes region, Guinea Bissau, Mali and the Sahel, South
Sudan and Somalia, just to name a few.
Despite the progress achieved so far, we still face
some challenges, particularly when it comes to the
relationship between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council, where more
work is needed in order to achieve greater coherence
and coordination when dealing with crisis situations on
the continent. Those include building on recent gains
made in South Sudan to impress upon the parties to
uphold and implement the signed agreements. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, attention must
be focused upon addressing the future challenges
associated with the general elections scheduled for
23 December in line with the 31 December 2016
agreement. In Somalia, resource mobilization to enable
the African Union Mission in Somalia to deliver on its
mandate, including the gradual handover to the Somali
security forces through Somalia’s transition plan and
capacity-building, remains a critical challenge. If not
addressed, the progress made in Somalia might be
reversed. The deteriorating security situation in the
Central African Republic is a continuing source of
concern. The African Union is grateful to the Security
Council for recognizing the African Initiative for

S/PV. 8314

Peace and Reconciliation as the main framework for
achieving a political solution in the country, and I urge
the Council to continue to support it.
The situation across the Sahel region also requires
our urgent attention. The instability in northern Mali
has not only spilled over into the central region of the
country and to neighbouring Burkina Faso and the
Niger; it has also morphed into intercommunity clashes
spurred by the conflict between herders and farmers.
Critical support from the United Nations is therefore
required to hasten the operationalization of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. For its part, the
African Union is finalizing the revision of its strategy
for the Sahel in line with the decision adopted by the
African Union Peace and Security Council at its recent
Heads-of-State meeting in Nouakchott. In that regard,
I am grateful to my sister Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, who met our envoy President
Buyoya in Nouakchott, where they agreed to coordinate
two strategies so that we can avoid duplication and,
more important, assist the people in the Sahel.
Allow me to recall that the African Union
has consistently advocated for predictable and
sustainable financing through United Nations-assessed
contributions for African Union-led peace operations.
In 2015, the African Union Assembly of Heads of
State and Government decided to finance 25 per
cent of the cost of the African Union’s peace support
operations. In order to deliver on that objective, in 2016
the African Union Assembly decided to endow the
African Union Peace Fund with $400 million. The full
endowment level will be reached in 2021 and will be
achieved incrementally at the following annual targets:
$65 million for 2017; $65 million for the current year
and $90 million per year for 2019, 2020 and 2021. As
I address the Council, African Union member States
have already contributed $47 million out of the targeted
$65 million. That illustrates that, despite their limited
resources, African Union member States are committed
to assuming their share of responsibility to enhance
peace and security on the continent.
We hope that that will serve as impetus for the
Security Council to move forward in its considerations
to avail assessed contributions to African Union-led
peace support operations. It is our hope that today’s
meeting will pave the way to achieve that objective
in line with the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, including Chapter VIII. Flexibility
and innovation should guide our discussions to ensure

18-228815/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

coherence across the various layers of our global security
architecture. In that regard, I am pleased to note that
there has been progress with regard to the SecretaryGeneral’s recent Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
the strategic importance of the African Union-United
Nations partnership, particularly its positive impact
on peace and security in Africa. Our joint efforts are
already bearing fruit, and we look forward to building
a closer relationship that will deliver on our aspirations
for peace and security on the continent, including
silencing the guns by 2020. In the meantime, we are
receiving excellent news from Africa, as we heard
earlier with regard to developments between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and elsewhere. With such efforts under way
in Africa, together with our collective work, I believe
that we can achieve the noble goal of silencing the guns.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Sweden.
I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative and Commissioner Chergui for their
very important briefings to the Security Council
this afternoon.
As we have heard, recent developments in Africa
give us cause for optimism. The joint declaration of
peace and friendship signed by the leaders of Eritrea
and Ethiopia represents a courageous step towards a
new beginning of peace and cooperation for the people
concerned, neighbouring countries, the region and
neighbouring regions.
Sweden remains a steadfast supporter of an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and, no less, subregional organizations in
Africa. The emerging security challenges that we are
facing are shared and increasingly interconnected. They
require a collective response. Regional actors have a
thorough understanding of the issues at stake on the
ground. They are invested in resolving crises in their
neighbourhood, and they have established relationships
at the local level. We commend the African Union (AU)
and its subregional partners for all that they do. They can
serve as an inspiration for other regions lacking regional
security and cooperative arrangements. They work in
environments in which the United Nations is unable or
cannot deploy with sufficient speed. We must not forget
that, when African countries respond to increasingly
6/20

18/07/2018

complex and interconnected challenges, they do so on
behalf of all of us. The partnership between the AU and
the United Nations with regard to more efficient peace
operations constitutes an important part of our ongoing
discussions on the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
We therefore welcome the renewed momentum
and concrete steps being taken to advance the United
Nations-AU partnership, not least, thanks to the
commitment and dedication of the leadership in both
organizations. We just heard about the second United
Nations-AU annual conference, held in Addis Ababa,
where the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission announced their commitment to
further deepening the partnership. We welcome the
move towards more structured cooperation between
the two organizations over the past 18 months through
the two important agreements mentioned earlier. The
joint visit by Under Secretary-General Lacroix and
Commissioner Chergui to the Sudan and the Central
African Republic was another tangible example of
closer cooperation. We received the note that that will
happen again as very welcome news.
The need for the flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations is clear. We
commend the African mobilization of funding within
the AU Peace Fund. The conversation that we are
presently leading on alternatives and modalities is truly
urgent. Sweden views positively access to assessed
United Nations contributions for AU-conducted peace
operations. We welcome the agreement on fiduciary
reporting as an important and concrete step in the right
direction. We also note progress in the development of
the compliance framework. In addition to enhancing
our cooperation concerning peace operations, we also
need to invest time and energy into United NationsAU cooperation in the area of conflict prevention
and resolution. The annual consultation with the AU
Peace and Security Council tomorrow will provide an
important opportunity to explore both issues further.
Yesterday in Brussels, Sweden, together with the
European Union and President Farmajo of Somalia,
hosted the Somalia Partnership Forum. The United
Nations and the AU had important roles at the
Forum. Successful AU-United Nations cooperation
in Somalia — where the United Nations provides
operational support to the AU-led African Union
Mission in Somalia, in turn operating on a United
Nations mandate — is a precondition for continued
progress in Somalia’s State-building process.
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

The joint United Nations-AU mission to the Sahel
two weeks ago, which we heard about earlier and in which
the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs participated,
is an encouraging sign of the much-needed cooperation
to advance the women and peace and security agenda.
As we said then, missions like this should become a
regular occurrence. We are also encouraged by the work
carried out by the African Women Leaders Network to
build on and harness women’s participation throughout
the region in peace and conflict resolution. Women’s
participation is not a women’s issue; it is a peace and
security issue.
I am confident that tomorrow’s joint meeting
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council will contribute to deepening our joint
cooperation. Such meetings are critically important for
building the relationship between the Councils, and
we would welcome more opportunities for informal
interactions between the two Councils. I look forward
to the adoption of the joint communiqué that has
been discussed, which will serve to signal our joint
commitment. Peace is best pursued in partnership.
Moving forward on this agenda will require our
substantial and sustained political investment, and we
look forward to doing our part.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking Sweden
for convening this important briefing on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, including the African Union
(AU). I also wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
for her informative briefing. As this is the first time that
she has briefed the Council in her new role, on behalf
of the three African members of the Council I take
this opportunity to offer our sincere congratulations to
Ms. Zewde, wishing her resounding success in her new
functions, to which we offer our full support. We would
also like to express our sincere thanks and gratitude to
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security.
I deliver this statement on behalf of the three
non-permanent African members of the Security
Council: Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and Ethiopia.

S/PV. 8314

It is encouraging to note that the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is advancing. In particular, efforts are
being made to improve collaboration between both the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and between the United
Nations Secretary-General and the African Union
Commission. That collaboration has become even
more steadfast since the eleventh consultative meeting.
We believe that the twelfth annual joint consultative
meeting between the members of the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which is scheduled for tomorrow, Thursday, 19 July,
will be a good opportunity for both bodies to step
up their efforts to address the most urgent security
obstacles and challenges in Africa, in particular the
problems related to South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, further steps could
be taken to take this cooperation to the next level,
including through joint field visits, the development of
methods of understanding and shared analysis, regular
information exchange and joint planning, evaluation
and information systems.
We also welcome the continued strengthening
of cooperation between the secretariats of the two
organizations within the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, which was signed last year. In that regard,
we welcome the recent visit of the Secretary-General to
Addis Ababa for the second high-level meeting with the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
is testimony to the determination of the top leadership
of both organizations to forge solid ties between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace
and security on the continent. The shared commitment
of the United Nations and the African Union in the
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security, as well as in
the high level of representation on the bureau, is also
encouraging. In that regard, we commend the joint visit
of Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Commissioner Chergui to the Central African
Republic and the Sudan.
We are pleased that the Secretary-General has given
the highest priority to partnership and cooperation with
the African Union in his proposal for reform of the
peace and security pillar, and his recent endorsement,
through the Fifth Committee, shows that Member States
strongly support this noble objective. The three African
members of the Council remain committed to assisting

18-228817/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

the Secretary-General in his effort to implement the
United Nations reform process.
It is very important that we improve operational
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the areas of conflict prevention
and mediation, maintenance and peacebuilding. Of
particular relevance is the support to peace support
operations of the African Union. We must remember
that in resolution 2378 (2017), the Security Council
expressed its intention to continue considering the
adoption of practical measures and the conditions
necessary to establish a mechanism through which the
African Union could direct peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council. Those could be
financed in part through the contribution of the United
Nations, on a case-by-case basis.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/678), the African Union has made definitive
progress towards putting the Peace Fund into operation,
and the three African members of the Council wish to
salute the important achievements made during the
past year in that regard. In particular, we applaud the
endorsement by the Assembly of the African Union of
an instrument relating to the enhanced governance and
management structure of the Peace Fund, which created
the necessary legal framework for the establishment
of a board of trustees, an executive management
committee, an independent evaluation panel and the
creation of the Peace Fund secretariat. It is important
that the instrument of governance and management be
put into operation as soon as possible. We praise the
efforts that the African Union is currently deploying in
that regard.
With regard to the contents of the report, it also
indicates that there are promising advances being
undertaken by the African Union, of course with United
Nations support, to establish the necessary framework
for international humanitarian law and human rights,
as well as the conduct and discipline required for the
support operations of the African Union. We applaud
the completion of the conduct and discipline policies, as
well as the prevention of and response to exploitation and
sexual abuse. Other frameworks related to progress in
guaranteeing respect for human rights in the deployment
of troops from troop-contributing countries, as well as
compliance with training standards for African Union
peace support operations, are also encouraging.
8/20

18/07/2018

The three African members of the Security Council
are proud of the level of commitment shown by African
Union member States in their quest for self-reliance
in order to reach their goal of funding 25 per cent of
peacekeeping and security costs. In that regard, the
$47 million raised by African Union member States this
year accounts for the highest-ever contribution to the
African Peace Fund since its establishment in 1993 and
proves that African Union member States are seriously
committed to achieving the goal of 25 per cent selffunding. The three African members of the Security
Council expect a similar commitment from the United
Nations, in particular from the members of the Security
Council, in line with resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017).
I reiterate that United Nations-African Union
cooperation is a valuable tool in preventing and resolving
conflicts on the continent. It is vital that the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council support
both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union Agenda 2063. We believe
that supporting social and economic development
in Africa can help resolve several conflicts on the
continent. Therefore, greater cooperation in the area of
development is also needed, not just in the area of peace
and security, because one without the other will lead us
nowhere. We are pleased that several initiatives have
been undertaken to ensure that women are involved in
processes to promote peace and security in Africa. The
three African members of the Security Council support
the participation and inclusion of women and young
people in the relevant processes and strategies because
they are key to achieving lasting peace on the continent.
The African Union is an indispensable partner of
the United Nations in the area of promoting peace and
security in Africa. We encourage the African Union
to continue its leadership and commitment to finding
African solutions to African problems. We recommend
that the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council continue to strengthen
their strategic partnership and align their visions with
a view to providing a speedier and more effective
response to conflicts. The three African members of
the Security Council will continue to firmly support
those key processes.
I would like to conclude by underscoring the
initiative by Ethiopia and Eritrea to achieve peace,
security and stability, not just for the two countries or
the Horn of Africa, but for the entire continent. The
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

African Union’s promise to silence weapons by 2020 is
not just a pipedream; it is possible. But we need support.
We must ensure that that noble goal is achieved.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zewde
and African Union Commissioner Chergui for their
briefings. I would also like to join African colleagues
in congratulating Ms. Zewde on her recent appointment
as Head of the United Nations Office to the African
Union. I wish her every success in her new endeavours.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands attaches great
value to closer collaboration between the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations. We are a staunch
supporter of the intentions enshrined in resolution
2320 (2016). A strong partnership enables both the
United Nations and the AU to respond more swiftly
and decisively to threats of international peace and
security. As we look for ways to further strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU, we
would like to highlight the following three important
aspects: practical cooperation, complementarity and
financial support.
First, with regard to practical cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands welcomes the practical progress made,
in particular the increase in the number of joint
briefings by Special Representatives and Envoys. It
also welcomes the enhanced collaboration between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission,
as well as the joint field visits by senior officials. We
welcome in particular the joint visit of Commissioner
Chergui and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix in April
to Darfur and the Central African Republic.
In addition, we encourage more joint AUUnited Nations analysis, early warning, planning
and decision-making and increased issuance of joint
statements. To that end, we would welcome closer
alignment between the agendas of the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, especially
when addressing African issues. In that same vein, we
believe that joint meetings between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the AU Peace and Security Council,
such as the one taking place today, are important.
Lastly, we strongly support the intention, as expressed
by members of the two Councils, to conduct joint field
missions so as to facilitate the formulation of common
positions and recommendations.

S/PV. 8314

Secondly, concerning complementarity between
the two organizations, we should do all in our power
to ensure that United Nations and AU approaches to
peacekeeping and conflict resolution are mutually
reinforcing. The AU’s ability to act as first responder and
move in much more quickly than the United Nations is
widely recognized and should be facilitated. Similarly,
political processes being positively fuelled or facilitated
by the AU or regional economic organizations deserve
the Council’s full support.
On the other hand, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues of
peace and security in Africa, including on the work
of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2018/678), rightly observes that regional interests
and proximity can also complicate matters. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU must rest on
comparative advantage and complementarity. An
organization’s willingness to act should be decisive in
that regard.
Thirdly, I would like to address the importance of
increased financial support for AU peacekeeping. The
role of the AU in peace operations in Africa is essential.
However, the AU cannot do it alone. We must step up
our efforts. Resolution 2320 (2016) clearly indicates
the need for increased support for AU peacekeeping,
which includes discussions on a different mode of
financing between the United Nations and the AU. We
must translate words into action. As highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report, the AU has made important
steps forward, including through the African Peace
Fund. Such steps must be recognized. Sustainable,
predictable and flexible financing would enhance
the effectiveness of AU peacekeeping, as would its
required compliance to the relevant agreed standards
on human rights and strategic and financial oversight
and accountability. We support the Secretary-General’s
intention to explore financing options in greater
technical detail with the General Assembly.
In conclusion, today’s complex security challenges
require an efficient relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union. A good example is the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Regional
organizations will play a central role in tackling the
existing challenges to peacekeeping. I would like to
underscore that the AU will find a constructive partner

18-228819/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

in us on efforts that take the strategic partnership with
the United Nations forward.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would
like to thank your delegation, Madam President, for
convening today’s briefing. We are especially honoured
to have you presiding over today’s meeting. We would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Smaїl Chergui, for their briefings.
It is sheer coincidence that today’s meeting is being
held as we mark the centennial of Nelson Mandela’s
birth. As we remember him, we run no risk of placing
him on an unattainable pedestal. We must never forget
that Nelson Mandela was a man of flesh and blood. He
was a revolutionary. He was always ready to change the
structures of an unjust regime such as that of apartheid.
However, he had a global vision with regard to how we
should build a more just and human world.
My delegation would also like to join in
commending and congratulating the important efforts
being undertaken by Ethiopia and Eritrea for mutual
support. That is an example not just for the African
continent, but for the entire world as to how we can
resolve our problems and disputes through dialogue,
negotiation and peaceful means.
Bolivia underscores the importance of continuing
to improve the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union. It is necessary to highlight
the responsibility of the international community
to implement this relationship in order to facilitate a
common understanding of the root causes of conflict
and the promotion of consensus in decision-making.
It is also necessary to deepen the integration of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, strengthen
and improve dialogue and cooperation and coordination
mechanisms through the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security in order to address the challenges to peace
and security between the two organizations, including
joint strategies related to demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration, conflict prevention, and the
prioritization of the leadership and participation of
women and youth on peace and security issues.
Along those lines, we welcome the signing of the
African Union-United Nations Framework for the
10/20

18/07/2018

Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. That agreement will enable a
systematic, predictable and strategic partnership to be
developed, based on the principles of mutual respect
and comparative advantage. Similarly, we commend
the fact that both organizations have initiated the
preparation of a memorandum of understanding
that will enhance capacities to combat terrorism and
prevent violent extremism, which continue to hinder
the consolidation of peace and development in Africa.
With regard to cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, a notable example is the deployment of
joint operations, which are a key instrument in the
constant quest to strengthen peace and security. They
are also a useful tool for addressing obstacles and
threats, such as terrorism and humanitarian crises.
That is the case in the region of the Lake Chad basin,
where the United Nations, the African Union and
other international partners support the work of the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat Boko Haram.
Bolivia encourages those initiatives, including the full
deployment and operationalization of the Group of
Five for the Sahel Joint Force, which together with the
African Union Mission in Somalia, represents one of
the most successful examples of partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, without
forgetting the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, a mission that is an example of
how the African Union and the United Nations can
develop a joint vision with regard to the priorities based
on the reality on the ground and the needs of the area.
We also commend the initiatives put forward
by subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and those under
way within the framework of the Nouakchott process, in
particular those aimed at identifying the root causes of
the conflicts in Mali and the Sahel region, which should
be in line with the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the support plan for that region.
Bolivia underscores the growing level of strategic
partnership between the Security Council of the United
Nations and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and their commitment to developing a
structured and equitable relationship. That partnership
must be strengthened on the basis of mutual support and
ongoing technical assistance, both for political issues
and peacekeeping operations. We therefore welcome the
recent briefings by special representatives and envoys
of the African Union in the Security Council. Similarly,
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

we support the option of having both Councils conduct
joint field missions. Furthermore, we believe that
efforts should be made to continue exploring different
modalities for support and assistance to the African
Union peacekeeping operations pursuant to resolution
2320 (2016). In that context, Bolivia supports the
requests made by the African Union for a predictable
and flexible budget and for economic support for peace
and security operations.
However, not all experiences have been positive.
We cannot forget the weakening or breakdown in trust
with regional organizations. For example, that has been
the case with South Sudan and the political process
that the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) is conducting as mediator. We regret that the
Security Council ignored IGAD’s express request that
targeted sanctions and an arms embargo not be imposed
at a time when headway was being made in the dialogue
in South Sudan. Bolivia once again reaffirms its full
support for the regional and subregional architecture
as a useful tool for conflict resolution in Africa. It is
essential to take into account the African perspective
and African recommendations, as they are more aware
of the reality on the ground.
In conclusion, Bolivia believes that it is crucial to
grant a greater leadership role to the African Union
in decision-making on matters that concern it, with
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all the countries that make up the African
Union, in the interest of the peace that we so long for.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. At
the outset, we congratulate Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde on
assuming her new post as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union and Head of
the United Nations Office to the AU. We also would
like to thank Mr. Smaïl Chergui for his thorough
briefing on cooperation between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council.
Cooperation between international and regional
organizations is indispensable, given the international
necessities, circumstances and enormous challenges,
on the one hand, and the unprecedented expansion of
the role of regional organizations in the areas of peace,
security and stability, especially in the light of the
growing number of national and regional conflicts,
on the other. Emphasizing the importance of such

S/PV. 8314

cooperation in addressing security challenges and
settling African conflicts, the African Union (AU)
sought to cooperate with the United Nations pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Kuwait’s relationship with the African continent
is historical and deep-rooted and precedes the
establishment of official diplomatic relations with its
States. That relationship was significantly bolstered
after Kuwait’s accession to the AU as an observer in
December 2011. This is an unequivocal evidence of
Kuwait’s recognition of the political and economic
importance of Africa.
The report of former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
on the causes of conflict in Africa and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318) clearly noted that there can be no peace
without development and no development without
peace. That is consistent with one of the basic principles
and pillars of Kuwait’s foreign policy, particularly the
policy of the Kuwaiti Fund for Economic Development
since 1961, as reflected in its contributions of over
$10 billion to African countries. The State of Kuwait,
as an observer in the AU and together with its member
States, will continue to implement the AU vision for
peace, progress and prosperity, as well as the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of
regional peace, security and stability.
The momentum of this cooperation must be
maintained in the light of our understanding that
the tools and mechanisms of the United Nations and
the AU in the area of preventive diplomacy can be
enhanced only by working closely at all levels, be it
in the framework of cooperation between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council or of
the United Nations Office to the African Union, not to
mention the close synergy among the Special Envoys
and representatives of the United Nations and the AU,
in addition to scaling up joint field visits.
It is incumbent on us to advance all the early warning
mechanisms in order to avert future conflicts. We count
on the role of the African members of the AU and their
unified positions to increase cooperation between both
organizations and particularly between both Councils.
Greater harmony and alignment between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union will enhance their existing partnership
and have a positive effect on their joint peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace operations in

18-2288111/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

conflict-affected countries, not to mention improving
the transparency of information exchanges between
both organs, which will facilitate consistent and
appropriate responses to issues of conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping, peace-support operations
and post-conflict development.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it
is essential to build African countries’ capacities,
especially in the area of peacekeeping. We hope that
progress can be made in ensuring predictable, sustainable
and flexible financing for AU-led peace-support
operations that are mandated by the Security Council.
We commend the fact that the AU continues to cover
25 per cent of the costs of peace-support operation.
We also support the activation of the Peace Fund
and partnership between the AU and the United Nations
in ensuring sustainable and predictable funding. We
emphasize the importance of starting early to develop
a joint understanding of conflicts, coordinate efforts,
ensure responses and ensure effective partnership
between the two organizations and regional economic
groups, which will enable them to achieve their roles
as desired.
We are pleased to see the cooperation between the
two Councils, and we commend the joint communiqué
to be issued at their twelfth joint consultative meeting, to
be held tomorrow. We look forward to maintaining that
approach and pace until the desired goals are achieved.
Given the ongoing conflicts in the Arab region, the
State of Kuwait looks forward to enhanced cooperation
between the Security Council and the League of
Arab States in the areas of conflict prevention, early
warning,and conflict resolution through peaceful ways
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
On the hundredth anniversary of the birth of the late
great leader Nelson Mandela, I would like to conclude
with a quote attributed to him, which says that “Peace
is the greatest weapon for development that anyone can
have”. Indeed, no one can deny the existence today of
the peace-and-development nexus. Development, along
with peace and human rights, is one of the core pillars
of the United Nations. Let us continue to work with
the African Union, through the various bilateral and
multilateral partnerships that we have with it, towards
achieving peace and development in Africa.
12/20

18/07/2018

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We are
very pleased to have you with us for today’s discussion,
Madam President. We would also like to thank
Commissioner Chergui and Special Representative
Zewde for their briefings, and to congratulate
Ms. Zewde on her new appointment. We look forward
to working with her.
As the Council has recognized, the African Union
(AU) is a critical partner for the United Nations. We
are pleased to see greater collaboration, more regular
exchanges of information and consultations and
coordinated action aimed at effectively preventing,
resolving and managing Africa’s complex tasks related
to peace and security. Africa is a continent of promise
as well as enduring challenges. Progress towards open
markets and free trade has spurred economic growth
there, and today Africa is home to five of the world’s
10 fastest-growing economies. By 2030 Africa will
represent almost a quarter of the world’s workforce and
consumers. By 2050 its population is expected to double
to 2 billion people, a majority of whom will be under 18,
making Africa the world’s youngest continent. Almost
70 per cent of Africans today are under 25 years old.
The success or failure of African Governments in
meeting the aspirations of their peoples, particularly
their young people, will affect peace and security
issues across the continent. Meeting those aspirations
will depend on their ability to continue to develop
institutions that are accountable and responsive to
citizens, promoting the rule of law and ensuring
political stability. The African Union plays a leading
role, and its partnership with the United Nations is a
critical component in advancing our shared objectives
of stability and prosperity in Africa.
The United States appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s recognition that the focus of joint efforts
between the United Nations and the AU must be on
facilitating sustainable political solutions, which
requires addressing the root causes of conflict. We
applaud the efforts to develop linkages with financial
institutions such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. They are essential to bringing
to bear the resources necessary to help address the
root causes of conflict in Africa. We also welcome
the African Union’s efforts to increase financial selfreliance, including through the AU Peace Fund, and
to meet the commitment made by the Assembly of the
African Union in January 2015 to funding 25 per cent
of the cost of its peace and security operations. We
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

especially look forward to working with AU member
States to identify non-trade mechanisms for greater
self-financing that are transparent and compliant with
their international obligations and commitments.
What the United States will not do is consider
additional financial support through the United
Nations for any future AU-led operations authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, until benchmarks
for financial transparency, conduct and discipline
and human rights are demonstrably implemented
across AU peace organizations and operations. To
do otherwise, or to act prematurely, would be to risk
jeopardizing the legitimacy and credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping. However, we do recognize the
progress that the AU has made towards developing
compliance frameworks for international humanitarian
law and human rights, and for conduct and discipline,
particularly the policies on conduct and discipline and
on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse, as well as the training standards for the
integrated protection of civilians. We urge the United
Nations and the AU to continue to prioritize the
development and implementation of standards in order
to achieve greater transparency and accountability in
AU peace support operations.
As the Council is aware, earlier this year
the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations called on the Secretariat
to develop a comprehensive performance policy that
details performance standards and mechanisms for
accountability. We would be interested to hear our
briefers’ thoughts on how the AU can better support
and draw from that policy as it develops its own
performance and accountability mechanisms.
Lastly, we are confident that this important
relationship is headed in the right direction. We share
the vision of a stable, prosperous and secure Africa,
and applaud the many efforts to pursue continued and
increased collaboration between the United Nations and
the African Union in order to achieve our shared goals.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Smaїl Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for their substantive briefings.
We share the attitude of the Secretary-General to the
development and strengthening of the cooperation

S/PV. 8314

between the United Nations, the African Union (AU)
and Africa’s subregional organizations. The challenges
facing both the African continent and the international
community make it essential to unite our efforts and
make use of the organizations’ comparative advantages.
We see the potential for more thorough interaction.
We welcome the efforts of our African partners
to resolve conflicts on the continent and have been
pleased to note a marked intensification in the activities
of the African Union and subregional organizations in
that regard, including in efforts to establish a continentwide peace-and-security architecture. There can be no
question that in order to deal effectively with Africa’s
crises, the continent requires first of all an approach
in which Africans themselves take the leading role
in determining ways to settle their various problems,
combined with effective support to their efforts from
the international community. The approach we support
is that of “African solutions to African problems”.
We would like to focus attention on the fact that
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
should be based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, including such key provisions
as ensuring that the peace and security activities of
regional arrangements are consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, that peaceful means
are used for settling disputes, that Security Council
authorization is obtained for any enforcement action
and that the Council is kept informed. Besides that,
it is important to ensure that individual recipes for
dealing with crises are developed for each concrete
situation and geared to local specifics. We believe
that in the majority of cases, the regional stakeholders
have a better understanding of situations in their area
of responsibility. However, the Security Council has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, so its participation in
resolving Africa’s problems is also essential.
We understand the concerns of our African
partners about the provision of resources for African
peacekeeping operations. It will be important to improve
the predictability, reliability and flexibility of the
financing for African operations and joint missions. We
do not object in principle to considering the possibilities
for expanding United Nations participation in such
missions, and we are ready for further constructive
dialogue in that regard. However, we believe it is
extremely important to maintain the current United
Nations procedures for considering and approving the

18-2288113/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

relevant budgetary applications, to ensure transparency
and accountability in the allocation and use of funds,
and to provide for the participation of United Nations
personnel at every stage of the planning and practical
implementation of the tasks involved. Obviously,
strengthening cooperation between our organizations
will inevitably mean additional responsibilities for the
regional actors that they must be fully prepared for.
Russia participates actively in the logistics of
peacekeeping, primarily by providing air services.
We give a great deal of attention to training police
and military personnel from Africa through Russia’s
specialized institutions. In particular, the All-Russian
Institute of Advanced Training of Employees of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation
runs a training programme for peacekeepers. African
law-enforcement officials are given the opportunity to
study in higher-education programmes as well as shortterm training courses for improving their qualifications
in Ministry of Internal Affairs educational institutions.
We are ready to share with our African partners our
experience in counter-terrorism and to implement
projects to increase the capacity of the continent’s
countries to combat the threats of terrorism
and extremism.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to see you, Madam President, leading this
timely and important meeting on the eve of tomorrow’s
meeting with the African Union Peace and Security
Council, and we thank Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde and
Mr. Smaïl Chergui for their important briefings. We
would also like to note that this meeting falls on the
hundredth anniversary of the birth of Nelson Mandela,
whose memory continues to inspire the region and
the world in their efforts to achieve peace and combat
poverty. We also commend the courage of the leaders
of Ethiopia and Eritrea for the important step they have
just taken towards peace and reconciliation.
Peru notes with concern that despite African
countries’ potential and the efforts and progress they
have made in consolidating and sustaining peace,
many continue to face serious challenges and threats
driven or exacerbated by violent extremists, terrorist
groups and criminal organizations. The transnational
and cross-border reach of those non-State actors,
the agents of the vast majority of conflicts today,
reflects the underlying causes of the global effects
that are especially seriously apparent on the African
continent — poverty, inequality, climate change and
14/20

18/07/2018

weak institutions. In that context, we consider it vital
to strengthen multilateralism and cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, as well as
with other regional and subregional organizations and
international financial institutions, in order to respond
to the current challenges. We would like to highlight
three main lines of action for enhanced cooperation.
First, with respect to peacekeeping, we urge the
Council to closely coordinate with the African Union
and other regional organizations in order to strengthen
the effectiveness of peace missions, in accordance
with resolution 2320 (2016), which promotes
complementarities and synergies, including joint
analysis and planning missions. Regional organizations
are key in addressing terrorism, a task that is normally
beyond the mandates and capabilities of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we want to highlight the
African Peace and Security Architecture and initiatives
such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force against
Boko Haram.
Secondly, with regard to conflict prevention,
we must coordinate strategic action for mediation
and facilitating dialogue, early-warning systems and
confidence-building measures, and give visibility
to best practices and help countries interested in
replicating them. We believe the electoral calendar in
Africa provides opportunities for that. We underscore
that prevention requires inclusive and accountable
institutions with the ability to address the demands
of citizens, which are generally indicators of the root
causes of conflict. It also requires greater participation
on the part of citizens, the private sector and civil
society, and especially women and young people.
We believe that the efforts of member States must
be buttressed by the political and diplomatic support,
normative framework and technical cooperation that
the United Nations system, the African Union and
other regional and subregional actors are called on to
provide, in a coordinated and coherent manner. In that
regard, we highlight the roles of the African Union
in Mali and the Sahel, the Economic Community of
West African States in Togo and Guinea-Bissau and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
South Sudan.
Thirdly, with regard to peacebuilding and
sustainable development, it is also essential that
the United Nations, the African Union and other
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

relevant organizations work together on post-conflict
reconstruction and development by addressing root
causes. To that end, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063
should be mutually reinforcing. We want to emphasize
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in that regard,
as well as the importance of promoting the rule of law
in order to safeguard human rights and foster economic
growth, in line with the Sustainable Development
Goals. We also underscore the importance of mitigating
and adapting to climate change.
Lastly, we support the ongoing internal reforms
within both the United Nations and the African Union
aimed at creating a closer and more efficient partnership
to address their common challenges.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Madam President,
for presiding over this meeting. We are also grateful
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zewde and Mr. Chergui for their briefings. We deeply
appreciate your efforts, Madam President, to promote
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).
Over the past year, the United Nations-AU
partnership has seen relatively significant progress,
thanks to efforts on both sides. The eleventh joint
annual consultative meeting was held last year in
Ethiopia and the twelfth will take place at the United
Nations tomorrow. We expect both parties to have
a candid and deep exchange on topics of common
interest to both sides. The two parties have also jointly
carried out activities in areas such as joint evaluations,
decision-making and briefing, and coping with the
problems of Somalia, Mali, the Sahel, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and many other hotspot
issues, with positive results. China highly appreciates
those efforts.
The continued strengthening of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU is very important
to peace and development in Africa and in the world
as a whole. The overall situation in Africa is currently
stable, but the continent is still facing challenges
on the peace, security, economic development and
humanitarian fronts, which creates new demands for
cooperation between the two parties.
China lends its overall support to the
recommendations 2018 annual report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/678) on the partnership between the

S/PV. 8314

United Nations and the AU. We believe that, in order
to address new situations and challenges, the United
Nations should focus on the following three areas, while
continuing to enhance its partnership with the AU.
First, there is a need to continue to build on and
optimize the relevant partnership mechanisms. The
United Nations should fully respect the leadership
of Africa in solving its own security issues and
improve cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU. Based on new trends,
they should find innovative ways of working together,
while improving the coherence of topics, the timeliness
of briefings and effective decision-making.
Secondly, there is a need to actively explore
ways to provide Africa-led peacekeeping operations
with sustainable and predictable funding. AU-led
peacekeeping operations constitute a significant means
to address crises in Africa and an important complement
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, but AU
peacekeeping operations face difficulties in terms of
human and financial resources. The United Nations
and the AU have made several attempts to jointly
resolve the funding issue and have seen positive results.
The Secretary-General and Chairperson of the AU
Commission have offered several relevant models, in
the light of which the two sides will be able to pursue
extensive exchanges and find innovative ways to find a
way to resolve the issue.
Thirdly, there is a need to maintain support for
Africa in its efforts to address the root causes of
conflict. Support for Africa’s economic and social
development is a major way forward; it will expand the
United Nations-AU partnership in the future and is an
important channel to help Africa confront emerging
causes of conflict. The United Nations should closely
align the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development with the AU Agenda 2063.
As a priority, the international community should
increase assistance to and investment in Africa’s health
care, education, economy, trade, connectivity and other
infrastructure to improve the economic and social
development of African nations.
China is actively committed to promoting African
peace and security and strengthening the United
Nations-AU partnership. China will continue to uphold
the principles and the concept of achieving shared
growth through discussions and cooperation, work
closely with African nations and assist and support

18-2288115/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

them in their effort to strengthen peace, security and
capacity-building, resolve regional hotspot issues, and
realize stability and development for African nations.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me begin by joining
other speakers in thanking Special Representative
Zewde and African Union (AU) Commissioner Chergui
for their insightful briefings. Allow me also to take
this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Zewde on her new
appointment and wish her every success in fulfilling
her mandate, including fostering progress between the
United Nations and the African Union.
We could not agree more with Ms. Zewde that
partnership is not a choice. It is a necessity, and that
is why Poland is a steadfast supporter of fostering the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union. We therefore welcome the progress
made over the past year, covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/678) under consideration.
In recent years, the African Union has taken on
important responsibilities, and its role in promoting
peace and security has only expanded. We appreciate the
ownership it has consistently demonstrated in tackling
security challenges and in bringing together subregional
organizations in joint efforts to ensure peace, stability
and development on the African continent. We all
acknowledge the comparative advantages of African
Union peace operations — their understanding of the
realities on the ground, ability to rapidly deploy and
flexibility, and capacity to perform mandated tasks
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
unable to perform. Poland believes that, if African
peace and security operations are to be most effective,
the partnership between the two organizations should
be further strengthened in the area of joint analysis
and planning.
We recognize the need for flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations authorized
or mandated by the Security Council, and we stand ready
to further discuss various options and models of such
support, including access to United Nations-assessed
contributions. At the same time, we underline the need
to ensure the full compliance of African-led peace
operations with United Nations rules and standards in
terms of troop quality, training and equipment, as well
accountability, conduct and discipline.
Let me stress that enhanced cooperation and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union are needed not only in relation to peace
16/20

18/07/2018

and security operations; they are equally important
in the area of mediation and conflict prevention,
as well as in addressing the root causes of conflict,
strengthening political processes and respect for rule of
law, and good governance, and promoting sustainable
and inclusive development. Therefore, we commend
the United Nations-AU action plan on implementation
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as agreed at the second United NationsAfrican Union Annual Conference held in Addis Ababa
in early July.
At this juncture, allow me to once again express
Poland’s appreciation for African mediation and
facilitation efforts in various conflicts, including in
South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic.
Poland believes that continued United Nations
support for the African Union in its efforts to equip
itself with the capacities, tools and means necessary for
effective action is critical. It is of utmost importance
in enabling both organizations to face new threats and
address complex sources of instability in Africa. We
believe that regular exchanges between the Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council are an
essential instrument for deepening the partnership. In
that context, we would be supportive of the possible
expansion of joint field missions of both Councils. We
believe that a joint visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the weeks to come could be instrumental
in reaching a political solution in the country. In that
respect, we also stress the importance of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in providing
support and ensuring concerted action between the
two Councils.
In conclusion, I reiterate Poland’s support for
strengthening United Nations-AU cooperation and our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his continued
efforts focused on strengthening the partnership with
the African Union, as well as other regional partners in
Africa. Let me assure you, Madam, that Poland stands
ready to work closely with African partners not only on
African issues, but also on ways to address our shared
global challenges.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Commissioner Chergui for his briefing and for
the work of the African Union (AU) to bring peace and
security to Africa. I would also like to welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zewde to her
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

new role and thank her for her briefing, presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/678) and
efforts and those of her Office to the African Union.
I would also like to join other speakers, including
the representative of Bolivia and others, who have
taken this opportunity to pay tribute to the remarkable
efforts of Ethiopia and Eritrea in advancing peace and
stability between the two countries in recent weeks.
That is truly positive news for the region, the African
Union and the Council.
The United Kingdom believes that the African
Union is a crucial partner for the United Nations across
many different strands of work, including peace and
security. The AU’s deep understanding of the issues
that the continent is facing makes it uniquely placed
to lead efforts in this area. The United Kingdom
strongly welcomes the intention of the African Union
and the United Nations to coordinate more on peace
and security, including on conflict prevention and
peacekeeping matters. Combining the knowledge and
skills of both organizations will mean that resources
can be deployed more effectively and efficiently.
As set out in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/678), regional economic communities, such
as the Economic Community of West African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
have positively contributed to peace and security in
the region, and as such must be considered as part of
the AU’s reform process. To ensure that resources are
coordinated effectively, we agree that the AU must retain
oversight over these regional economic communities.
The United Kingdom believes that the AU’s peace
support operations can play a crucial role in achieving
long-term peace. It is therefore important that the
long-term financial sustainability and predictability
of current and future missions be considered so that
they can keep doing their good work. As Commissioner
Chergui has already highlighted today, resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) outline the principles of
United Nations-assessed funding for AU-led peace
support operations. Resolution 2320 (2016) agreed that
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
on peace-support operations is key to delivering and
maintaining peace in Africa. As set out in the resolution,
we look forward to progress towards a United NationsAU decision-making process that respects Security
Council primacy on mandating and deploying missions.

S/PV. 8314

We support the AU’s efforts to ensure robust
standards that are comparable to the United Nations and
are adhered to across the organization. In that regard,
we welcome the close work between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission on compliance
frameworks and that a conduct and discipline policy and
a sexual exploitation and abuse policy have been agreed.
We eagerly await the completion of the accountability
and oversight frameworks so that we can move forward
in considering the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions to partially fund AU-led peace-support
operations on a case-by-case basis. In that regard, we
warmly welcome the AU’s commitment to funding
25 per cent of peace-support operation costs by 2020,
and I also welcome the detail set out by Commissioner
Chergui earlier in this meeting.
In particular, with respect to the Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we note the
report of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoys on AU
financing, future financing and the recommendation
for the AU to lead on funding and for non-traditional
donors to contribute. As the report concluded, United
Nations assessed contributions are not an option in the
short term. Therefore, we need to see the international
community step up and provide vital contributions to
AMISOM in the short and medium terms.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations, as demonstrated by the joint field visits of the
United Nations Secretary-General, Chairperson Faki
and others. We encourage more joint United NationsAU field visits, as well as increased coordination
between United Nations Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and AU Special Envoys, particularly
ahead of decision points on mandates or sanctions
regimes and ahead of the issuing of reports. The African
Union’s knowledge of the region is invaluable. With
that in mind, we encourage more interaction between
the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,
including on reporting, so that we can consider the
views of the African Union.
The challenges that Africa faces remain significant.
Only last year, 15,000 people were displaced every
day, 75 per cent of them due to conflict. We must work
together to ensure that our efforts are complementary
so that we maximize the impact they can have to give
us the best chance to address the enormous challenge of
achieving peace and security in Africa and in silencing
the guns.

18-2288117/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this debate. I also thank Ms. Zewde and
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
Chergui for their very interesting briefings.
For France, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is of strategic
importance for international peace and security, and we
are firmly committed to supporting it. The partnership
is fully in keeping with the current evolution of
peacekeeping, which requires better coordination
among the United Nations, regional organizations and
subregional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to better exploit
the comparative advantages of each organization,
thereby better preventing and responding to crises.
In that context, we welcome the progress made
over the past year under the personal leadership of the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, to better coordinate and analyse crises and
our responses to them. For example, the joint visit
of the Commissioner and Jean-Pierre Lacroix to the
Central African Republic highlighted the importance
of coordinated action by the two organizations in
support of the peace process in that country to achieve a
comprehensive political agreement as soon as possible.
In the face of evolving threats in Africa and the
need for the United Nations and the AU to improve their
responses and efficiency, France is in favour of United
Nations reinforcement of African peace operations.
President Macron made a clear commitment to this goal
during his speech in Ouagadougou, in November 2017,
and more recently at the thirty-first African Union
Summit in Nouakchott. We believe that African Union
operations should be supported in two areas.
First, it is important to promote the concept
of African peace enforcement operations that are
mandated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council.
African peace operations can be deployed more quickly
than United Nations peacekeeping operations in
carrying out offensive peace-enforcement or counterterrorism operations. That division of tasks would
allow United Nations peacekeeping operations to focus
on peacekeeping, which is at the core of their mandate.
At the political and military levels, such operations
should therefore be provided with a stable framework
18/20

18/07/2018

for cooperation, as has been done with the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the African Union
Mission for the Central African Republic and Central
Africa and, more recently, to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). The proposals
of the Secretary-General and the Chairman of the
African Union Commission to establish a joint process
for the analysis of threats, developing mandates and
operational concepts, planning and the evaluation of
African peace operations constitute a solid basis for
further efforts, and we invite them to develop it further.
The second key point for enhancing African peace
operations is the need to move concretely and swiftly
towards their predictable and sustainable financing, as
called for in resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).
Given the current situation, it now seems logical that
African peace enforcement operations, which would
complement United Nations peacekeeping operations,
should also enjoy sound and predictable funding,
including through mandatory contributions from the
United Nations.
In that regard, we welcome the reforms led by
the African Union, including the revitalization of the
Peace Fund, and the African Union’s commitment
to funding 25 per cent of African peace operations.
We also commend the unprecedented financial
commitment of AU member States to replenishing
the Fund. Of course, several crucial points still need
to be discussed concerning financing, in particular
regarding the acceleration and finalization of ongoing
work on compliance frameworks in the fields of
international humanitarian law, human rights and
conduct and discipline, as well as work related to chains
of command in African peace operations. However, we
remain confident that the work will proceed and allow
us to move forward.
I conclude by emphasizing that France considers
the progress achieved by our African Union partners
to be real and must now be strongly supported by
the Security Council. France will play an active role,
together with its partners in the Security Council, to
ensure progress in the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, in the name of peace
and security on the African continent.
Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s meeting. I join
18-22881

18/07/2018

African Union

others in congratulating the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, on
her new assignment and assure her and her staff of
our full support for the United Nations Office to the
African Union. I thank her and African Union (AU)
Commissioner Smaïl Chergui for their insightful
briefings on enhancing African capacities for peace
and security.
My delegation fully supports the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security in Africa, including on the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union (S/2018/678), and
would like to make the following observations.
First, with regard to institutional partnerships,
we are encouraged to see strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in an effort to
support Africa’s steady pursuit of peace, stability and
sustainable development. We welcome the progress
made to capitalize on the United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security and the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We, the
international community, should support to the fullest
efforts to implement the Frameworks through joint
field visits to conflict areas, joint briefings, meetings
of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security and other initiatives. At the same
time, further technical work is needed to develop the
modalities for joint analysis, planning and assessment,
as well as reporting to the relevant intergovernmental
bodies. Both the United Nations and the AU must revise
their internal administrative processes, policies and
procedures and strengthen common synergies.
Secondly, with regard to the peacekeeping
partnership, AU-led peace support operations are
recognized as being absolutely essential to the
Security Council’s responsibility to maintain peace and
security. This is particularly relevant,considering the
limitations of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in countering terrorism. AU forces have also proven to
be very effective because they are familiar with their
own terrain, local conditions and the tactics of armed
and militia groups. Good examples of such partnership
are the AU-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Similarly, the Multinational Joint Task Force and

S/PV. 8314

the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are
exemplary reinforcements as part of our global counterterrorism action.
My delegation commends the AU for its continued
efforts to operationalize the African Peace Fund and
its commitment to covering 25 per cent of the cost of
its peace-support operations. We encourage the AU
to pursue with greater determination the creation of
the African Standby Force and strengthen a robust
compliance framework. However, it is clear that
without sufficient financial and capacity-building
support, the ability of AU peace operations to deliver
will not match expectations. My delegation therefore
calls on the Security Council to consider practical steps
to develop a mechanism to ensure the sustainable and
predictable joint financing of AU peace operations.
The four financing options, identified in last year’s
reports of the Secretary-General’ (S/2017/744), should
be explored for optimal results, beyond the use of
voluntary contributions through trust funds. We must
also find a way to understand and harmonize the
varying differences in the orientation, structures and
bureaucracies of the two organizations for a smoother
and more effective partnership.
Thirdly, we should prioritize conflict prevention
and mediation by improving the efficiency of United
Nations-AU preventive diplomacy and developing
a comprehensive approach, while strengthening the
security-development nexus. We need more coordinated
actions in order to adopt what the Secretary-General
calls a whole new approach — one of preventing
conflicts rather than spending time and resources on
resolving them. Currently, we spend 10 times more funds
on peacekeeping than on peacebuilding and addressing
the root causes of instability. We must therefore invest
more in human development, including education,
employment, social services, State institutions and
good governance, rule of law, security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
At the same time, attention must be paid to climate
mitigation, disaster risk reduction, resilience-building
and infrastructure development to foster trade and
agriculture, as well as water, food and energy security,
so as to develop a holistic concept of human security.
Lastly, we underscore that only collective action,
with the engagement of all relevant actors, will be the
most effective in achieving peace and stability in Africa.
We must listen carefully to the guidance given by the
three African non-permanent members of the Council

18-2288119/20

S/PV.8314

African Union

on all the issues related to Africa. We also encourage the
United Nations to leverage the comparative advantage of
regional economic communities and mechanisms, such
as the Economic Community of West African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
They, in particular, possess a better understanding of the
dynamics and root causes of conflicts and can mobilize
local financial and human resources. Parliamentarians,
religious leaders and civil society are also assets in our
efforts. Last but not least, it is important to ensure that
women and youth are integrated into every stage related
to peace and security.
Kazakhstan, as an observer to the AU, is strongly
committed to further strengthening the capacity of
that organization and all subregional structures to help
African countries fulfil their vision for peace, progress
and prosperity.
The President: I would like to make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative
of Sweden.
We spend an inordinate amount of time in the
Chamber discussing devastating crises on the African
continent. However, today’s meeting has provided
a welcome opportunity to focus on cooperation and

20/20

18/07/2018

solutions and on how our joint efforts can yield better
results. I am very encouraged by the resounding support
we have heard today for a deepened strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
It is clear that enhanced collaboration is part and
parcel of ongoing efforts to make peace operations
more effective. In order to foster such collaboration,
further discussion is required on the modalities for
much needed predictable financing. It was encouraging
to hear from Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde and Commissioner
Chergui about the magnitude of activities, exchanges
and collaborative efforts between the two secretariats
in an effort to operationalize closer cooperation. Such
endeavours deserve our full support. That momentum
must continue in order to achieve results. I believe
that it all bodes very well for the twelfth annual joint
consultative meeting to be held tomorrow with the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

18-22881
