A /71/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

50th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 30 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mnatsakanyan
(Armenia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(А/71/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (А/71/359)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/174)
Draft resolutions (A/71/L.18, A/71/L.19,
A/71/L.20 and A/71/L.21)
Mrs. Matar (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to deliver a statement on behalf of the
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Bahrain
to the United Nations.
On this occasion, His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa
Al Khalifa of Bahrain has sent a letter of solidarity with
the Palestinian people to the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in
which he writes:
“The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People reflects the attention that the
United Nations and the international community
attach to the question of Palestine and their solid
commitment to meeting the legitimate aspirations
of Palestinians and to granting them their rights,

including the right to self-determination and the
right to establish their own independent State,
similar to other peoples of the world.”
His Majesty also writes:
“The Kingdom of Bahrain has always stressed
its support for the establishment of a State of
Palestine with Jerusalem as its capital. We have
always called on the international community to
make every effort to grant the Palestinian people
their inalienable rights and to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions, including Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), based on the two-State
solution, the Madrid terms of reference of the
peace process and the Arab Peace Initiative. All
of these instruments call for the full withdrawal
of Israel from Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem, and from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967. They also call for granting the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights.”
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to
the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, His
Excellency Mr. Fodé Seck, Permanent Representative
of Senegal to the United Nations, and to all members
of the Committee for their valuable report (A/71/35).
I would also like to express my appreciation to all
members of the Committee for their ongoing efforts to
ensure the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
and to allow Palestinians to put an end to the occupation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-40731 (E)

*1640731*

A/71/PV.50

30/11/2016

and establish their own independent State on their land,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Initiative, which is the only genuine solution that would
lay the foundation for peace in the region.

The Committee’s report reflects the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
with respect to the situation of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the Palestinian people. Those
rights are inalienable and fundamental, according to
Security Council resolution 237 (1967). The outrageous
deterioration of the situation in the occupied territories,
as detailed in the report, is the result of Israel’s
annexation and settlement policy and its continued
construction of the separation wall in the West Bank
and around Jerusalem.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We commemorate the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People every year. Yet for far too long the Day has been
a somber and grim reminder of the unending suffering
of the Palestinian people at the hands of an occupier
that has shown utter disregard for the principles of
international law and the morals of humanity.

We reiterate our thanks to the Committee and
to the Division for Palestinian Rights for their
activities during the reporting period, as detailed in
the Committee’s report. Those activities include the
International Conference on the Question of Jerusalem,
which took place in Jakarta on 14 and 15 December,
2015; the United Nations Civil Society Forum on the
Question of Palestine, under the theme of “Civil society
action in support of justice in Palestine and ending the
occupation”, held in Jakarta on 16 December, 2015; the
United Nations Round Table on Legal Aspects of the
Question of Palestine, in Amman from 15 to 17 March;
the International Conference on the Question of
Jerusalem, in Dakar on 3 and 4 May; the United Nations
Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People, in
Stockholm on 19 and 20 May; and other activities
seeking to raise awareness of the just Palestinian cause.
We would also like to thank the Department of Public
Information for its special information programme
on the question of Palestine, for its annual training
programme for Palestinian journalists, and for its call
on all United Nations information centres to carry
out activities related to the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its firm
position in support of the Palestinian question. We
must strive to meet the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace that will guarantee the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, including the establishment of their
own independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital, on
all territories that have been occupied since 1967. That
must be done in a manner that will ensure the return
of Palestinian refugees to their homeland, pursuant to
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
2/32

The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
is essential for peace and stability throughout the
Middle East. It is also essential to enable us to address
some of the drivers of extremism and terrorism. It is
that conflict that has contributed most significantly
to the anger and frustration in the Arab and the
Islamic world. The continued spread of illegal Israeli
settlements on Palestinian lands, the blockade of Gaza,
the provocations around the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the continued imprisonment of Palestinians are all real
and present obstacles to a two-State solution. Those
actions, along with the recent proclamations from
Israel that a two-State solution no longer needs to be
pursued, reflect a willful defiance of the international
consensus that the only viable option for durable peace
lies in such a solution. They are also a testimony to
the fact that the occupying Power is being emboldened
by the lack of resolute action on the part of the
international community.
The 5.2 million Palestinian refugees who were
forcibly displaced from their homes nearly 70 years ago
and denied their inalienable right to return represent a
travesty of justice and morality. Their right to return
is pivotal to the vision of a peaceful and stable Middle
East. The expropriation of Palestinian lands and the
continued expansion of illegal settlements in occupied
territories are other egregious Israeli inequities that
constitute total defiance of its international obligations.
The so-called legalization bill in the Israeli
parliament aims at providing a veneer of legality
to that shameless land-grab. The demolition of
Palestinian homes and expulsion of Palestinians from
their properties further compound the suffering of the
people. The collective punishment meted out through
the blockade of Gaza, now in its ninth year, continues to
wreak havoc on the lives of the residents of the enclave.
It also seriously impedes the ability of the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies to deliver
much-needed support to embattled communities as
16-40731

30/11/2016

A/71/PV.50

they try to rebuild shattered lives after the devastation
caused by the Israeli aggression in 2014.

to the future of the next generation of Palestinians but
to international peace and international security.

Through all this, the United Nations has remained
seized of the Palestinian question. Countless United
Nations resolutions testify to the political and diplomatic
capital spent by the international community on the
Palestinian cause. And yet, none of it has been able to
transform the grim reality of daily existence for the
Palestinian people.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Pakistan’s unwavering
solidarity with the people of Palestine, which has
been consistently manifested by its support over the
decades. We call for an end to the constant delays
and the realization of the legitimate and inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, which is an essential
prerequisite to sustainable peace in the Middle East.
The construction of an architecture of global stability
and prosperity at this seminal juncture of world history
cannot be built on injustice and denial of the rights of
the Palestinian people.

Through its resolution 2535 (XXIV) B of
10 December 1969, the General Assembly expressed
grave concern at the denial of basic rights to the
Palestinians through collective punishment, arbitrary
detention, curfews, the destruction of homes and
property, deportation and other repressive acts. Almost
half a century later, sadly, the draft resolution that we
will adopt tomorrow will speak to the same trials and
tribulations. That lack of progress is an indictment not
of the commitment of the many countries, including my
own, that have steadfastly supported the Palestinian
cause, but of the few that have the capacity to bring
about material change but lack the will to do so.
Renewed demands for the recognition of the State of
Palestine are a clarion call that must be heeded.
The inaction of the Security Council has not only
undermined its own credibility, but has also weakened
the ideals that the Organization espouses — the ideals
of human dignity, of peaceful coexistence based on
the sovereign equality of all nations, and of the right
to self-determination of all peoples. The resumption
of negotiations is the only way forward. The
Security Council should live up to its obligations and
responsibilities and summon the political courage
and vision to adopt a resolution with parameters and
timelines to end the occupation. However, talks should
be meaningful and results-oriented and not a means for
providing space for Israel to further shrink prospects
for a contiguous State of Palestine.
Another dimension of conflict in the Middle East is
the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan. The Israeli
settlement policy and illegal practices of controlling
resources and changing the demographic composition
and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan is a
violation and in blatant disregard of United Nations
resolutions. Lasting and sustainable peace in the
Middle East requires bold decisions. Withdrawal of the
occupation forces from all Arab lands, including from
Lebanon and the Syrian Golan Heights, is vital not only
16-40731

Mr. Al Harthy (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Sultanate of Oman, I would like to thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this special meeting to consider the Palestinian question
and the situation in the Middle East. I would also like
to thank the representative of Senegal for his statement
on behalf of the President of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (see A/71/PV.49). We commend him for the
activities of the Committee.
The Israeli forces’ illegal expansionist practices in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem and their breach of
international law and norms through settlement activity
and the building of a separation wall are flagrant
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian
people living in the occupied territories, as well as
of the provisions of international humanitarian and
human rights law. My country therefore calls on the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to fulfil its responsibility and compel Israel,
the occupying Power, to cease these practices and
policies and its attempts to alter the demography on the
ground in Palestine.
We call on Israel to return to negotiations to end
the occupation of the Palestinian territories and build
the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We also call on Israel to
withdraw from the Syrian Golan and other areas under
Israeli occupation in south Lebanon.
My country wishes to stress that peace and stability
can be achieved only through dialogue and negotiations.
Our position was succinctly set forth in the statement
of my country’s Minister for Foreign Affairs during the
general debate at the start of the Assemb;y’s seventy3/32

A/71/PV.50

first session (see A/71/PV.22). We call for serious
negotiations that would preserve the rights of all parties
to live within secure borders on the basis of two States,
Israel and Palestine. We also call upon the international
community to support all efforts aimed at achieving a
noble goal that is shared by all peace-loving countries.
Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Fidel Castro — the eternal leader of the Cuban people,
of the Latin American people and of the peoples in
the world who are seeking development, who has just
entered into the pantheon of immortality — spoke a
great truth in this very Hall in 1979: “the Palestinian
question is the very crux of the problem of the Middle
East” (A/34/PV.31, para. 22). In fact, if the international
community had complied with General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), of 29 November 1947 — which,
just as it created the State of Israel, should also have
established the independent State of Palestine and done
justice to the Palestinian people — the world would not
have had to lament the indescribable tragedies that they
have experienced and are living today in the Middle
East region.
After 70 years, the Palestinian people are still
fighting for the right to self-determination, to exist as
a nation and to establish a State, like all the rest of the
peoples of the Earth. These rights are theirs not only
because of the international community’s recognition,
in resolution 3236 (XXIX), adopted in 1974, but also
because of the millennial history that precedes this
Palestinian population, descendants of the Canaanites
and Philistines, more than 5,000 years ago.
On the occasion of the annual observation of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, it is a priority to recall that after the 1948 war
between the new State of Israel and the neighbouring
Arab States, more than half of the native Palestinians
were obliged to flee or were expelled from their land. By
1949, there were already 725,000 Palestinian refugees.
Following the war of 1967, the Palestinian exodus grew,
with 500,000 additional refugees.
Seventy years later, the increase in the number of
displaced persons is dramatic and inhumane. There
are 5.3 million Palestinian refugees located primarily
in the Near East, who represent more than 40 per cent
of the world’s long-term refugees. That percentage
demonstrates a permanent violation of rights in which
the people survive, a people whose situation is steadily
4/32

30/11/2016

deteriorating and who are being deprived even of their
right to humanitarian assistance.
This Organization has heard the testimonies
of senior officials of United Nations bodies on
the difficulties that they are having in providing
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian refugees
and on the obstructions by the Government of Israel
to the humanitarian aid agencies on the ground.
Similar allegations have been received by the Security
Council with respect to other Governments that are
also obstructing the work organized through numerous
Council resolutions for humanitarian assistance in
Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan and Yemen.
My delegation reiterates once again that the lack of
effective action by the Security Council, the indifference
of the Powers directly involved and the obstinacy of
extremist sectors in the State of Israel, encouraged by
outside support, have generated unilateral policies that,
as in the case of the Gaza Strip blockade, suffocate its
people, stifle its economy and impede reconstruction.
Meanwhile, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
thre is new legislation that contains discriminatory,
anti-democratic provisions that could pose a serious
threat to the human rights of Palestinian citizens
in Israel and Palestinians who live in the territory
occupied in 1967. Such laws and draft laws seek, inter
alia, to strip Arab citizens of their land and exclude
them from it, regulate their citizenship, undermine the
ability of Arab citizens of Israel and their parliamentary
representatives to take part in the political life of the
country, penalize political expression or acts that
challenge the Jewish or Zionist character of the State
and give priority to Jewish citizens when State resources
are being allocated. According to a recent report of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
presented to the Special Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the
occupation imposes high costs on the economy of the
occupied Palestinian territory.
The Security Council cannot continue to shirk its
responsibility or ignore the support of the majority
of the States Members of the United Nations for the
Palestinian cause. The Security Council must shoulder
its responsibility and overcome its silence and paralysis
on the issue. A serious historic responsibility falls to
it, particularly to some of its permanent members. A
definitive response that rejects the policy of building
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
16-40731

30/11/2016

is threatening the two-State solution, as outlined by
the Quartet in its July 2016 report, is the only path to
lasting peace. It takes into account Israel’s security
needs and Palestinian aspirations of sovereignty and
independence and could end the occupation that began
in 1967.
Once again, we urge Israel — a State member of the
international community that was born out of a decision
by this Organization — to respect international law and
the opinion of the community of nations, which, year
after year, calls for an end to the policy of expansion
and the building of settlements. As our delegation
has previously stated, the question of Palestine is an
eminently political conflict that requires a political
solution. Its basis lies in the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and depends on an overall
solution to the problem of the Middle East. The region
has already been the battleground for four wars and,
now more than ever, the present conflict is one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
The bilateral formula for the quest for peace is direct
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. Such
negotiations have been supported by the international
community but regrettably have not yielded any results
or progress. Seventy years of waiting is quite enough.
Unfortunately, we believe that this path has been
exhausted. That is why our delegation values and voices
its support for the various recent initiatives that have
emerged recently to promote the peace process between
Israel and Palestine, such as the French and Egyptian
initiative, and Russia’s more recent proposal to host a
meeting of Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
This legally organized community has a duty and a
debt to return the rights of the Palestinian people to them
and finalize the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations, as
was established in the 1947 partition plan (see resolution
181 (II)). My delegation would like to firmly reiterate
once again the support of the Government and people
of Ecuador for the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State with the1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Next year,
2017, should be the year the foreign occupation of the
Palestinian territory comes to an end.
I will conclude with another quotation from Fidel
Castro. He spoke these words in the General Assembly
Hall — at this very rostrum — in 1979, as he made a
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

statement on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries:
“From the bottom of our heart, we repudiated
the merciless persecution and genocide that the
Nazis once visited on the Jews, but there is nothing
in recent history that parallels it more closely than
the dispossession, persecution and genocide that
imperialism and Zionism are currently practicing
against the Palestinian people. Pushed off their
land, expelled from their own country, scattered
throughout the world, persecuted and murdered, the
heroic Palestinians are a vivid example of sacrifice
and patriotism, living symbols of the most terrible
crime of our era” (A/34/PV.31, para. 24).
Mr. Thammavongsa (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): As of today, the question of Palestine has
been on the agenda of the United Nations for more than
six decades, and it is unfortunate that the Palestinian
people still have no glimmer of hope that their right to
self-determination that will lead to the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine will be realized. It is
therefore time for the international community to take
bold steps to create favourable conditions for the return
by all parties concerned to dialogue and negotiations in
order to resolve this protracted conflict and realize the
two-State solution so that Palestine and Israel can live
side by side in peace.
We are concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip following the war in 2014.
At their current rate, efforts to address humanitarian
needs and rebuild homes to improve the livelihoods
of tens of thousands of Palestinian people affected by
the war are insufficient due to the blockade, severe
import restrictions and unfulfilled donor pledges. My
delegation therefore calls for the lifting of the blockade
and urges the international community to provide
support and aid to Palestine so that the humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction process can be expedited.
In addition, the continued illegal settlement activities
and destruction of properties, homes and economic
institutions in the occupied territory have led to the
further deterioration of the already grave socioeconomic
situation that the Palestinian people are facing.
This constitutes a breach of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, and acts as an impediment to the peace
process and opportunities for negotiations. Such
acts should therefore be stopped in order to create a
5/32

A/71/PV.50

conducive environment for the parties concerned to
return to the negotiating table and find a just and lasting
solution to the long-overdue question of Palestine. This
solution must be based on United Nations resolutions
and the Quartet road map, which envisage a sovereign,
independent and viable State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in peace with
the State of Israel, within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has long
recognized the State of Palestine and wishes to reaffirm
its consistent support for the Palestinian people in
attaining their long-delayed goal of a viable, peaceful
and prosperous State of Palestine that is a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations. We welcome other
countries’ decisions to recognize the State of Palestine
and hope that more will do so in future. We believe that
the more recognition there is for the State of Palestine,
the more positive the contribution will be to expediting
a peaceful solution to this long-overdue issue.
While waiting to see the full-fledged, independent
State of Palestine, we take this opportunity to commend
the role and work of the United Nations agencies,
especially the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for their
support and assistance to the millions of Palestinian
people in need during all these year,s despite multiple
difficulties. We also wish the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People every success in its noble endeavours to achieve
a just, peaceful, comprehensive and lasting solution to
the question of Palestine.

30/11/2016

a sovereign and independent State such as those other
peoples of the world enjoy.
The United Arab Emirates expresses its concern
with regard to the deteriorating humanitarian and
security and social situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory as well as to the escalation of violence and the
absence of a solution that would uphold the Palestinians’
inalienable rights, despite all the resolutions of and
efforts by the United Nations, its agencies and other
regional and international bodies to solve the Palestinian
question. The tragedy of the Palestinian people has
continued for 70 years. The United Arab Emirates
believes that this international impotence will persist as
long as Israel continues with its illegitimate and illegal
practices and its aggressive policies designed to oppress
the Palestinian people. Israel continues to destroy and
demolish Palestinian property, confiscate Palestinian
lands and forcibly displace Palestinians, while using
excessive force against women and children.
In Gaza, Israel continues its inhumane embargo and
blockade which has led to a deteriorating humanitarian
situation and to rising unemployment. Israel persists
in its expanding its settlements, which is considered
illegal and prohibited under international humanitarian
law, having thus disregarded all international calls to
cease these activities. These activities undermine the
two-State solution and constitute an obstacle to the
peace process in the Middle East.

Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation and I would
like to extend our sincere condolences to the people and
the Government of Cuba at the passing of the former
President, His Excellency Mr. Fidel Castro.

In the light of this situation, settlers continue their
violence against the Palestinian people, while Israel
persists in its exploitation of the natural resources
of occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan. Israel continues to take illegal measures to
change the character of Jerusalem. It persists in its
systematic attacks against Christian and Islamic holy
sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in violation of
international treaties.

I take this opportunity to reiterate the words of
His Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan,
President of the United Arab Emirates, in his letter
addressed to the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people on
the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People. In that letter, His Highness
addressed the support of the United Arab Emirates for
the people and the Government of Palestine as they
strive to achieve their legitimate aspirations to establish

The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns
all Israeli violations and acts of oppression that run
counter to international human rights and humanitarian
law and the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. We call
on Israel to cease those violations and demonstrate
genuine political will towards achieving a true peace
in the region. We denounce the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories, as it threatens the
stability and security of the region and plays into the
hands of terrorist and extremist groups.

6/32

16-40731

30/11/2016

It is high time for the international community to
fulfil its legal, political and material responsibilities
and compel Israel to immediately cease all its illegal
practices. We call on the international community,
the Quartet and the Security Council to act decisively
and immediately, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the provisions of international
law, to end the suffering of the Palestinian people,
take all necessary measures to salvage the two-State
solution and end the Israeli occupation of all Arab
territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan. We
stress the need for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State along the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
international resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Madrid Principles.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation and I would like to express our
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of Cuba at the passing of the former President, His
Excellency Mr. Fidel Castro.
Today, on behalf of the President of Iraq, I
would like to deliver this statement addressed to the
Palestinian people:
“The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People reflects and renews the global
and ongoing responsibility of the international
community to address the Palestinian question as
well as its commitment to upholding the Palestinian
people’s legitimate rights in their just struggle for
self-determination. It also reflects the need to
end the unjust Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory so that Palestinians can establish their
own independent State, as other peoples of the
world have done.
“The Republic of Iraq has long supported
addressing the question of Palestine and its
people’s struggle to see their legitimate rights
fulfilled. We are extremely concerned at the
humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian people
as a result of Israel’s continued disregard for
international resolutions and persistent, aggressive
attacks on the Gaza Strip, in particular, resulting
in disastrous consequences and the death and
injury of hundreds of civilians, including women,
children and the elderly. Those attacks have also
destroyed infrastructure, schools — including
schools administered by the United Nations Relief
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East — and holy places.
“Israel also continues to play out its expansionist
policy by building settlements in the heart of
Palestinian cities in the West Bank, including in
East Jerusalem. Those practices have perpetuated
the suffering of the Palestinian people, who have
lost all hope of seeing the establishment of a
comprehensive and just peace, given the continued
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories since
1967 and despite the passing of 24 years since the
first round of negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians was undertaken.
“On this International Day, the Republic of Iraq
stresses that a comprehensive and just solution to
the Palestinian question is possible only through the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
a fully fledged State, along the lines of the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative, the
two-State solution and international resolutions,
including the relevant United Nations resolutions.
“We call on those countries that have yet to
recognize the State of Palestine, including European
countries, to recognize the State of Palestine, as the
Kingdom of Sweden has done. We call on them to
support the aspirations of the Palestinian people
to realize their legitimate rights, given that such
recognition would contribute to peace, security and
stability in the Middle East.
“The Republic of Iraq strongly condemns
all Israeli attacks on Palestinian territory. We
also express our full support for the Palestinian
Authority and our solidarity with the Palestinian
people. We call on Arab countries and the
international community to support the efforts of
the Palestinian National Authority in combating the
negative consequences of the Israeli occupation,
especially at the socioeconomic level, in the
occupied territories and in Jerusalem. We call on
them to work together to strengthen national unity
and create a united front, with a view to defending
the Palestinians’ legitimate rights.”
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Israeli occupation of Palestine is now in its fiftieth
year. Occupation is by definition temporary, but when
an occupation, such as that of Palestine by Israel, is
moving steadily towards semi-permanent status, it fuels
7/32

A/71/PV.50

the continuation of a conflict that is now the oldest and
most dangerous in the Middle East. It erodes prospects
for coexistence and mutual respect. As described by the
Secretary-General, it has turned the region into a fertile
ground for hatred and extremism.
The international community has continuously
advocated for a solution to the question of Palestine
that upholds the Palestinian people’s legitimate
right to self-determination and the aspirations of the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples to live in peace as equals
in two independent States, side by side, on the basis of
international resolutions, within the borders of 4 June
1967. However, today, 23 years after the Oslo Accords,
instead of witnessing the birth of a sovereign Palestinian
State in accordance with resolutions and international
legitimacy, we are witnessing the establishment of a
cozy State of illegal settlements — a cozy State inhabited
by more than half a million settlers — expanding over
Palestinian territories and enjoying the official support
of the occupying Power. That occupying Power has
spared no effort over the past 10 years to confiscate
land, demolish homes and displace Palestinians, and
has been supported by the inaction of the international
community and the passive stances of influential
international Powers that have the ability to stop such
illegal actions.
Maintaining the status quo represents a pulling back
from the objectives of the United Nations. It encourages
further deterioration on the ground, the consequences
of which are hard to predict. I would like to stress here
that it is a false notion that what we are doing here at the
United Nations is a foregone conclusion. Over a period
of years, our meetings in the General Assembly on this
agenda item and the resolutions we have adopted have
been the only way to officially document Palestinian
rights and duties within the United Nations, which
should remain, with regard to any political accounting,
the legal protector of the right of Palestinians to their
independent State within the borders of June 1967
and with Jerusalem as its capital. Furthermore, our
meetings in the General Assembly and our adoption of
such resolutions are testimony to the fact that Arabs
and Palestinians should choose the path of peace.
I would therefore like to thank all those who
continue to support international legitimacy by voting in
favour of United Nations resolutions and ascribe blame
to all those that voted against them. I would ask the
latter group the following question: If they are against
the principle of maintaining Palestinian rights through
8/32

30/11/2016

international, United Nations resolutions, what is the
best way to maintain, restore and protect their rights
from erosion caused by the policy of maintaining the
status quo? It is clear that those parties are responsible
for the delay in resolving the question of Palestine.
Indeed, it is the lack of will of major international
Powers that is impeding a solution. Nevertheless, this
situation should not make us forget the central role of
the United Nations and its bodies, nor should it cause
us to deviate from the path chartered by international
legitimacy and the terms of references.
In a Arria Formula meeting on 14 July 2016,
members of the Security Council heard statements
from people all over the world, including from the
United States, Belgium and Israel itself. It was stressed
once again at that meeting that the Israeli settlements
were not just an obstacle to peace and to the two-State
solution, but rather the core and crux of the crisis. The
Palestinian cause is mainly the issue of a land that has
been forcibly occupied. It is the cause of a people that
has been stripped of its right to live in dignity.
Also highlighted at that meeting was something
worth recognizing and valuing, namely, the Israeli
voices calling for peace. Those voices are aware that
it is impossible for the occupation to continue, or for
coexistence to be viable, in the light of attempts to
impose a status quo. It is impossible to achieve the goal
of peace when laws are applied in a discriminatory
manner. Those voices spoke out against the imposition
of a policy of maintaining the status quo and abandoning
the two-State solution. They are the voices of those who
know that a people cannot live at the expense of another
people. Thanks to what we heard, I am fully confident
that the Israeli call within the United Nations for peace
is an expression of the genuine desire of a significant,
if not the largest, segment of the Israeli people. We, as
Egyptians and Arabs, are resolved to cooperate with
that segment of the Israeli population and will continue
to work towards a just and comprehensive peace in
the region.
Egypt remains committed to the Arab Peace
Initiative and to encouraging efforts by the international
community to resume negotiations between the
Palestinians and the Israelis, particularly the efforts by
France and Russia. Egypt is resolved to act bilaterally
within a multilateral framework to enforce its vision for
peace in the region. That vision, which was introduced
37 years ago at the conclusion of the peace treaty
between Egypt and Israel, can still be implemented if
16-40731

30/11/2016

we garner the necessary international will and if Israel
opts for a just, comprehensive peace for itself and other
countries of the region.
Ms. Danish (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
On behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the President for making it possible for us to take part in
today’s discussion of the Palestinian question. We will
always support the legitimate claim of our brothers, the
Palestinian people, to recover their inalienable rights.
On this International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, we recall the tragedy that has
befallen them and caused their long-standing suffering.
Despite the fact that the Palestinian question is the crux
of the Middle East conflict and that there have been
many initiatives — including the Arab Peace Initiative,
which my country launched 15 years ago — the
Palestinian people remain deprived of their right to live
in dignity and to secure their freedom and right to selfdetermination.
Israel continues to be in breach of international
law, pursues illegitimate and illegal policies, especially
its settlement activities, violates the sanctity of holy
sites and blocks peace efforts. We therefore call on
the international community to dissuade Israel from
carrying out such coercive policies, which defy the will
of the international community and hinder efforts aimed
at reaching a successful conclusion to negotiations.
Ms. Young (Belize), Vice-President, took the Chair.
My country is dedicated to a lasting peace. The
success of the peace process depends upon the complete
and final withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian
territories, the fulfilment of Palestinian people’s right
to self-determination and the establishment of an
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We should put an end to the tragedy endured by the
Palestinian people. My country supports the efforts by
the Palestinian Authority, under President Mahmoud
Abbas, as well as international efforts to protect the
Palestinian people, and especially to preserve the
Islamic and Arab character of Jerusalem.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the President for convening today’s meeting,
and the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for the
statement delivered on his behalf (see A/71/PV.49). We
are also grateful to the Committee itself for its efforts.
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

We take this opportunity to affirm the indivisibility
of Palestinian rights and to welcome the special
information programme on the question of Palestine
sponsored by the Department of Public Information.
The Middle East faces many challenges as a result
of the increasing number of crises and conflicts in
the region. Those crises and conflicts are negatively
affecting the people of the region and are undermining
their fundamental rights, well-being and development,
with disastrous effects across the world. Stability and
peace must therefore be achieved in the region by
addressing the root causes of the crises, particularly the
unsuccessful efforts to counter the grave violations of
international law and resolutions and the failure to ensure
equity and justice — a problem that must be addressed
if we are to achieve a lasting, comprehensive peace by
ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories.
The seven decades of occupation have proved
that there can be no peace or stability in the region
by imposing a fait accompli. We therefore welcome
the initiative of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to proclaim
the year 2017 as the International Year to End Israeli
Occupation of Palestine, including East Jerusalem. The
initiative is based on realistic and legal grounds that
would defuse the tension between the two parties.
We reaffirm our condemnation of all practices
undertaken by Israel, the occupying Power, against
holy sites, Islamic and Christian, in Jerusalem, as
well as attempts to change the situation at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and to impose restrictions on Muslims entering
that site. We welcome the decision of the UNESCO
Executive Board on occupied Palestine. in October,
and the separate decision of the World Heritage
Committee, which both proclaim Al-Ḥaram Al-Sharif
to be an integral part of a world cultural heritage site
with historic value that Israel is obligated to protect.
General Assembly resolutions in that regard reflect
the commitment of the international community
to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to cease
its unilateral activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, that seek to change
the demographic character of the city. All of those
resolutions stress the illegality of Israeli practices
that seek to impose its laws and legislation on East
Jerusalem. The resolutions also confirm the invalidity
of the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan and call on
Israel to fully withdraw to the 1967 borders.
9/32

A/71/PV.50

It is time to reach a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution based on the United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and the two-State solution,
which seeks to create two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and within the recognized
and secure 1967 borders. Israel must therefore withdraw
from land occupied by Palestinians in 1967 and ensure
the rights of the Palestinian people, particularly their
right to self-determination and to the establishment
of their own independent State, while reaching a just
solution to the refugee crisis, pursuant to resolution
194 (III), of 11 December 1948. Negotiations must be
resumed, in keeping with the relevant mandates and
following a clear timetable, so as to bring about a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution.
The escalating violence on the ground is the
result of the illegal Israeli occupation, the use of
excessive force against the Palestinians and the crimes
committed by Israeli settlers against Palestinians with
full impunity. We should therefore not be surprised
that Palestinians are protesting all those measures,
as they violate their rights and diminish any prospect
of the establishment of their own independent State.
Accordingly, the international community must provide
international protection for the Palestinian people
while implementing and enforcing Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 605 (1987) and 904
(1994), on the applicability to the occupied Palestinian
territories of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
The continued, unjust blockade of the Gaza
Strip, which denies the people of Gaza their basic
necessities, together with the restrictions imposed
on the entry of goods and services to the Strip, has
had disastrous humanitarian effects and impedes the
peace process. Qatar is aware of the need to improve
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We will
therefore continue our humanitarian efforts and work to
assist in the reconstruction of the Strip. In that respect,
Qatar recently inaugurated schools in the Gaza Strip
named for His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al-Thani, and we will continue our efforts towards
Palestinian reconciliation.
The international community is currently
focused on achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). However, the policies imposed by the
occupying Power impede the ability of the Palestinian
people to achieve the SDGs. According to a report of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
10/32

30/11/2016

the Palestinian economy is suffering as a result of the
Israeli occupation. There should be a comprehensive,
lasting and evidence-based mechanism within the
United Nations system to determine the amount of
those economic losses.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar renews its full
support for the Palestinian people and for all efforts
aimed at achieving a lasting, comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
question of Palestine, which is at the core of the situation
in the Middle East, remains an issue of fundamental
importance for peace in the region. The international
community should have a greater sense of urgency in
resolving the Palestinian question, and concrete efforts
should be made to promote a just and complete solution
to the issue. Such a solution is in the interests of the
peoples of the Middle East, including Palestinians, and
can help promote peace and stability in the world.
The Palestinian-Israeli peace talks are now deeply
mired in an impasse, even as violent conflicts continue.
The humanitarian situation is dire. The international
community must not just let the Palestinian people
suffer, nor should it allow the Middle East peace process
to stall. Concerted efforts should be made to resolve the
Palestinian question. China calls upon the international
community to make efforts in the following ways.
First, it should adhere to the path leading towards
both the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State and the peaceful coexistence of Palestine
and Israel. That should be done on the basis of the
principle of land for peace, the two-State solution, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The international community should
promote the early resumption of the peace talks for
real, concrete outcomes.
Secondly, the international community should urge
Palestine and Israel to exercise restraint and put an end to
violent conflicts. Israel should demonstrate its sincerity
first by ceasing the construction of settlements and
the demolition of Palestinian homes in order to create
conditions for the resumption of peace talks. In the
meantime, attention should be given to the legitimate
security concerns of the countries of the region.
Thirdly, the international community should provide
a guarantee for the Middle East peace process. It should
explore a broader scope for peacebuilding efforts and
16-40731

30/11/2016

develop more effective peace-promoting mechanisms
for issues relating to the Middle East. The General
Assembly should urge the relevant Member States to
concretely implement Assembly resolutions regarding
the Palestinian question. The Security Council should
take swift action and actively respond to the legitimate
concerns of Palestine and the Arab States.
Fourthly, the international community should press
ahead with the economic reconstruction of Palestine
and strengthen economic aid and support for it, in order
to alleviate its humanitarian situation.
China is a staunch supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people. At the meeting commemorating
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People yesterday (see A/AC.183/PV.380), President Xi
Jinping sent a message that expressed China’s sympathy
and support for the Palestinian people. President Xi
Jinping emphasized the fact that China supports the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
full sovereignty on the basis of pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as Palestine’s
increased participation in international affairs in its
capacity as a State. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China is ready to work with the
international community towards the early realization
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
At present, the Middle East is still experiencing
wars and conflicts caused by intertwined hotspot
issues and the spread of terrorism. The international
community should work together for peace and stability
in the region, which is in the interests of all parties.
First, the international community should respect
the rights of the countries and peoples in the region
to choose their own political systems and pathways
of development. It should encourage parties to resolve
differences through inclusive political dialogue.
Secondly, in dealing with Middle East affairs, the
international community should uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It should respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and observe widely
recognized basic principles of international relations.
Thirdly, the international community should help
the region of the Middle East improve the well-being
of its people, develop a culture of tolerance, strive for
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

harmonious coexistence and address the root causes of
regional turmoil.
Fourthly, it should enhance coordination, tackle
both symptoms and root causes, apply unified standards
and steadfastly crack down on regional terrorist
forces in order to prevent the development and spread
of terrorism.
Together with the international community, China
is ready to make its contribution to finding a way
out of the difficult situation in the Middle East, thus
enabling the early realization of peace and development
in the region.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to thank the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and its
Chair, Ambassador Fodé Seck, for the efforts to support
the rights of the Palestinian people.
My delegation has taken note of the report of
the Committee covering the period from October
2015 to October 2016 (A/71/35), which recounts the
deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation
in the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem,
which is a cause of concern. The report has considered
and specified initiatives to relaunch the peace process.
Those are initiatives that we fully support in order
to dispel the impasse blocking the Palestinian cause.
Those initiatives would also help the Palestinian people
to live in dignity and create an independent State within
the pre-1967 borders, making it possible for them
to live side by side with Israel in peace and security.
My delegation has also taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (A/71/359).
The marking of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People has been an opportunity for
the King Mohamed VI to pledge to the Chair of the
Committee on the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People — and through the Committee to the Palestinian
people and its leadership, headed by President
Mahmoud Abbas — the full and ongoing support of
the Kingdom of Morocco for the historic and legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, in particular the right
to establish, within the borders of 4 June 1967, and with
East Jerusalem as its capital, a viable, independent State
living by side by side with Israel in peace and security
and in accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy. His Majesty has also specified that:
11/32

A/71/PV.50

“Given the obstacles that are impeding the
creation of a Palestinian State, our message
today — in view of the uncertain and confused
international and regional situation — is that we
must heighten the international community’s
awareness with respect to its duty towards the
Palestinian people, given Palestinians’ ongoing
and increasing suffering due to the intransigence
of the other party, a party which continues its
settlement activities and its aggressions in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and does everything to undermine the
two-State solution.”
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, who chairs the
Al-Quds Committee, is following with deep concern
the escalation in violence and the practices adopted
by Israel in Palestine, especially in Jerusalem, aimed
at destroying the legal status of the holy city, as
set forth in resolutions of international legitimacy,
which consider Jerusalem to be an integral part of
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. Those
practices — including recurring acts of systematic
aggression, perpetrated in the esplanades of Al-Aqsa
mosque — seek to conflate the Palestinian cause with
sectarian conflict and to make Jerusalem disintegrate
in space and in time.
In his message, His Majesty expressed our
commitment to support peace, security, equity and
stability in Palestine. We will spare no effort to
preserve the rights of the Palestinians in that city. We
will defend the legal status of the city using political,
legal and diplomatic means. We will do everything
possible and use every necessary means so that the
Al-Quds Fund — the right hand of the Al-Quds
Committee — succeeds in realizing the socioeconomic
projects to strengthen the resilience of the Palestinians,
to enable them to live in dignity and to preserve the
heritage of that city, which is a symbol par excellence
of coexistence and tolerance.
The only way to resolve the question of Palestine
is to return to the negotiating table in good faith within
a specified time frame with a view to achieving the
two-State solution, each living side by side in peace,
security, harmony and cooperation.
Morocco maintains its principled position, based
on the Arab Peace Initiative, with regard to the
achievement of peace based on the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967. The
12/32

30/11/2016

international community is therefore called on, now
more than ever, to revive the peace process within a
specific time frame and on the basis of international
legitimacy. Morocco is more than willing to engage
positively in all initiatives that will push forward the
peace process with a view to reaching a settlement that
will ensure security and stability in the region.
Mr. Uddin (Bangladesh): Bangladesh joins
the international community in reaffirming its
commitment to the rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and independence. Bangladesh
supports the cause of an independent, viable and united
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. On the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, our Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina urged all concerned parties “to
take a pragmatic approach and work together for the
attainment of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people”.
We appreciate the Secretary General’s report
(A/71/359), reflecting his abiding commitment to
resuming negotiations on the Palestinian question.
We believe that the new Secretary-General will also
remain seized of the issue of restoring the political
horizon for the negotiations to take off. We remain
mindful of the Middle East Quartet’s efforts to assess
the situation on the ground in order to move ahead with
the peace process.
The year 2017 will mark the fiftieth anniversary
of the occupation of the Palestinian territories. That
should be an occasion for mobilizing the necessary
political will of all concerned for meaningful peace
initiatives. The immediate priority for the international
community should be to send out a clear message on
putting an end to Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The illegal Israeli
settlements have been rightly identified as the main
obstacle to a two-State solution.
The Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip is about to
enter its tenth year. The humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation there remains an urgent matter of concern.
We call upon the international community to impress
upon Israel, the occupying Power, to halt its systematic
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights principles. We reiterate that the implementation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Quartet’s
road map, the Arab Peace Plan and the principle of
16-40731

30/11/2016

land for peace remains critical to achieving a durable
solution to the Palestinian question.
Bangladesh supports the Palestinian delegation’s
interest in playing an enhanced role in the United Nations.
We shall continue to support the work of the relevant
United Nations entities and committees in promoting
and protecting the rights of the Palestinian people.
Ms. Stener (Norway): The efforts to resolve
the conflict by establishing two States living side by
side in peace and security remain at an impasse. We
must strive to safeguard two decades of investment in
building the foundations for the two-State solution.
The parties need to increase their efforts to make that a
reality. We know what steps are required. All unilateral
actions that undermine the political process and turn
hope into confrontation must stop. The expansion and
legalization of settlements must stop. Violence and
incitement to violence must stop.
Norway, as the Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, the donor group for Palestine,
sees some positive signs. The Committee’s meeting in
New York on 19 September was the most constructive
meeting in years. The Palestinian Authority and Israel
reached an agreement on the electricity sector, and
important progress has been made this year on fiscal
issues. The two parties agreed on key infrastructure
projects in Gaza.
That way forward also warrants the full cooperation
of the donors. The Palestinian Authority will not be able
to close the current financial gap by itself. Continued
budget support is needed, also to enable reform. Norway
is actively working with the parties and the donors to
follow up on the results from September. When the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meets again in Brussels in
the spring, we must make sure that the electricity-debt
agreement has reached its implementation phase, and
that the parties have made serious progress on water
and energy.
The Palestinian Authority needs to reform and
strengthen its political institutions and governance
structures. The West Bank and Gaza need to be
reintegrated into one authority that fully respects the
parameters of the security agreements between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The situation in Gaza is of great concern.
Developing Gaza in an effective manner must remain
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

a top priority. Reconstruction must be accelerated. The
volume of imported construction material, including
cement, through the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
needs to be increased. The entry of construction
materials through other channels is undermining the
efforts to address dual-use and security problems in
Gaza.
The mandate and purpose of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee is to underpin such efforts to realize the
two-State solution. While progress on the economic
files is no substitute for a political solution, the parties
must continue their cooperation in order to advance the
Palestinian institutions and economy in preparation for
independence.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to start by
extending our heartfelt condolences to the people and
the Government of Cuba for the passing away of former
President Fidel Castro, who was a legendary leader.
At the outset, let me emphasize Turkey’s strong
and long-standing commitment to the establishment of
a peaceful, stable and democratic environment that is
respectful of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the Middle East. It is unfortunate that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict remains the core challenge to
attaining that goal. As the Secretary-General has said,
we should reaffirm our commitment to upholding the
rights of the Palestinian people and working to build
a future of peace, justice, security and dignity for
Palestinians and Israelis alike.
The historic injustice, continuing occupation and
Israel’s practices in contravention of international law,
particularly the systematic expansion of settlements,
erode the viability of a two-State solution. House
demolitions,
land
confiscation,
administrative
detentions, denying the Palestinians’ fundamental
rights, and attempts to undermine the status and sanctity
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif breed desperation and anger
among the Palestinians, who have been collectively
punished for decades. All of those actions combined
weaken the possibility of peaceful coexistence. They
fuel hatred, alienation and extremism in the region.
In order to overcome the current impasse, the
Palestinian people should be able to sit at the negotiating
table as the State of Palestine on an equal standing with
Israel. In that regard, the recognition of the State of
Palestine by more countries and its full integration into
international institutions are vital. To reach a just and
lasting peace, it is also crucial for the Palestinians to
13/32

A/71/PV.50

voice their legitimate demands in unity. In that regard,
Turkey continues to encourage the Palestinian groups
to move towards reconciliation and national unity.
In addition, empowering the Palestinian people and
improving their living conditions through development
assistance and investments is more urgent than ever.
Turkey will maintain its assistance programmes, in
particular those addressing the ongoing humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza and the development needs of the
West Bank.
We all agree that prospects for lasting peace are
fading away. The revitalization of the peace process is
essential to granting lives of dignity to the Palestinian
people and to achieving stability in the region. With
the Israeli occupation approaching its fiftieth year,
the international community should uphold its
responsibility and renew its engagement in reaching
a negotiated political settlement based on the twoState solution, in accordance with international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Turkey will not cease its efforts for
a just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue,
with the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders, and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

30/11/2016

have denied the Palestinian people large parts of their
territories. The separation wall is an issue of contention
between the two sides. We see the two-State solution,
with a return to the pre-1967 borders, as the only viable
option for reaching a durable peace by dialogue, in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Other mechanisms and initiatives at the bilateral
and multilateral levels, such as the road map for peace
and the Arab Peace Initiative, should be harnessed. My
delegation urges the Middle East Quartet to pursue its
mediation efforts, and calls on Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate political responsibility towards
the long-sought peace. We reiterate Kazakhstan’s
commitment to joining the multilateral effort to ensure
peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report under
this agenda item (A/71/359) and the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People for the report in document
A/71/35.

Mr. Bultrikov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan attaches
great importance to the Middle East region and
consistently strives for a political solution to the IsraeliPalestinian issue. We are seriously concerned by the
absence of real progress in the conflict, which impacts
regional and international security.

In order to resolve the question of Palestine, we
must first end the Israeli occupation of Palestine and
the Golan Heights. The international community has a
responsibility to force the Israeli occupation authorities
to comply with United Nations resolutions and to
respect the historic rights of the Palestinian people,
particularly their rights to return, to self-determination
and to create a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

In his latest report entitled “Assistance to the
Palestinian people” (A/71/87), the Secretary-General
points out the negative trends on the ground, which
according to him make the two-State solution more
distant. Kazakhstan is particularly concerned about
the gravity of the Palestinian situation and calls for
urgent action by the international community towards
its resolution in order to mitigate the suffering of
Palestinians in all aspects of their existence. The
blockades and checkpoints in Gaza, with little
scope for economic survival, are worsening the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian population, causing relations to deteriorate
and diminishing prospects for peace.

The Israel occupation authorities now consistently
flout their obligations under international law. There
is no need for us to list all of Israel’s practices, which
are already documented by the United Nations, civil
society organizations and the media. However, we
recall the war crimes committed against Gaza and in
Jerusalem. The frequent and excessive use of force
against women and children, the practice of isolating
Palestinian communities, settlement activities, crimes
committed against Palestinians, the separation wall,
political assassinations, expulsions, the expropriation
of land and the destruction of houses and holy places are
all flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The settlement process and its rapid expansion in
the occupied territories not only aggravate the conflict
but also militate against all peace processes, as they

Israel’s oppression of the Palestinian people and
its annexation and Judaization policies seek to erase
the Arab identity from Jerusalem and are carried

14/32

16-40731

30/11/2016

out systematically and on a recurring basis. The
occupation authorities pursue their violations of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and flout
international resolutions, particularly those adopted by
the Security Council. In this context, we commend the
international community’s efforts to take all necessary
measures to protect the Palestinian people; to put an
end to settlement activities, which are changing the
situation on the ground, and to the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territories; and to recognize the State of
Palestine as a full-fledged State Member of the United
Nations.
The occupation authorities have imposed an unjust
siege on the Gaza Strip since 2007. This is a form of
collective punishment that threatens the lives of hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians and violates international
humanitarian law. It is a siege that has had a negative
impact on the daily lives of the inhabitants of Gaza,
who suffer from the deterioration of infrastructure, a
lack of medication and medical equipment, electricity
shortages, high unemployment and a lack of drinking
water, not to mention the military agressions that
have killed or wounded hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians, including women, children and the elderly.
The Israeli policy of expansion has not spared schools,
especially those run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
resulting in the displacement of thousands.
My country condemns the Israeli occupation of
the Syrian Golan and the activities carried out by the
occupation forces against Syrian civilians in the Golan
in an attempt to impose an Israeli identity on its Arab
inhabitants. That constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions. We
believe that the necessary steps should be taken to
compel Israel to end its activities and comply with
Security Council resolution 497 (1981).

A/71/PV.50

the full rights of the Palestinian people on their lands,
which have been occupied since June 1967, and to
establish their independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
We stress that the inaction of the internatinal
community and its inability to find a just solution
represent an utter failure of the contemporary world
order. The international community has made repeated
calls for an end to the occupation, including through
the General Assembly and the League of Arab States,
but the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories
continues. Israeli policies include the establishment
of the apartheid wall, the displacement of Palestinian
civilians, the imposition of collective punishment and
the ongoing blockade of Gaza, whose people there are
suffering the impact of recent brutal aggressions that
constitute a complete violation of international law.
Israel’s lack of accountability for its brutal
occupation allows it to pursue its daily violations of the
human rights of the Palestinian people, including the
expansion of settlements and efforts to win acceptance
for them, violence by settlers, the exploitation of the
natural resources of the West Bank and Gaza, the
miserable state of detainees and prisoners in detention
centres and administrative detentions, the excessive use
of force, extrajudicial killings, legislation proposing the
deportation of Palestinian families and the demolition
of Palestinian houses, the forced displacement of
nomads and herder communities in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, and the blockade of Gaza and the
paucity of reconstruction there.

Mr. Bouassila (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank the members of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for their comprehensive report (A/71/35) and
welcome the important recommendations contained
therein. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the matter (A/71/359).

On this International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, we recall that the Palestinian people
have the right to protection under international law
and that Israel, as the occupying Power, is obliged to
allow the Palestinian people to exercise that right in
full. Israel’s refusal to implement the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 in the Palestinian territories is a
flagrant act of defiance of the will of the internatinal
community, and yet it acts without fear of punishment.
Those injust Israeli practices and continuous violations,
in addition to the settlement and Judaization of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, are the main obstacle hindering the twoState solution, as stated in the recent Quartet report.

The General Assembly is meeting today to discuss
the Palestinian question at a time when the prospects
for a political solution seem to be growing ever more
remote. We must aim for a solution that recognizes

This ongoing situation and violations of the rights
of the Palestinian people continue to serve as a reminder
of the responsibility of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole for the Palestinian

16-40731

15/32

A/71/PV.50

people, who have been living under occupation for
more than half a century. This Day also serves as a
reminder of the responsibility of the United Nations
and the entire international community to provide them
with the protection they deserve and to bring pressure
to bear on Israel to end that occupation. My delegation
welcomes the proposed designation of 2017 as the
international year to end the Israeli occupation.
In conclusion, Algeria reiterates its firm and
principled position in support of the Palestinian people
and their just cause, and calls on the international
community and the United Nations to put an end to the
occupying Power’s flagrant violations and to intensify
their efforts to enable the Palestinian people to establish
an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
on the territories that have been occupied since 1967.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. I should like to inform
members that the consideration of draft resolutions
A/71/L.18, A/71/L.19, A/71/L.20 and A/71/L.21 will
take place following the conclusion of the debate on
agenda item 34.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 35.
Agenda item 34
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/71/328,
A/71/328/Add.1 and A/71/359)
Draft resolutions (A/71/L.8 and A/71/L.22)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolutions
A/71/L.8 and A/71/L.22.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
world is witnessing many humanitarian crises, most
of them in the Middle East, which has been plagued
by instability for many reasons. However, we must not
forget that this instability arises historically from long
decades of injustice meted out to Arab peoples under
a seemingly indefinite occupation. Any attempt to
use the crises in the region as a pretext for diverting
attention from the Israeli occupation of Arab territories
is based on false claims that contravene the most
basic humanitarian principles and perpetuate illegal,
inhumane situations. Those situations will continue
to deteriorate as long as the occupation continues, and
16/32

30/11/2016

as long as we continue to condone the practices and
violations it inflicts on people who are supposed to
be able to enjoy the same rights as any other peoples
in the world, especially the right to freedom, selfdetermination and a homeland.
In line with the international rejection of Israel’s
illegal occupation and practices in the occupied Arab
territories, today I have the honour to introduce, on
behalf of the sponsors, two draft resolutions under
agenda item 34, “The situation in the Middle East”.
Draft resolution A/71/L.22, entitled “Jerusalem”,
stresses that the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council are the main
reference points for the issue, and that any measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its laws
or administration on the city of Jerusalem are illegal
and therefore null and void.
The international community has expressed
its grave concern about Israel’s continued illegal
settlement activities, including those regarding the socalled E-1 plan and its construction of a separation wall
in and around East Jerusalem that isolates the city from
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. In view of
our desire for peace, and in order to protect Jerusalem’s
religious character, the draft resolution takes account
of the legitimate concerns of both the Israelis and the
Palestinians by emphasizing that a solution to the issue
should ensure freedom of religion for all of the city’s
inhabitants, as well as access to the city’s holy sites for
people of all religions and nationalities. It also calls for
respect for the historical status quo in the city, in word
and practice, including in the Haram al-Sharif.
Draft resolution A/71/L.8, on the Syrian Golan,
sends an important message on behalf of the
international community that despite the unprecedented
humanitarian crisis and conflict going on in Syria,
the world must not forget that a significant part of
Syria’s territory is still under occupation. The draft
resolution stresses the fact that despite the 35 years that
have elapsed since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), Israel has yet to comply with its
provisions. It also stresses the fact that the Regulations
annexed to the 1907 Hague Convention and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 continue to apply to the
Syrian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and
declares the invalidity of Israel’s decision to impose
its laws on the Syrian Golan and the illegality of its
settlements. The draft resolution also calls on Israel to
16-40731

30/11/2016

withdraw completely from the Syrian Golan to the line
of 4 June 1967.
The peoples of our region continue to suffer from
war and aggression and look forward to achieving
peace, stability and coexistence. As the resolutions
of the General Assembly show, those goals cannot be
achieved without serious commitment and political
will on the part of Israel to fully withdrawing from
all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, in line
with the resolutions of the Assembly and the Security
Council and on the basis of the principle of land for
peace and the standards of international law.
On behalf of Egypt and the sponsors, I hope that
all Member States will support the draft resolutions,
and I urge everyone to vote in their favour in order
to demonstrate our solidarity and commitment to our
international goals in upholding the noble purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the delegation of the Arab Republic
of Egypt for introducing draft resolutions A/71/L.8
and A/71/L.22, entitled “The Syrian Golan” and
“Jerusalem”, respectively. I would also like to thank the
States that have voted in favour of the resolution on the
Syrian Golan in the past.
Every year, the General Assembly considers an
agenda item on the situation in the Middle East, and
has done so since its twenty-fifth session, in 1970.
Every year, the Assembly calls on Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories, emphasizing that any
measure taken by Israel, the occupying Power in the
Arab territories, to impose its laws and authority on
Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian Golan is unlawful,
illegitimate and null and void. The Assembly’s
resolutions on the subject consort perfectly with
the position unanimously expressed by the Security
Council in its adoption of resolution 487 (1980), on
occupied Jerusalem, and resolution 497 (1981), on the
Syrian Golan. They rejected the Israeli occupation’s
provocative, unilateral decisions to annex Jerusalem
and the Golan and considered them null and void, with
no legal consequences.
We are once again debating this agenda item today,
50 years after Israel’s occupation of Arab territories
and in the face of severe lethargy on the part of the
international community and Israel’s violation of
Palestine’s holy sites. All of that is going on while
Israel is escalating its acts of aggression and settlement
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

activities through, for example, the proposed law on
settlement regularization, which is aimed at legitimizing
those colonies, and the law banning amplification of
the call to prayer in Jerusalem.
Israel’s occupation of the Syrian Golan is part
of that sad picture. Israel has continued to refuse to
restore the Golan to Syria and to respect the resolutions
of international law, particularly Security Council
resolution 497 (1981). It continues to confiscate land
in the occupied Golan and to pursue its settlement
activities, plundering the area’s resources, distorting
historical realities, looting antiquities and laying mines.
It prevents Syrian citizens from pursuing educational
programmes and deprives them of the right to be
identified as Syrian nationals and of the right to build
hospitals in their own country.
I cannot fail to mention, too, Israel’s policies
of terrorism, repression, arbitrary detention, sham
hearings and sentences, and ongoing aggressive,
racist policies towards our brothers in the occupied
Syrian Golan. We recently saw Israel’s military court
sentence one young Syrian, Amal Abu Saleh, to seven
years and eight months in prison, and another, Bashira
Mahmoud, to 22 months because they blocked the path
of an ambulance that was transporting two terrorists
from the Al-Nusra Front and drove through the village
of Majdal Shams in occupied Syria. Their sentences are
a demonstration of Israel’s involvement with terrorist
groups in Syria and its flagrant violations of Security
Council resolutions related to the fight against the
terrorists of Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front.
We also remind the international community of
the situation of Syria’s Mandela — the freedom fighter
Sedqi Al-Maqet. He was re-arrested by the Israeli
occupation forces in March 2015, after 27 years in
prison in Israel’s detention centres, because he exposed
Israel’s cooperation with the terrorists of the Al-Nusra
Front in the area of separation. We urge that pressure be
put on Israel to free without delay Sedqi Al-Maqet, Iyad
Al-Johari and Amal Abu Saleh. We also call for Bashira
Mahmoud’s sentence to be revoked. The Government
of Syria has appealed to the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and other relevant entities to help
achieve that humane goal. It seems that Mr. Mladenov
is not aware of the serious situation of our citizens in
the occupied Syrian Golan.
Since those events in Syria began, Israel, the
occupying Power, has added a new chapter to its record
17/32

A/71/PV.50

of aggressions and violations of the separation of
forces agreement and of Security Council resolutions,
including those related to the fight against terrorism. We
have seen Israel’s support for armed terrorist groups in
the area of separation, including the Al-Nusra Front and
Da’esh, which are blacklisted by the Security Council.
Israel has been in contact with both groups along
the ceasefire line and has facilitated their transit and
movement in the southern part of the area of separation
and towards the north. Israel has clearly and blatantly
provided them with logistic and medical support and
enabled them to return to Syrian territory so that they
can continue their terrorist activities there. That is done
openly and with the knowledge of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which has not lifted a finger
to prevent it.
We can no longer tolerate the fact that the States
Members of the United Nations cooperate routinely
and in solidarity with this occupying force, particularly
after the statement issued on 17 April by Israel’s Head of
Government at the provocative Cabinet meeting held by
the occupying Power in the Golan, in which he said that
“the Golan will always remain in Israel’s hands [and]
Israel will never withdraw from the Golan Heights”.
We have heard no comment, condemnation, rejection
or reservation expressed by the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat or the Security Council in response to such
provocations.
However, the citizens of the occupied Syrian Golan
are standing up to such daily declarations, which
clearly and blatantly violate international law and
United Nations resolutions, remaining attached to their
Syrian Arab nationality and their loyalty to Syria and
opposed to such practices and procedures on the part
of Israel. The Syrian Golan is an integral part of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Syrian Arab nationality is an
unchanging criterion for us, passed down from father
to son. Our lands are property sacred to the children
of Syria and we do not recognize any Israeli decision
that aims to annex us to Israel. We categorically reject
any resolutions or decisions of the Israeli Government
designed to usurp our Syrian Arab identity.
Today the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic reaffirms that Syria’s sovereignty over the
occupied Syrian Golan within the 1967 lines cannot be
negotiated or bargained over. Syria’s demands in the
pursuit of peace are not painful concessions. The lands
that have been usurped and violated must be returned
18/32

30/11/2016

to their legitimate owners. Sooner or later, the Israeli
colonizers must leave our lands in the Golan.
In that regard, the main question is, how long will
Israel remain above the law, evade accountability and
continue its bellicose practices? The General Assembly
must take the necessary measures to contain Israel and
compel it to end the occupation of the Arab territories
and withdraw from them, in line with pre-1967 borders,
instead of usurping that area. I call on States to support
draft resolutions A/71/L.8, on the Syrian Golan, and
A/71/L.22, on Jerusalem.
Ms. AlDuraie (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation would like to express its support
for the Secretary-General for his efforts to strengthen
international peace and security and his close monitoring
of the situation in the Middle East. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General in documents A/71/328
and Add.1 and support all international efforts aimed at
laying the foundation for regional security and stability.
We will continue to take part in all efforts that seek to
strengthen international peace and security.
The failed peace process in the Middle East is a
major challenge for the international community. It
reflects our paralysis in spite of the pressure that has
been exerted on Israel for more than 60 years in an
attempt to compel it to stop the settlement building
and continued violations of the rights of Palestinians,
who remain the target of systematic acts of aggression.
My country offers its full support and solidarity to
the Palestinian people so that they can achieve their
aspirations to an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as it capital, in line with 4 June 1967
borders, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
We again call on the international community to
compel Israel to implement Security Council resolution
497 (1981), which calls on Israel to withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan. We support all measures
undertaken by the fraternal Lebanese Republic aimed
at preserving its stability, security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We stress the need for Israel to
cease its continued violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty,
withdraw from all occupied territory and fully
implement Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
My delegation is extremely concerned about the
ongoing crisis and bloody conflict in Syria, which
is now in its sixth year. We are concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, the displacement
16-40731

30/11/2016

of 13 million Syrians inside and outside of the country
and the death of more than 300,000 people. Syrian
refugees make up the largest refugee community in the
world.
In that connection, we cannot ignore the situation in
the city of Aleppo. Statistics show that the humanitarian
situation continues to worsen. Two hundred and
seventy-five thousand people are under siege in eastern
Aleppo. That is half of those besieged in Syria, for
some 582,000 people are under siege throughout the
country. In that regard, once again, we condemn the
deliberate targeting of all residential areas, as well
as civilian and medical infrastructure across Syria,
including the indiscriminate use of barrels bombs and
internationally prohibited weapons. We stress the need
for all perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity to be brought to justice.
The State of Kuwait reiterates its support for United
Nations and other international efforts to reach a
political solution in Syria, in line with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015), which sets a clear path to such
a solution based on the first Geneva Communiqué of
2012 (S/2012/523, annex) and the Vienna statements
regarding the establishment of a transitional governing
body with full executive powers to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people to a life of freedom and
dignity in a way that would preserve Syria’s stability,
sovereignty and independence.
In that regard, in an effort to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people, in 2013, 2014 and 2015 my
country hosted three international donor conferences in
support of humanitarian efforts there. My country has
pledged $1.3 billion, most of which has been disbursed
to specialized agencies of the United Nations and other
intergovernmental and non-governmental humanitarian
organizations. My country also co-chaired the fourth
conference of support for the humanitarian situation in
Syria, which was held in London early this year.
The State of Kuwait supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, to find a solution to the
crisis in Yemen in order to reach a consensus that would
restore security and stability in Yemen and end the
bloodshed and the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni
people, based on the three terms of reference — the
outcome of the national dialogue, the Gulf initiative and
its implementation mechanism — as well as relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

2216 (2015). We reiterate our rejection of all unilateral
measures, including those announced by the Houthis
and by the general public, to establish a Government
of Salvation. We know that the Government of Yemeni
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour is the
internationally recognized legitimate Government.
Kuwait reiterates its support for the security and
stability of Yemen, which would preserve its sovereignty
and its territorial integrity. We are committed to the
Yemeni political process and seek to ensure its success
in line with the Security Council resolutions. In April,
Kuwait hosted the Yemeni peace negotiations under
the auspices of the United Nations. We hope that those
negotiations will resume as soon as possible so that
the various Yemeni parties can achieve peace and
restore stability and security in that Arab country, in
order to move forward on the path to development and
reconstruction.
The State of Kuwait reiterates its support to the
Iraqi Government. We commend Iraqi achievements
in combating terrorism and Da’esh. We support all
measures taken by the Government to preserve the
security, stability and territorial integrity of Iraq in
a way that would preserve security and safety of all
sectors of the fraternal Iraqi people.
With regard to the disturbing situation in Libya,
Kuwait welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
and the Presidency Council to implement the Libyan
Political Agreement. We hope that such an agreement
will help the Libyan people preserve the security,
stability and independence of their country.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Unfortunately, the situation in the
Middle East region, the cradle of world religions
and civilizations, remains tense. The clashes on the
West Bank of the Jordan River, acts of terrorism and
outbreaks of violence have led to the suffering of
Palestinian civilians and the Israelis. The situation is
worsening, with continued violations of the ceasefire
around the Gaza Strip. Against the backdrop of the
deteriorating situation, we see increasing radicalism
among the Palestinian population, especially among
youth, and extremist views are increasing on both sides.
We strongly condemn any acts of violence, which whip
up an already difficult atmosphere in the region and
cause immense suffering to civilians, both in Israel and
in the occupied Palestinian territories.
19/32

A/71/PV.50

We are also concerned about the unilateral activities
of Israel aimed at creating facts on the ground. The
Israeli authorities, in spite of the stern condemnations
by the international community, continue to build and
expand settlements in the occupied territories, and at a
rate that will enable them to reach a point of no return
in the near future. We have noted with grave concern
the reports that a draft bill is under consideration by
the Knesset that would establish a procedure for the
legalization of outlying settlements and the various
facilities that have been built on private Palestinian
land. The expropriation of land in the West Bank
area continues, as does the destruction of Palestinian
homes. We are convinced that all of those activities
only undermine the realization of a two-State solution
aimed at solving the Palestinian problem. The Israelis,
the Palestinians and the international community all
agree that there is no alternative to a two-State solution.
The conflict zone will be stabilized only if there are
opportunities for a renewal of substantive talks on the
basis of generally recognized international decisions.
In order to overcome the deadlock in the peace process,
the body approved by Security Council, namely, the
Middle East Quartet of international negotiators, should
be actively engaged. On 1 July the Quartet issued its
report (S/2016/595, annex) on the situation with regard
to the Palestine-Israel conflict settlement process, and
it has become a landmark in the context of international
efforts to find a Middle East settlement.
The report not only gives a real description of
Palestinian-Israeli activities, but also includes concrete
recommendations aimed at safeguarding the prospects
for a two-State solution. We are convinced that sincere
implementation by the parties of those recommendations
will contribute to taking the situation out of its current
deadlock and to overcoming mutual distrust. However,
quite frankly, we must recognize that the provisions
contained in the document are not being complied with.
That is shown by our assessment of the situation in the
Palestinian territories.
In the context of international efforts to find a way
out of the deadlock in the Middle East peace process,
Russia has been carrying out a consistent policy with
all the interested parties. We support intensive contacts
with participants in the conflict and with regional
States. We reaffirm that the invitation proffered to
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu still
remains in effect. Under the auspices of the President
of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, a meeting is
20/32

30/11/2016

to be held in Moscow to discuss optimal ways to find a
way out of the deadlock in the peace process. We note
that the Palestinian and Israeli leaders have repeatedly
reaffirmed their fundamental readiness to carry out
such an initiative.
We call for the speedy restoration of Palestinian
unity, based on the Palestine Liberation Organization’s
political platform and the Arab Peace Initiative. With
the Palestinians working together, it will be much
easier to fight for the realization of their legitimate
aspirations to establish a sovereign, independent State,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
We support the Palestinian leadership’s quest to form a
national unity Government and to hold presidential and
parliamentary elections.
We are seriously concerned about the situation in the
Gaza Strip, where the humanitarian situation continues
to be very serious. There is not enough drinking water,
there are disruptions in electricity supplies and the
unemployment rate is among the highest in the world.
All of that contributes to radicalization among local
residents, which is being used by extremists. We agree
with the view of the international community on the
need to lift the blockade on Gaza.
Because of the difficult humanitarian situation
faced by Palestinian refugees, the Russian Federation
in November decided to provide a yearly voluntary
contribution to the budget of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East.
Next year marks 50 years since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which is one
of the main documents whose international legal basis
is generally recognized for a comprehensive Middle
East settlement. Unfortunately, we have to note that,
after half a century, this outmoded, chronic conflict
is still far from being resolved, and the prospects for
a settlement still remain vague. The relative calm of
recent times in the Arab conflict should not mislead us.
The situation remains tense and fraught with danger in
the context of the conflagrations that are taking place in
the Middle East region, which are fraught with the most
serious consequences. But this anniversary of the most
important Security Council decision on a Middle East
settlement should and must become for us a stimulus to
achieve progress in that most important area of world
politics.
16-40731

30/11/2016

Ms. Ibrahim (Maldives): On behalf of the Republic
of the Maldives, I wish to express our deep appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his reports under this
agenda item (A/71/328, A/71/328/Add.1 and A.71/359)
and his good offices, and for the continuing efforts to
find lasting solutions to the various conflicts that still
plague the Middle East.
This debate is taking place at a timely juncture with
regard to the situation in the Middle East, especially
at a time when the world is apprehensive over the
grave humanitarian situation in Syria, particularly the
escalating violence in Aleppo. The Maldives remains
gravely concerned about the escalating violence and
conflict in the region as a whole. The Middle East is the
cradle of civilization and a centre of deep knowledge,
tradition and culture, and peace in the region is crucial
for its people and for the world as a whole.
Peace is both an enabler and a by-product of
development, for there is no peace without development
and no development without peace. The situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory illustrates that reality.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer under the
Israeli occupation. With no end in sight to the conflict
and the violence, basic necessities such as food, water,
employment, working institutions and systems remain
compromised. Over the past 70 years, generations
have grown up in an atmosphere of hatred, fear and
violence. Nonetheless, the occupation of the Palestinian
territories and the incessant violation of the human
rights of the Palestinian people continue unchecked.
The failure to realize the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people epitomizes the inability of the
international community to work together to bring an
end to the Palestinian conflict despite countless United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Oslo
Accords, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map, which strive to overcome the Israeli occupation
and apartheid system in place. The perpetual hostility
and conflict in occupied Palestine have compromised
peace and security in the region for decades. A solution
is necessary. The Maldives reiterates its call for the
full realization of the right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people. The Maldives stands with Palestine
in its quest to establish its own State alongside Israel on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The Maldives notes with grave concern the events
that are taking place in Syria, particularly Aleppo,
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

which the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs characterized as “our generation’s shame” in
his briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.7795).
For years, we have watched the violence in Syria
escalate and the death toll reach into the thousands.
It is now into the hundreds of thousands, with even
more people displaced and injured and nearly a million
persons under siege. The Maldives is raising its voice
at the United Nations, doing all it can to support the
Syrian people — the Syrian men, women and children
who are suffering endlessly. We call upon all parties to
set politics aside and take the side of humankind.
While Syria is being destroyed, the conflict is
causing an unending web of violence and destabilization
in the entire Middle East region. The vacuum created
in many parts of the region has led to the birth of the
so-called Islamic State, which uses the Islamic religion
to falsely legitimize barbaric and relentless violations
of humanitarian law. The Maldives condemns attempts
to attribute any terrorism to any religion, culture or
tradition. We condemn any such acts committed in the
name of Islam. We condemn terrorism and terrorist
attacks in all their forms and dimensions.
In today’s interconnected world, the effects of
conflict in the region cannot be contained, nor should
they be. The international community has to step up,
take action and present a united front and a unified
voice against terrorism, against violence and against
oppression. We cannot stress enough the importance of
political compromise and the productive engagement
of the international community to resolve the many
conflicts in the Middle East. The Maldives looks to
the United Nations and the international community to
make renewed efforts for a lasting solution in a region
that has been mired in strife for far too long.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I thank the President for
convening this important meeting. I would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the people of Palestine
on the occasion of yesterday’s International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People.
Instability in the Middle East has had repercussions
beyond the region, the most prominent manifestations
being the waves of refugees and migrants and the spread
of violent extremism. The international community
has dealt with those issues with mixed results at best.
However, we must be aware that they are just symptoms
of deeper issues that we should not lose sight of.
21/32

A/71/PV.50

In the Security Council open debate on the situation
in the Middle East in July (see S/PV.7736), Japan
stressed that the restoration and the strengthening of
governance must be promoted in order to create an
inclusive and tolerant society that is resilient against
extremism. Those efforts cannot be completed
overnight, and the international community must be
united in making such efforts.
With regard to the question of Palestine, a number of
resolutions will be adopted during the current session of
the General Assembly. However, we should not consider
that that represents sufficient international effort to
bring about a peaceful solution to the issue. Now more
than ever, we need actions that have a tangible impact
on the ground. With regard to Palestine, it seems that
we have actually moved away from achieving a twoState solution.
Settlement activities by Israel continue in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. Settlement activities are in
violation of international law. Japan calls upon Israel to
immediately freeze such activities.
At the same time, we continue to see violence from
both sides, with varying degrees of intensity. Cases
of violence indicate that a one-State reality is not in
the interests of either party, in view of the persisting
violence and turmoil. I would like to call upon the
leaders of both sides to renew their commitment to a
two-State solution and to take concrete steps towards
the resumption of peace negotiations.
Japan stands ready to cooperate with initiatives
that will have a positive impact in promoting a twoState solution. We have also continued our own efforts
to create an environment more conducive to peace
negotiations. One example is the Jericho Agro-Industrial
Park, the flagship project of our Corridor for Peace and
Prosperity initiative. We have continuously invested in
the Park, which is a medium- to long-term project to
promote the sustainability of the Palestinian economy,
in cooperation with Israel, Jordan and Palestine. The
project is approaching its tenth year, and now we have
three Palestinian companies operating and creating
jobs. We envisage that in the coming years the products
made in the Park will be exported through Jordan to the
region and beyond. We believe that a more sustainable
Palestinian economy will make the two-State solution
more viable, and cooperation among the parties through
the project enhances the spirit of coexistence.
22/32

30/11/2016

Achieving a two-State solution means achieving
coexistence between Israel and Palestine. In order to
facilitate confidence-building between the two, Japan
has been inviting future leaders in various fields
from both sides to Japan since 1997. During their
stay in Japan, they have a chance to engage in various
activities together and exchange views. We have held
that programme every year for about 20 years, and over
200 people have participated so far. I had the chance to
meet with one of the participants from the Israeli side.
He appreciated his experience very much and told me
that before the programme he had never had a chance to
talk in depth with a Palestinian. We are looking forward
to again welcoming five Israelis and five Palestinians
next month.
There is no easy solution to the question of
Palestine, but we believe that even when the political
process is stagnant, there is something that we can do to
create an environment more conducive to peace. Japan
stands ready to continue its efforts together with the
international community.
The Middle East today is awash with issues, many
of which are symptoms of deeper problems. While
symptoms themselves are often quite difficult, we must
keep in mind the necessity of embodying inclusiveness
and coexistence in the region so as to achieve enduring
peace. If the parties cannot share a hope for such
a future, it is very difficult for them to sit down and
negotiate.
Japan believes that governance, inclusiveness
and coexistence are the keys to bringing peace to that
region of great diversity. We will continue to engage in
the region with that perspective in mind.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Before moving on to the voting, I would like
to inform members that action on draft resolutions
A/71/L.8 and A/71/L.22 will be taken after we take
action on draft resolutions A/71/L.18, A/71/L.19,
A/71/L.20 and A/71/L.22, which were submitted under
agenda item 35.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 34.
16-40731

30/11/2016

Agenda item 35 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/71/L.18, A/71/L.19,
A/71/L.20 and A/71/L.21)
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolutions one by one, members are
reminded that they will have an opportunity to explain
their vote on all four draft resolutions before and after
action is taken on all draft resolutions.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to inform
the Assembly of an oral revision of draft resolution
A/71/L.18, which the the sponsors have requested
the Secretariat to announce. The document symbol
in footnote 7 of this draft resolution, which reads
“UNCTAD/APP/2016/1”, should read “TD/B/63/3”.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/71/L.18, as orally revised,
A/71/L.19, A/71/L.20 and A/71/L.21.
Before giving the floor to delegations in
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): I would like to begin by
speaking of the deadly fires that raged in Israel for over
a week, which were put out in the past few days. As a
consequence of those fires, dozens of Israeli citizens
have been hospitalized and tens of thousands have been
forced to evacuate their homes. Fortunately, no lives
were lost in that catastrophe, but hundreds of families
watched their homes disintegrate in front of them and
saw the places of their precious family moments go up
in smoke.
Sadly, some, including Hamas, chose that moment
of tragedy to celebrate the terrible human loss and even
to encourage further deliberate acts of arson. While
the fires brought out such appalling and heartless
behaviour, the tragedy also brought out the best in
humankind. Nations from around the world came to our
aid when we needed them most. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank those that have already supplied
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

crucial help, namely, Cyprus, Greece, Italy, the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Croatia, France, Spain, Azerbaijan,
Ukraine, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, the Palestinian Authority and all other States
that offered their assistance. Let me add that the sight of
Israeli and Palestinian firefighters standing side by side
to fight those fires is a symbol of hope for the future.
On 29 November 1947, the United Nations adopted
resolution 181 (II), known as the partition resolution,
which recommended the creation of independent Arab
and Jewish States living side by side. While the State of
Israel accepted that resolution, the Arab world rejected
it and launched a war against the newly established
State. Sixty-nine years later, it is shameful to see
how that important date has become an annual event
dedicated to bashing Israel at the United Nations, and
how some countries, many of which spoke here today
and yesterday, have yet to accept the existence of Israel
in the Middle East and abuse this Hall to spread baseless
allegations against my country.
The Assembly is convened here today to vote on a
series of draft resolutions that serve those who prefer
to promote a biased narrative that does not serve
either side. The six draft resolutions that are being
considered here today not only fail to promote dialogue
or build trust, but they also create an organizational
infrastructure that abuses United Nations funding to
allow anti-Israel activities to take place under United
Nations auspices.
At a time when the world is facing many devastating
conflicts and humanitarian disasters, it is regrettable
to see that the Assembly is meeting once again to
adopt draft resolutions that divert precious financial
resources to wasteful and politicized bodies whose
only purpose is to attack Israel. Those bodies include
the special information programme on the question
of Palestine and the Division for Palestinian Rights
of the Secretariat — the only Secretariat bodies that
are dedicated solely to one specific conflict, or more
precisely, to the public relations activities of one side
to the conflict — as well as the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which is a hotbed of anti-Israel activity.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is tasked with promoting
the Palestinian political agenda at the United Nations.
The Committee organizes United Nations events and
international conferences specializing in presenting
23/32

A/71/PV.50

false facts and half-truths and in promoting an agenda
clearly directed against Israel. The Committee has also
accredited a number of non-governmental organizations,
some of which call for the boycott of Israel, and they do
so as invited guests of the Committee at United Nations
events held on United Nations premises.
That outrageous Committee is being supported
by an office in the Secretariat, namely, the Division
for Palestinian Rights, which runs the United Nations
anti-Israel propaganda programme, mobilizing the
resources of the Department of Political Affairs to
promote their agenda. Such a division is unparalleled
in this institution. There is no other office in the
Secretariat that runs a propaganda programme against
a State Member of the United Nations, and does so
using United Nations resources.
As for the special information programme on the
question of Palestine, that is a programme led by the
Department of Public Information, which has offered
a biased and misleading narrative about our region
since its inception. Circulating prejudiced materials
under the banner of the United Nations undermines
this institution’s integrity and impartiality. Hence, it is
crucial to make sure that no United Nations platform
is being abused in order to disseminate materials
promoting anti-Israel messages, including social media
platforms.
Unfortunately, the recent International Media
Seminar on Peace in the Middle East, organized by the
Department of Public Information, which took place
in August in Pretoria, was an unfortunate reminder
of the all-too-common distortion and manipulation of
information by a United Nations body. As is evident
from the seminar’s discussions, debates and panels,
it was a completely one-sided event, presenting
only the Palestinian narrative. Shamefully, some of
the speakers expressed open sympathy with the the
boycott, divestment and sanctions movement, which is
conducting a global campaign of misinformation and
outright slander against Israel.
In the light of that information, it is quite baffling
why the United Nations, which faces a severe budgetary
deficit, would spend approximately $6.5 million a
year on those bodies, which are dedicated solely to
promoting the Palestinian narrative. Those who vote in
favour of these resolutions should ask themselves: Why
is the United Nations giving that money to promote
24/32

30/11/2016

a purely anti-Israel agenda instead of allocating it to
those who are in dire need of humanitarian assistance?
These outrageous and wasteful resolutions are not
only counterproductive, but they also become more
detached from reality with each passing year. Since
September 2015, terror attacks against Israelis have
claimed the lives of 42 citizens and injured more than
600. Yet these draft resolutions include no mention
of those victims, let alone take a stand condemning
the incitement that fuelled the vile acts of terror that
brought about their terrible fates.
Furthermore, the draft resolutions under discussion
do not mention the internationally recognized terror
organization Hamas — not even once. That is an
organization that fires rockets towards Israel and
builds terror tunnels, in a clear threat to the safety and
security of both Israeli citizens and the population of
Gaza alike.
The list can go on and on, but the bottom line is
very clear: selective and biased resolutions will not
bring the two sides together; it will only drive them
further apart.
Another concerning element of these resolutions is
the shameful refusal to use the term “Temple Mount”.
The Temple Mount, what we call “Har Habayit” in
Hebrew, is the holiest site in the Jewish faith and a place
sacred to all Abrahamic religions — Islam, Christianity
and Judaism. Yet two of the draft resolutions that will
be voted on here today omit any reference to the Jewish
or Christian connection to the Temple Mount. That
deliberate omission represents much more than just
words on paper. It is a testament to the persistent refusal
of the Palestinians and their supporters to recognize the
historical connection of the Jewish people to that holy
site and to the city of Jerusalem.
The bitter reality is that the six draft resolutions
offer a one-sided account of the situation and only
perpetuate a zero-sum approach to the conflict. They
send a message that the only way to support the
Palestinians is by criticizing Israel. That idea is in
stark contradiction to the cooperation we witnessed
just recently between the two sides in a time of stress.
Let no one delude themselves: supporting these draft
resolutions and the inherent bias against Israel at the
United Nations will not advance the cause of peace; it
will only make peace harder to achieve. I call on all
the Members that genuinely wish to assist in achieving
a durable solution for Israel and the Palestinians to
16-40731

30/11/2016

take a stand against these resolutions and take steps
to facilitate direct negotiations, without preconditions,
between the parties.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/71/L.18 as orally revised, A/71/L.19,
A/71/L.20 and A/71/L.21.
We turn first to draft resolution A/71/L.18, as
orally revised, entitled “Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.18,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution, as orally revised: Bangladesh, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
Malaysia, Mali and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/71/L.18 as orally revised, was
adopted by 100 votes to 9, with 55 abstentions
(resolution 71/20).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.19, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.19,
the following countries have also become sponsors:
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
Malaysia, Mali and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
25/32

A/71/PV.50

Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/71/L.19 was adopted by 98 votes
to 9, with 57 abstentions (resolution 71/21).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.20, entitled
“Special information programme on the question of
Palestine of the Department of Public Information of
the Secretariat”.
26/32

30/11/2016

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/71/L.20, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia and Mali.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
16-40731

30/11/2016

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, Nauru, Paraguay, Togo,
Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/71/L.20 was adopted by 153
votes to 7, with 7 abstentions (resolution 71/22).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.21, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.21,
the following countries have also become sponsors:
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, Malaysia, Mali and Vietnam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Honduras,
Guinea, Paraguay, Tonga, Vanuatu

Papua

New

Draft resolution A/71/L.21 was adopted by 153
votes to 7, with 7 abstentions (resolution 71/23).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to speak in explanation
of vote concerning resolution 71/21, entitled “Division
for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
Mexico recognizes the role that must be played
by the Organization to raise awareness and support at
the international level for the rights of the Palestinian
people and the urgency of achieving a peaceful
settlement to the question of Palestine on the basis of
international law and resolutions of the United Nations.
Mexico nevertheless wishes to stress the importance of
27/32

A/71/PV.50

making more efficient and rational use of the resources
of the Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat
in carrying out its functions.
The Government of Mexico reiterates its support
for the self-determination of the Palestinian people
and its search for a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict so as to
realize the two-State solution that permits both parties
to live within secure and internationally recognized
borders.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): I have the honour to speak in
explanation of vote following the adoption of resolutions
71/20 through 71/23.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 71/20,
entitled, “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”, on the understanding
that the reference in paragraph 2 to the achievement
of the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders should be interpreted in the same manner as set
out in paragraph 1 of resolution 71/23, entitled, “Peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine”, namely, de by
side in peace and security within recognized borders,
based on the pre-1967 borders.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): I am speaking in
explanation of vote on resolution 71/23, entitled,
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
The EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation
for the successful outcome of our negotiations on
a number of resolutions on which action was taken
by the General Assembly. As an outcome of those
negotiations, the EU confirms its consolidated voting
pattern on those resolutions.
At this time, we would like to place on record that,
with regard to all resolutions that are adopted during
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly,
the European Union and its member States consider
that whenever the term “Palestinian Government” is
mentioned, this refers to the Palestinian Authority.
Furthermore, the use of the term “Palestine” in any of
those resolutions cannot be construed as recognition of
a State of Palestine, and its use is without prejudice to
the individual positions of the Member States on that
issue, and hence on the question of the validity of an
accession to the conventions and treaties mentioned
therein. We also point out that the European Union as
28/32

30/11/2016

a whole has not expressed a legal qualification with
regard to the term “forced displacement”, which is
used in a number of draft resolutions submitted under
agenda items 38 and 50.
Some of the resolutions adopted today also refer
to the holy sites in Jerusalem. The EU is concerned
about the worrying developments in that regard and the
recurrent violent clashes at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The EU recalls the special significance of
the holy sites and calls for upholding the status quo
put in place in 1976 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif in line with previous understandings and
respect to Jordan’s special role. The EU stresses the
need for language on the holy sites of Jerusalem to
reflect their importance and historical significance
for the three monotheistic religions and to respect
religious and cultural sensitivities The EU recalls that
the terminology used in the resolutions does not imply
a change of its sense with regard to the Temple Mount/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/.
Mr. Sanabria de Montiel (Paraguay) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation would like to make an
explanation of vote on resolutions 71/20 and 71/21.
The Republic of Paraguay firmly believes that
dialogue and direct and good-faith negotiations
between the parties are the only path to achieve a
final, just and lasting peace. That is why we call for
the resumption of the negotiating process and for the
international community to support such efforts. The
Republic of Paraguay reaffirms the need to achieve
a just settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and other
relevant decisions whereby two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
The Republic of Paraguay believes that these
resolutions will not contribute to the peaceful settlement
of the conflict between the parties, and that is why it
abstained in the voting.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
16-40731

30/11/2016

Agenda item 34 (continued)
Draft resolutions (A/71/L.8 and A/71/L.22)
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
they will have an opportunity to explain their votes on
the two draft resolutions before and after action is taken
on each.
We turn first to draft resolution A/71/L.8, entitled
“The Syrian Golan”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.8,
the following countries have become sponsors: Brunei
Darussalam and Malaysia.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/71/L.8 was adopted by 103 votes
to 6, with 56 abstentions (resolution 71/24).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/71/L.22, entitled “Jerusalem”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution A/71/L.22, the following countries have
become sponsors: Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, Malaysia, Mali and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
29/32

A/71/PV.50

Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Guatemala, Honduras,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/71/L.22 was adopted by 149
votes to 7, with 8 abstentions (resolution 71/25).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of
Argentina and Brazil to explain our votes.
As we have done in previous years in regard to
the resolution concerning the Syrian Golan, which the
30/32

30/11/2016

Assembly has just adopted (resolution 71/24), Brazil
and Argentina voted in favour of the resolution because
we believe that its fundamental nature is related to the
unlawfulness of the acquisition of territory by force.
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter of the United
Nations prohibits the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity of a State.
At the same time, I would like to clarify the position
of our delegations with regard to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our vote does not prejudge the content of
that paragraph, in particular the reference to the line
of 4 June 1967. Brazil and Argentina believe that it is
important to advance in the search for a solution for the
Israeli-Syrian track of the conflict in the Middle East
in order to end the occupation of the Golan Heights.
Therefore, on behalf of the Governments of Brazil and
Argentina, we again stress the importance of resuming
negotiations to find a definitive solution to the situation
in the Syrian Golan, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): The
United States remains profoundly troubled by the
submission of a disproportionate number of one-sided
General Assembly resolutions designed to condemn
Israel. That one-sided approach damages the prospects
for peace by undermining trust between parties and the
kind of international support that is critical to achieving
peace. All parties to the conflict have responsibilities
for ending it, and we are disappointed that United
Nations Members continually single out Israel without
acknowledging the responsibilities and difficult steps
that must be taken on all sides. It is manifestly unjust
that the United Nations, an institution founded on the
idea that all nations should be treated equally, is so
often used by Member States to treat Israel unequally.
The United States votes against one-sided
resolutions in the General Assembly, especially those
that renew the mandates of committees that use valuable
United Nations resources, because we believe that they
are counterproductive to the goal of achieving peace
that we all share. Of these annual resolutions, three
United Nations bodies in particular reflect the bias,
redundancy and unnecessary cost of such resolutions:
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, the Division for Palestinian
Rights and the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
16-40731

30/11/2016

Territories. Those bodies waste limited United Nations
resources, costing approximately $6.1 million in 2015,
but they do nothing to contribute to peace in the region
and they perpetuate the perception of a United Nations
that unfairly focuses on Israel.
The United States remains firmly committed to
advancing a two-State solution. We continue to urge all
sides to take steps to stop violence, improve conditions
on the ground in the West Bank and Gaza, and move
the diplomatic process forward. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence and terrorism directed at unarmed
civilians, including stabbings, shootings, arson and
vehicular attacks, as well as the statements glorifying
them.
The United States will support Israel’s right
to defend innocent civilians against terrorism, and
we mourn any loss of innocent life. It is critical that
every possible effort be made to show restraint and to
de-escalate tensions. I would like to reiterate that the
United States has consistently opposed every effort
to delegitimize Israel or to undermine its security at
the United Nations, and we will continue to do so with
vigour.
However, our continued opposition to the resolution
on Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem and occupied Golan,
should not be understood to mean that we support
settlement activity. On the contrary, we view Israeli
settlement activity as illegitimate and corrosive to the
cause of peace. Israeli settlement activity threatens the
viability of a two-State solution. It also moves Israel
ever closer to cementing a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation, which is fundamentally inconsistent with
Israel’s future as a Jewish and democratic State.
While the United States remains firmly opposed
to Israeli settlement activity, that does not justify the
repetitive and one-sided General Assembly resolutions
facilitating the condemnation of Israel. Those
resolutions set back our collective efforts to advance a
peaceful resolution of the conflict between the Israelis
and the Palestinians. In addition, they damage the
institutional credibility of the United Nations, which
should be a concern for us all.
Such one-sided resolutions will not advance peace.
Only hard choices made in the context of bilateral
negotiations will do that. The cause of peace would be
well served by a more balanced approach by the General
Assembly to the conflict.
16-40731

A/71/PV.50

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its sincere
appreciation to the General Assembly for adopting
every year since 1981, when Israel decided to annex the
Syrian Golan, a resolution on the matter. We thank the
Assembly for adopting resolution 71/24, as well as the
other resolutions on the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East. My country would like to
thank all the delegations that decided to co-sponsor the
resolution on the Syrian Golan, as well as those who
voted in favour of it.
The majority of States Members of the United
Nations have continued to support the resolutions, which
reflect their commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular the
rejection of foreign occupation and support for our full
right to recover all our land occupied by Israel since
1967. The vote in favour of those resolutions sends a
clear international message to Israel, namely, that the
killings, the expansion, the settlement activities, the
imposition of a fait accompli and the annexation of land
by force are all rejected. Those practices run counter
to international principles, including the Charter of
the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949. Therefore, all those practices will always be
met with rejection by every party that seeks to uphold
international law and rejects foreign occupation and the
acquisition of lands taken by force.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): On behalf of
the delegation of the State of Palestine, I wish to express
our sincere thanks and appreciation to all Member
States that voted in favour of the important resolutions
that the Assembly has just adopted and that adhere in
word and deed to the legal, political and humanitarian
principles and rules enshrined therein.
The General Assembly’s adoption of these
resolutions, once again by an overwhelming majority, is
a reflection of the long-standing international consensus
regarding the rights of the Palestinian people and the
fundamental requirements for achieving a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects, without exception.
Those resolutions are also a clear reaffirmation of
the international consensus on the two-State solution,
31/32

A/71/PV.50

30/11/2016

based on the 1967 borders, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative — a solution that is now in grave peril owing
to the violations, destructive actions and rejectionism
of Israel, the occupying Power. Lastly, these resolutions
answer firmly, clearly and thoroughly the false
assertions, distortions and negative discourse that we
have heard in this Hall from the Israeli delegation.

prospect seems very distant at this moment. We renew
our thanks and appreciation to all delegations for their
principled support.

In conclusion, I wish to express the profound
gratitude of the delegation of the State of Palestine, on
behalf of the Palestinian people and their leadership,
for all of the compelling expressions of support to the
Palestinian people and solidarity with them and the
just cause of Palestine in recent days and during the
many long years. We experience despair at this ongoing
injustice, as we mark yet another Day of Solidarity
and as we approach the painful anniversaries of the
coming year, including, inconceivably, the fiftieth
year of Israel’s illegal foreign occupation of our land
and oppression of our people and denial of our rights.
The deep despair and hopelessness among our people
is increasing, yet the support and solidarity of the
international community, from countries and peoples
all around the world, help us to remain hopeful that we
will indeed one day overcome the current injustice and
realize our freedom and rights in our own independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and finally achieve peace and coexistence
between Palestine and Israel, despite the fact that that

The Acting Pesident: I would like to consult
members regarding an extension for the work of the
Second Committee.

32/32

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 34.
Programme of work

Members will recall that, at its 48th plenary
meeting, on 21 November, the General Assembly
agreed to extend the work of the Second Committee
to Wednesday, 30 November. However, I have been
informed by the Chair of the Second Committee that
the Committee requests an additional extension of
its work to Friday, 9 December, in view of the fact
that such an extension will be needed to conclude
negotiations on the draft resolution on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for the development of the United Nations system.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Second Committee
until Friday, 9 December 2016?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

16-40731
