S/2001/832

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 29 August 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period 1 to 31 July 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-52467 (E) 300801

*0152467*

S/2001/832

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR operations
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 July 2001), there were approximately 42,000
KFOR troops in theatre, with no major changes in deployment since the last report.
2.
The situation in Kosovo remained calm during the month of July, except for
some minor incidents and attempts at illegal border crossings.
3.
Although the level of inter-ethnic violence and intimidation remained the
same, the number of arson incidents against Kosovar Serb unoccupied houses,
particularly in Vitina and Gnjilane, increased, reaching its highest level in five
months. KFOR is taking additional security measures to prevent similar incidents.
4.
On 6 July, Dr. Covic, Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, was appointed by the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as Chief of the Coordination
Body for Kosovo and Metohija. He visited both Zvecan and Gracanica during the
last week in July and stated during one of his press conferences that the Serbs
should work with KFOR and the international community.
5.
KFOR continued to reinforce its presence along the border with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedoniaa and continued to deter members of the National
Liberation Army (NLA) from using Kosovo as a supply route and from illegally
crossing the border. The number of refugees making their way into Kosovo from the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia since February 2001 is estimated to be
77,800, with some 5,000 entering Kosovo during the reporting period.
6.
The security situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia resulted
in some violent incidents directed against KFOR. These included shots fired at a
KFOR post near Brunca, a stone thrown towards a convoy which hit a KFOR soldier
in the face who was subsequently treated in hospital, and a missile strike by a
helicopter of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia against a KFOR
observation post in Leskovica, situated 1 kilometre inside the province.
Security
7.
During the reporting period, there were relatively few incidents reported. A
bomb was found planted outside the front door of a leading Democratic Party of
Kosovo politician in Pristina, the second attempt in the space of 10 days and since
the start of the election process.
8.
In Mitrovica, initiatives are under way to improve the security situation and
the residents’ quality of life. Although inter-ethnic intimidation continues, the
number of incidents has decreased. KFOR had to intervene to ensure that some
Kosovar Albanian pedestrians could return to “Little Bosnia” via the western bridge
after a group of Kosovar Serbs tried to bar the way.
9.
The weapons destruction programme resumed during the last reporting period.
During the month of July, 625 weapons were destroyed, bringing the total to 7,764.

a

2

Turkey recognizes the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

S/2001/832

Return of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces to the ground safety zone
10. The return of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces to the ground
safety zone was completed according to plan and without incident during the last
reporting period. No major difficulties have been encountered since re-entry.
Illegal border activity
11. KFOR forces continue to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries, external borders and recognized crossing points.
12. In reinforcing its presence along the border with the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, KFOR interdicted the movement of personnel and weapons into and
out of the northern part of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and between
Albania and Kosovo.
13. On several occasions, KFOR prevented persons from illegally crossing from
Albania into Kosovo, from Kosovo into the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, and from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia into Kosovo.
These actions included the detention of one NLA member (four others escaped) and
the seizure of a large amount of weapons from a mule train discovered south of
Sasare; the detention of 14 men passing through Kosovo from the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to Albania with 21 horses and mules, carrying food, clothes,
radios and mobile phones; and the confiscation of weapons and ammunition of 10
armed men captured while trying to cross with 11 horses into the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia from Kosovo near Gostivar. One of the most significant
seizures in the border area related to the detention of five men and the confiscation
of a large amount of hand grenades, anti-tank mines, anti-personnel mines, sticks of
dynamite and rounds of small arms ammunition. In routine search operations,
quantities of weapons, ammunition, explosives and over three million cigarettes
have been seized.
Security Council resolution 1160 (1999)
14. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures, there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1999).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
15. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), five senior members were
suspended from the organization on suspicion of supporting the National Liberation
Army in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. As a result, General Ceku
offered his resignation, which was refused by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Although temporary replacements have been appointed by
General Ceku, they have not yet been approved by the Special Representative. On
16 and 17 July, Kosovar Albanians demonstrated to demand the reinstatement of the
KPC members who had been suspended, and used trucks to block a road near
Komorane in protest. These demonstrations subsided without any incident. On 15
July, KFOR searched the house of one of the five KPC members and confiscated one
rifle, one pistol, over 300 rounds of ammunition and military equipment.
16. In a separate incident, a KPC commander was arrested by KFOR for
threatening KFOR troops. An investigation is being carried out.

3

S/2001/832

17. The KPC continued to carry out a variety of humanitarian projects throughout
the province. Despite the arrival of construction equipment and supplies, which
helped the KPC carry out their projects, the projected and desired number of
man/workdays for future work might be affected by a delay in the delivery of some
equipment which is needed for planned projects.
18. Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces remain in general compliance
with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
19. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
20. KFOR is becoming increasingly involved in the preparations for the General
Assembly elections scheduled for 17 November 2001. KFOR civil/military elements
will provide support to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) during the election process by contributing to the registration, electoral
campaign and election phases, and will provide liaison officers to the Joint Election
Operations Centre. KFOR plans to provide coordinated security support to UNMIK
and OSCE, and to prevent intimidation of voters and political candidates.
Outlook
21. Despite the fact that the security situation in Kosovo continues to be affected
by the violence in the northern part of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
which has also increased the risk to KFOR personnel, the situation throughout
Kosovo is generally calm and stable. Additional measures have been taken to reduce
the risk to KFOR forces.

4
