S/PV.7950

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7950th meeting

Wednesday, 24 May 2017, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14841 (E)
*1714841*

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Shearer is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.
Mr. Shearer: Mr. President, I thank you for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in South Sudan and the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force.
It may seem unusual to start my briefing off with
a weather report, but it is important to announce that
the rains have arrived in South Sudan. These seasonal
rains dictate almost every aspect of life in the country,
including the cycle of conflict. Across the country, we
are seeing the last push to position forces before roads
become impassable for the next four months. And with
that, the nature of conflict changes.
Significant military moves have been most evident
in the north, on the west bank of the Nile River in Shilluk
tribal areas, and in northern Jonglei, in the eastern
part of the country, inhabited mainly by Nuer. In both
areas, the Government’s Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) has captured former SPLA in Opposition
strongholds and reinforced their positions.
In the former Unity State, in the centre of the
country, the SPLA continues low-intensity battles.
Declared a famine zone in February, the area remains
highly volatile, with many displaced people. On
3 May, a base of the United Nations Mission in South
2/18

24/05/2017

Sudan (UNMISS), located just 500 metres from Leer
town, came under direct fire. Ghanaian peacekeepers
responded robustly, returning fire, and repelled the
attack. An internal investigation is under way to
determine who carried out the attack and why. Sadly,
it prompted some humanitarian organizations working
alongside UNMISS to downsize their presence at a
time when their efforts are desperately needed. They
are brave people, but they should never be a target. If
for no other reason, I condemn in the strongest terms
that callous attack.
Intercommunal conflicts persist across the country.
A long-standing tension between the Dinka Bor and
the Murle communities in Jonglei in the east escalated
dangerously, threatening hundreds of lives over the
past few weeks. UNMISS has persisted with mediation
efforts, and over the past two weeks, has supported the
visits of a delegation led by First Vice-President Taban
Deng Gai shuttling between the various communities.
Yesterday, those efforts culminated in the signing of a
joint cessation of hostilities agreement. It is only a start,
but I am encouraged by the willingness of both sides
to progress with further talks on substance, which, of
course, we will continue to support.
In Greater Bahr el-Ghazal, in the west, clashes
between the SРLA and opposition forces have
continued, with 22,000 people arriving in the town of
Wau from surrounding areas to seek refuge with the
United Nations and with churches. The Government
has consistently prevented access to areas outside of
Wau, but recently an UNMISS Bangladeshi infantry
patrol was able to reach the south-west areas of Wau,
which had previously been off-limits, only to find the
area completely abandoned and evidence of armed
activity all around.
In the south, in the Equatorias, clashes between the
SPLA and allied militias persist, with Yei town once
again in the focus. Violence in Yei has been unrelenting,
as the joint report released by ourselves and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights documented with respect to the events that
happened between July 2016 and January 2017. The
report, which was released last week, documents 114
killings by pro-Government forces. The extent of the
abuses by opposition groups remains unclear, because
our access to those areas has been impeded. But
satellite imagery also corroborated field observations
of the widespread burning of homes and villages.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Since January, UNMISS has deployed almost
continuous long-duration patrols to Yei. The latest
reached the area this week — despite warning shots
being fired at them. Its presence has enabled human
rights violations to be investigated and engagement to
occur with stakeholders in the course of the conflict and,
most importantly, to reassure civilians, who are feeling
very vulnerable. Follow-up missions are planned.
The rains may bring a respite to large-scale military
manoeuvres, but they complicate the humanitarian
response and bring the inevitable spectre of cholera to
South Sudan. To date, 7,700 cases have been reported.
Over 60 per cent of the country will now be impossible
to access by road or by dirt airstrips, and humanitarian
efforts will have to rely on air and barge transport.
A focus of the humanitarian responders during
this past month has been to support more than 20,000
civilians who fled the minute village of Aburoc
in Upper Nile, after being displaced by SPLA and
opposition fighting. Most arrived in Aburoc in a very
weak state — the perfect conditions for cholera to tear
through their numbers.
UNMISS helicoptered in a detachment of Rwandan
peacekeepers to Aburoc in early May for a short-term
deployment that then gave the confidence needed
for humanitarian agencies to deploy immediately
afterwards. Cholera has broken out in the town, but the
improved water supplies and the presence of a strong
medical response from agencies there have contained
its spread and have undoubtedly saved many lives. Such
a more nimble approach on the part of our peacekeepers
working with others is a formula that we can replicate,
along with the improved robustness I reported to the
Council in my previous briefing (see S/PV.7930).
I applaud the humanitarians working in South
Sudan. Their efforts in one of the toughest and most
operationally difficult environments — and in the most
remote places — have saved countless lives. I wish to
particularly acknowledge the World Food Programme,
which has pre-positioned over 90 per cent of its food aid
for the coming rainy season. Yes, we face problems in
gaining access to some areas. These obstacles are mostly
posed by local actors, particularly where fighting is
ongoing. However, I condemn the unacceptable levels
of violence that continue to be directed towards aid
workers, which include threats, arrests, assaults and
even murder.

S/PV.7950

As the latest Secretary-General’s 30-day report
details, the deployment of the first wave of the regional
protection force vanguard has begun. To date, all 60
members of the Bangladeshi construction-engineering
advance team have arrived in Juba with their equipment,
and the advance team of the Nepalese high-readiness
company will be on the ground by the end of the month.
The main bodies of those contingents are on track to
arrive by July. Pending the final tax exemptions for the
Rwandan advance infantry company, it should deploy
in late June or July, and I understand that the equipment
for the scheduled Ethiopian infantry company is being
refurbished. It should deploy by August.
With the arrival of the rains, the focus of the conflict
tends to shift from the battlefield to the political arena.
Already, we are seeing signs of some political shifts.
As you know, on 9 May, President Salva Kiir dismissed
SPLA Chief of General Staff Paul Malong. After briefly
leaving the capital and heading west to his home town
of Aweil, Malong returned to Juba, and the situation
seemed to calm. The President recently announced
several changes to the structure and appointments of
the SPLA and also replaced the Aweil governor. Most
expect further changes and a possible reshuffling of
some cabinet posts.
The President has also moved ahead with the
national dialogue, with a formal launch on Monday this
week in Juba, attended by Ugandan President Yoweri
Museveni. He again declared a unilateral ceasefire
and pledged to review the cases of political prisoners.
Those announcements are very welcome. There will
be close scrutiny, however, of the number of prisoners
who are actually released and whether the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, the organization that was established by
the peace agreement to monitor ceasefire violations
and which is supported by UNMISS, can move freely
to perform its ceasefire monitoring tasks. The proof of
the pudding is, as they say, in the eating.
While the national dialogue should bring a
welcome focus on reconciliation for it to be credible,
it needs, as we have said before, to involve the genuine
participation of opposition constituencies. Meanwhile,
opposition groups, mainly outside the country, have
come together around the common position and jointly
denounced the dialogue.
As many Council members have acknowledged,
States of the region hold significant influence on the

17-148413/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

political process. Yesterday, I met with the Chair of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
President Festus Mogae, in Juba, who updated us on his
engagements with regional actors over the past months.
President Museveni, speaking at Monday’s national
dialogue launch, called for a review of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement, but made no mention of
the peace agreement. In my recent meeting with him,
together with United Nations Special Envoy for Sudan
and South Sudan Nicholas Haysom, he also reiterated his
outreach to opposition leaders, in particular concerning
elections. At the same time, there are reports that Kenya
is engaging with opposition figures based outside the
country. I am encouraged to see Member States in the
region stepping up their engagement. It remains critical,
however, that a coherent and unified regional position
on South Sudan be forthcoming.
As I mentioned last month (see S/PV.7930), it is now
more than ever imperative to ensure that the Council
unites on a common strategy to advance the political
process in South Sudan. We acknowledge and thank
Council members individually and collectively for their
support of UNMISS and the humanitarian community,
both of which are overcoming immense difficulties in
order to make a real difference to people’s lives. But
unity of purpose will send the best signal to South
Sudan’s political leaders that they must focus first and
foremost on the plight of their citizens.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Shearer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Shearer for his briefing
today. It is always good to hear from him, although his
report is indeed sobering.
Two thousand eight hundred — that is the average
number of South Sudanese fleeing to neighbouring
countries each day; 90 — that is the number of incidents
and restrictions related to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance reported for the month of April, and it is the
highest for any month this year so far; 100 — that is
the number of aid workers forced to relocate in April
as a result of active hostilities; 84 — that is the total
number of aid workers killed in South Sudan since the
beginning of the conflict, including 17 this year alone,
making South Sudan the most dangerous place in the
world to be a humanitarian worker; unknown — that
4/18

24/05/2017

is the number of women and girls who have been raped
this year as part of this senseless war or as a so-called
tax, as they say, for leaving the country to seek refuge.
The Government announced a unilateral ceasefire
on 22 May, two months after it had promised the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development that
it would do so, and only after pursuing offensives in
multiple locations in South Sudan before the onset
of the rainy season. Nor have we seen an end to the
obstacles and threats the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has to face when carrying out
its mandate. Most recently, they included violence on
the west bank of the Nile River as UNMISS was trying
to access vulnerable populations and, as Mr. Shearer
just informed us, an attack on the UNMISS base in Leer
this month. As he underscored, UNMISS needs access
when civilians are in need of protection, not just once
the fighting has stopped and all the civilians have fled.
We can only conclude from this that the parties still
have no intention of taking seriously the steps outlined
in the Security Council’s 23 March presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4). We condemn the recent
military campaigns by South Sudanese Government
forces, designed to disproportionately retaliate along
ethnic lines and seize territory to gain a strategic
advantage. We also deplore the violence instigated
by those in opposition, which only exacerbates the
situation and perpetuates this vicious cycle. Once again,
we call on all parties to stop the violence, return to the
negotiating table and give UNMISS and humanitarian
aid organizations unhindered access. We commend
UNMISS’s tenacity in carrying out its mandate to
protect civilians, enable the delivery of urgently needed
humanitarian assistance and deploy the initial elements
of the Regional Protection Force.
The only way to achieve a lasting solution to the
conflict in South Sudan and put an end to the suffering
it has caused is through an inclusive political process
led by the South Sudanese themselves. We call on
the United Nations, the African Union and their
regional partners to closely coordinate their efforts to
reinvigorate the process and chart a clear plan for the
way forward. Last month (see S/PV.7930), we urged the
Council to move forward with the tools at our disposal,
such as further sanctions and an arms embargo. Since
then, more people have suffered, more women and
children have been raped and tens of thousands more
have been displaced because of the fighting.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7950

Today, we voted to extend the existing sanctions
measures on South Sudan with our adoption of
resolution 2353 (2017). Now we must back up our
words with concrete action We will continue to conduct
dialogue with Council members and regional and
international partners in order to build support for
additional measures to halt the violence, including
sexual violence, in South Sudan, and to get the parties
to return to the negotiating table. The terrible cost of
our failure to act will continue to be born by the South
Sudanese people and will only increase over time. I
urge Council members to use the tools at our disposal
as soon as possible and take action to stop the suffering.

so that humanitarian actors can reach those in need of
lifesaving assistance.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank Special
Representative David Shearer for his briefing and
commend him for his good work in the past few months.

Lasting peace and security in South Sudan
can prevail only through genuine dialogue and
reconciliation. We reiterate our conviction that the
2015 peace agreement still remains an important
framework for ending the conflict in South Sudan,
and that its full implementation, through greater
inclusivity, forgiveness and reconciliation, can restore
peace and stability in the country. The parties have to
be committed to implementing their agreement in good
faith and keeping the national interest above all other
concerns.

It is very understandable that we all remain
extremely concerned about the situation in South Sudan
on the security, political and humanitarian fronts. What
we continue to see is lives lost and major displacement
of the civilian population. If we fail to avert what may
otherwise end up being a descent down a slippery
slope, the consequences will be horrendous in both
their geopolitical and humanitarian implications. At the
moment, there is no greater priority, as the representative
of the United States has said, than making sure that
all the parties to the conflict take genuine steps to
immediately cease all hostilities and violence in order
to end the suffering of the South Sudanese people. In
that context, we applaud the critical work of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and thank
Special Representative Shearer for his lucid briefing on
the issue. We do not have much to add to what he said
with regard to the Regional Protection Force.
We also welcome the unilateral ceasefire and
release of political prisoners declared by President
Salva Kiir on 22 May. It is our hope that the Government
will honour its commitments and take the necessary
confidence-building measures. It is important that the
Council acknowledge that development and urge all
other parties to follow suit by immediately stopping
the fighting. We would also like to underscore that the
dire humanitarian situation still requires our urgent
attention. Every possible measure must be taken to
save lives and forestall famine. The international
community must step up its humanitarian assistance.
All parties on the ground should also facilitate safe
and unhindered access, without conditions of any kind,

But all of this — the ceasefire and the efforts to
alleviate the humanitarian situation — can have durable
meaning only if we can see a light at the end of the tunnel
where the peace process is concerned. That continues
to wallow in inconsistencies and confusion, to a large
degree because of the lack of coordination among the
parties that are attempting to help South Sudan achieve
peace. Of course, that in no way implies that the lion’s
share of the responsibility does not belong to the parties
of the conflict.

We still think that the national dialogue has real
potential to facilitate the reinvigoration of the peace
process. In that regard, the launching of the national
dialogue and the swearing in of the Steering Committee
members on 22 May represent, of course, steps in the
right direction, but we want to emphasize once again the
need for that process to be undertaken in all-inclusive
manner in order to achieve the desired objective. We
call on all parties to seize the opportunity to participate
in the dialogue constructively and in good faith. The
Security Council and the international community at
large must contribute to making the national dialogue
a success.
We are probably in a somewhat better situation
now than we were months ago for moving ahead in
the peace process. Regional efforts are being made
to try to revive the peace process in South Sudan,
and we believe that it is important to support those
efforts. There is, in particular, a promising effort being
deployed by President Museveni of Uganda, to which
Mr. Shearer alluded broadly and which deserves close
follow-up and support. President Museveni knows that
he has the full support of the Ethiopian Prime Minister
and the Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on

17-148415/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Development (IGAD), as well as other members of that
regional organization.
The Kenyan effort is designed to support that
initiative. We look forward to the convening of an
IGAD summit when it is appropriate and deemed to
offer added value. In our view, the most critical element
is that the region continue to speak in one voice, so
that the international community and, above all, the
Security Council can be on the same page. There is no
greater damage that can be inflicted on a peace process
than conflicting messages. They are the bane of any
peacemaking effort.
We are pleased in that regard that the African Union
(AU) and IGAD have always made sure that their efforts
are always fully coordinated. We are now encouraged
by the personal involvement of the new African Union
Chairperson, as witnessed by his visit to South Sudan.
The same is true of the Secretary-General and the active
engagement of his Special Representative, Mr. Shearer,
and Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom.
All of those efforts call for greater cooperation and
closer coordination. That is why we continue to attach
indispensable value to a unified approach by the AU,
IGAD and the United Nations in efforts to ensure a
speedy and peaceful settlement to the conflict in South
Sudan. In that connection, the joint press statement of
29 January by the AU, the United Nations and the IGAD
still represents a useful framework for cooperation
among those three organizations in their joint efforts to
reinvigorate the South Sudanese peace process — the
implementation of which remains the key to addressing
the issue of South Sudan.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Mr. Shearer for his briefing just now and for all of his
excellent work.
We are meeting two months after President Kiir
recommitted to a ceasefire in South Sudan, two months
after the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4) with very clear steps. We
should be reflecting today on two months of peace, two
months of life-saving aid reaching those in need, two
months of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) protecting civilians. Instead, we meeting
today as South Sudan spirals deeper into crisis.
As we have heard so many times, the humanitarian
and human rights situation is worsening, the economy
is collapsing, and fighting has continued unabated.
6/18

24/05/2017

People are no longer fleeing in the tens of thousands but
in the hundreds of thousands. More than 900,000 South
Sudanese have now sought refuge in Uganda. Those
figures underlie not only how severe the situation has
become but also how hollow those promises sounded to
the people of South Sudan when President Kiir made
them two months ago. We all know what needs to
happen — President Kiir must take the long-overdue
steps to which he agreed in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) statement in March
and which we called for in our presidential statement.
That means granting sustained humanitarian access,
allowing the deployment of the regional protection
force, enabling UNMISS to fulfil its mandate and,
above all, bringing an end to the fighting — not just in
words but through actions that make the people of South
Sudan feel safe in their homes in their own country.
On Monday, President Kiir once again declared
a unilateral ceasefire and said that he had once again
agreed to consider the release of political prisoners.
We welcome those statements, but the onus is now on
him to prove that they are meaningful commitments,
not just words reflecting convenient timing with the
start of the rainy season when fighting is made more
difficult. I note with scepticism but not surprise that on
the day that the ceasefire was announced, Government
offences continued in Yei, and attacks by militia groups
continue still. We need to see an end to offensive
operations and disproportionate responses. We need to
see true inclusive engagement with the opposition and
civil society, and, in turn, we need to see a commitment
to a ceasefire from opposition groups as well.
President Kiir must begin withdrawing troops
from parts of the country, disband ethnic militias and
ensure that humanitarian assistance can reach those in
desperate need. Sadly, the Government has repeatedly
ignored the request of the Security Council, just as it has
repeatedly ignored the requests of the African Union
and IGAD. Instead of allowing humanitarian access,
the Government has endangered the most vulnerable
by denying aid to those facing famine in Unity state.
Instead of being allowed to fulfil its mandate, UNMISS
has faced sustained harassment and worse, with the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army threatening to shoot
United Nations peacekeepers if they moved any further
towards Wunkur in Unity state. Such moves are not
designed to inspire confidence in the commitments of
President Kiir.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is long past time for the Government of South
Sudan to show genuine commitment to peace and
stability, including by reaching out to the opposition.
We will, of course, support political efforts that are
truly inclusive, but we must learn from the past and
not make the same mistake of relying on the promise
of dialogue alone. We will also need to keep up the
pressure. By that, I mean that we must use all of the
tools at our disposal to encourage the Government
of South Sudan to take the steps required, and the
opposition must follow suit. We need to show that there
are consequences should they fail to do so. Earlier
today we renewed the sanctions regime that enables us
to do just that. We should be willing to use that regime
to send a clear message to anyone who continues to fail
to deliver peace. As I have said on numerous occasions
in this Chamber, we also need to restrict the flow of
weapons into South Sudan.
The Council has a responsibility to do all it can to
bring peace to South Sudan. It is a responsibility that
we are not yet fulfilling. All of us in this Chamber, in
the United Nations and across the region must redouble
our efforts. We owe it to the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. Shearer, for
his briefing.
Thanks to the concerted efforts of all South
Sudanese parties and the international community, the
political reconciliation process in South Sudan has made
some progress recently. President Kiir announced the
formal launching of national dialogue and implemented
a unilateral ceasefire, actions that China welcomes. The
overall situation in South Sudan remains as complex as
it is austere, and it still faces serious challenges in the
areas of political security, economic development and
the need to address famine. Meeting those challenges
will require the consistent efforts of all South Sudanese
parties and the international community.
First, it is central to actively promote a political
solution in South Sudan. Attaining peace and stability
is the common aspiration shared by all South Sudanese
parties. A political settlement is the only possible
solution to the question of South Sudan, and the key
is to realize reconciliation in its true sense. We hope
that all South Sudanese parties will take advantage
of the opportunity offered by the national dialogue,
abandon the mindset of a military solution, revert to the

S/PV.7950

political settlement track, promote inclusive national
dialogue, attract the extensive and active participation
of all parties, resolve differences, enhance mutual
trust and achieve peace, stability and development in
South Sudan.
Secondly, it is essential to facilitate the mediation
role of regional and subregional organizations.
China appreciates the active mediation efforts by
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union. The international community
should vigorously support Mr. Mogae, Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and
Mr. Konaré, High Representative of the African Union.
The international community should strengthen its
leadership, send a consistent message to the world,
create synergies and resolve the question of South
Sudan.
Thirdly, we must focus on the fundamental questions
that relate to the conflict. Development is an important
factor for ensuring peace, and underdevelopment is
the underlying cause of the situation in South Sudan.
The international community should actively help
South Sudan through increasing development and
input relating to agriculture, infrastructure and natural
resources; providing support for South Sudan in
developing its economy; and improving livelihoods so
that the South Sudanese people can benefit from the
peace dividend.
Fourthly, it is essential to strengthen the capacitybuilding of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). We hope that the Secretariat and UNMISS
will strengthen their communication with the South
Sudanese Government, improve the capability of
UNMISS to perform its duties and the effectiveness of
its operations, and strengthen its ability to deal with
complex situations, while taking effective measures
to strengthen the security and safety of peacekeeping
personnel. The Government of South Sudan should
continue to actively implement the joint communiqué
with the Security Council and its relevant resolutions,
support UNMISS in carrying out its duties and properly
address and resolve problems related to cooperation.
The Chinese Government has always supported
the peace process in South Sudan and provided
assistance to its ability to South Sudan for its countrybuilding efforts. To date, we have sent more than 1,000
peacekeepers to UNMISS. Not long ago, in response
to the United Nations appeal, the Chinese Government

17-148417/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

provided assistance in the amount of $5 million through
the World Food Programme and also provided, through
bilateral channels, 8,750 tons of food to assist South
Sudan respond to famine. China remains willing to
continue to play a constructive role in helping South
Sudan achieve lasting peace, stability and sustainable
development.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin my statement by thanking Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing today and for his efforts
as Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) during the past reporting period in
circumstances we know to be difficult.
Egypt will not go into the details relating to the
humanitarian and security situation in South Sudan and
our deep concerns about the suffering of civilians, who
alone pay the price of the conflict. What the civilian
population expects of the Security Council goes beyond
statements of condemnation. Accordingly, we would
like to emphasize the following points.
First, Egypt looks forward to seeing extensive and
intensive efforts being made by the relevant international
envoys in South Sudan to communicate with the
Government, opposition and regional stakeholders
so as to develop a time-specific operational plan of
action aimed at achieving the cessation of hostilities
and reviving the peace agreement. Further delay in
achieving that will lead to increased complications
and a deterioration of the situation on the ground. The
lack of progress provides the parties to the conflict the
argument that they need to continue fighting without
political or legal constraints.
Secondly, the political situation and the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan
require a unified front of opposition that would
renounce violence, become a serious political partner
representing all factions without narrow, tribal
prejudices, and practice peaceful political opposition in
the modern sense of the term.
Thirdly, Egypt hopes that yesterday’s declaration of
a ceasefire by President Kiir and the launch of a national
dialogue represent a real beginning to overcoming the
current political crisis. We also hope that the dialogue
will involve a real platform for truth and overcoming
narrow political differences. We hope that it will be a
genuine beginning for new commitments to the peace
agreement. In that context, we look forward to an
8/18

24/05/2017

inclusive dialogue that will include all factions of the
opposition, as well as youth and women.
Fourthly, in parallel with the efforts to revive
the political track, we must support efforts aimed at
national reconciliation on the local and grass-roots
levels, address the impact of the war and ensure
achieving sustained peace. We therefore emphasize the
importance of supporting the work of a number of civil
society organizations in that regard.
Fifthly, Egypt looks forward to the implementation
of the measures taken recently to restructure the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army as a step in the right
direction towards building a professional national army
capable of protecting all the citizens in South Sudan
regardless of their political or tribal affiliations, subject
to the law and held accountable to national authorities.
The Security Council shoulders the responsibility
of preventing a collapse of the State in South Sudan
and preserving and supporting it in the future. In its
experience addressing other conflicts, the Security
Council knows very well that the vacuum left by such a
collapse would only be filled by chaos.
Lastly, the parties have an urgent, moral, legal and
human obligation to end all forms of violence, abide
by international law and relevant international norms,
shoulder their responsibilities with regard to civilians
and ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, we reiterate Egypt’s support for
UNMISS and Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, in their efforts to achieving
peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan is pleased that the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2353 (2017). I would like to thank Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his informative briefing, as well as for his active
engagement and efforts to bring peace and stability to
South Sudan.
Regrettably, Japan must once again express its
deep concern about the situation in South Sudan.
Many innocent people, including women and children,
continue to suffer from the ongoing violence across
the country, despite strong calls from the Council, the
region and the international community to immediately
cease hostilities. For instance, in April, tens of
thousands of people were displaced in Upper Nile
owing to the fighting and the Government’s offensive
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on the west bank of the River Nile. Around one-third
of the entire population is now internally displaced or
living as refugees in neighbouring countries, while
two-thirds of the population are in need of food and
other humanitarian assistance.
Japan is deeply concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation and reiterates its call for the
parties to immediately cease hostilities and for President
Kiir and the Government of South Sudan to fully
uphold their primary responsibility to protect civilians.
In that regard, Japan welcomes the commencement
of the national dialogue process, as well as the recent
declaration of a unilateral ceasefire by President Kiir.
The ceasefire must be observed in every corner of
the country and we urge opposition forces to do the
same. The national dialogue will be productive only
if it is genuinely inclusive, which requires the steering
committee to listen impartially to all parties.
Japan appreciates the engagement of President
Konaré, African Union High Representative for South
Sudan, in consultation with the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, the United Nations and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
asks for his further efforts in this critical phase.
Last week, Japan dispatched to South Sudan
Ambassador Yoshifumi Okamura, a former colleague
based in Tokyo, who is mandated to work on African
affairs. He called on President Kiir and other leaders
to follow through on their commitments concerning
the cessation of hostilities, unimpeded humanitarian
access, the rapid and smooth deployment of the
Regional Protection Force and the national dialogue. He
also met with leaders in African countries, including
President Museveni of Uganda, President Condé of
Guinea, Chairperson of the African Union, and Foreign
Minister Workneh Gebeyehu of Ethiopia to encourage
their further engagement.
Japan welcomes the Secretary-General’s recent
meetings with relevant regional leaders on the
margins of the London Somalia Conference. Regional
organizations and leaders play a crucial role in
improving the dire situation and invigorating the
political process. We encourage them to continue to
work with the Secretary-General on points of leverage
with the South Sudanese leadership.
Finally, amid those challenges, the first wave of
the Regional Protection Force finally arrived in South
Sudan in April, eight months after its authorization

S/PV.7950

by the Council. The Regional Protection Force’s full
deployment must be completed expeditiously so that
it can implement its mandated tasks. We hope that
that will improve the situation on the ground, not
only in Juba but throughout the country. We urge the
Government of South Sudan and the troop-contributing
countries to further cooperate to that end.
In that regard, Japan strongly condemns the attacks
on the temporary base of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in Leer on 3 May. All
parties must fully cooperate with UNMISS, including
by observing the relevant resolutions and the status of
forces agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan concerning
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the Special
Representative Mr. David Shearer for his update on the
situation in South Sudan.
The Security Council just unanimously extended
the sanctions regime for another year, and we continue
to view the current context negatively because of
the grave violations of human rights, the ongoing
humanitarian crisis and the ethnicity-based hate speech
that is spreading. There is a substantial number of
Italian non-governmental organizations in the country.
Through them, we follow with apprehension the plight
of the people. Despite the tragic situation that seems
to have no end in sight, I would like to address three
processes under way that have shown some potential
and attempt to find constructive elements therein.
First, I would like to speak about the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the Regional
Protection Force. The assertive posture of UNMISS
enables the Mission to react rapidly on the ground.
However, it does not deter the conflicting parties from
intimidating its patrols and blocking humanitarian
access, in violation of the Status of Forces Agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan concerning the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. Data collected in April on
such humanitarian access incidents show an intolerable
situation. It is crucial that the Regional Protection Force
be deployed in Juba without further delay to allow
UNMISS to work more effectively in other parts of the
country. The arrival of the first contingent in recent
days is a positive step in that direction. We ask Juba to
cooperate responsibly with the United Nations so that it

17-148419/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

may fully deploy the Regional Protection Force in the
shortest term.
Secondly, I turn to the ceasefire and national
dialogue. Two days ago, the national dialogue was
inaugurated in Juba and, as a follow up to the statement
made by Intergovernmental Authority on Development
on 25 March, President Kiir announced a unilateral
ceasefire. In principle, the two events represent
significant progress but the circumstances lead us to
believe that the premise is not so promising. For the
national dialogue to succeed, it must be genuinely
inclusive and at least fully representative of all
opposition groups and civil society, at the community
and national level. The process remains devoid of
those conditions. Until the opposition groups are fully
involved in the process, they will not abandon warfare,
as they jointly announced a few days ago.
Most of all, the process needs a ceasefire in order to
flourish. That is the main precondition for the national
dialogue. The Council continues to urge both sides
to immediately and effectively suspend hostilities.
However, as the ceasefire was declared, clashes
continued. The Government announced the ceasefire
unilaterally but its efforts would be appreciated only
if its words were followed by action in retaining the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army on the ground.
Thirdly, with regard to international and regional
mediation, we support the joint mediation of President
Konaré, President Mogae, Special Envoy Haysom
and Special Representative Shearer and commend
their efforts. We hope that an action plan could be
finalized soon to coordinate the steps and timeline of
the mediation. We continue to believe that the regional
stakeholders, in particular the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) are those most
capable of breaking South Sudan’s self-destructive
cycle. They can do more for peace in South Sudan.
We welcome the initiative launched in recent days
by Uganda and Kenya. Their actions acknowledge
the destabilizing impact of the South Sudanese crisis
in the subregion, starting with the continuous flow
of refugees. We look forward to the next Kampala
conference on 22 June on that issue and trust that at the
IGAD summit in June, Heads of State and Government
will make substantive progress in finding common
ground and unity in their approach to the crisis.
In the past month, we have constantly noted that
the time to contain the tragedy is running out. It is up
10/18

24/05/2017

to the Government and opposition groups of South
Sudan, first and foremost, to help improve the situation
before time runs out. We therefore remind them that the
solution to the crisis must be political and all political
solutions require the will to compromise. Otherwise
the Council will have to consider further options to
maintain peace and security in the region.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for today’s
meeting. It is very important for the Security Council
to be updated on developments in the conflict in South
Sudan. We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mr. David Shearer for his briefing
on the situation in the country and for his excellent
work at the helm of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.
We are deeply concerned about the high levels
of insecurity and the economic and humanitarian
crisis affecting a large part of the population of South
Sudan. Regrettably, there has been no improvement in
the situation since last year. We reiterate once again
that there is no military solution to this conflict. It
is necessary to redouble our efforts to revitalize the
political process and to call for a constructive dialogue
between the parties in order to find a solution that will,
first of all, make it possible to defuse tensions and put
an end to armed confrontations. In that regard, we hail
initiatives that contribute to that objective, such as the
announcement of the unilateral ceasefire by President
Salva Kiir on Monday, 22 May, when the members of
the National Dialogue Steering Committee adopted
their position. That event could signal an emergence
from conflict, provided that there is true compromise
on the part of both the Government and the opposition.
Bolivia welcomes the good offices of President
Yoweri Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda,
who was present at the aforementioned event last
Monday. On that occasion, he mentioned several points
that I would like to highlight today. First, he spoke
very appropriately about the danger of forgetting the
common interests of the people and called for the unity
of the South Sudanese people. Secondly, he also spoke
about the respect that the people of South Sudan have
for the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the
need to revitalize that movement, stating that the use
of force should be a last resort. In that vein the SPLA
should not lose the trust of those whom it is supposed
to protect.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As we have said many times, Bolivia believes that
the support of regional organizations is essential in
order to reach a solution to the conflict. It is they who
should lead the processes. Neighbouring countries,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and former Presidents Mogae and
Konaré are all working to find a way out of the crisis.
In that regard, we call for coordinated actions and the
establishment of a strategy that would make it possible
for us to deal with the issue in a comprehensive,
unified fashion.
We are of the view that the three points proposed
by Secretary-General António Guterres to resolve the
conflict in South Sudan — the cessation of hostilities,
the resumption of the peace process through inclusive
dialogue, and unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance — provide the necessary focus for dealing
with the matter. The will and commitment of the
Government and the opposition are essential to
ensuring the establishment of a true political process.
The South Sudanese should take that first step, making
it possible to achieve reconciliation. National dialogue
should make it possible to have the broad participation
of all concerned to identify the main problems affecting
South Sudan and to reach a lasting peace.
We likewise express our concern at the terrible
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. Thousands
of internally displaced people and refugees in recent
months find themselves in unacceptable conditions.
There is a lack of basic services, and women and children
are those principally affected. We hail the efforts of
UNMISS to respond to those needs, in particular the
effort to provide drinking water to internally displaced
people in various areas. In that vein we call on the
Government to cooperate with and facilitate the work
of humanitarian agents and UNMISS.
The situation of insecurity and the escalation
of violence in several regions of the country are also
of great concern. They have led to the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation and make it difficult
to provide assistance to those affected. Compliance
with the ceasefire and the cessation of facilities
are indispensable.
We trust that the regional protection force will
contribute to the lowering of tensions and to the
protection of civilians who are trapped between two
opposing forces. We hail the progress that is taking
place in terms of the deployment of that force, and we

S/PV.7950

urge cooperation and permission from the Government
so that the force will be able to fulfil its mandate as
quickly as possible.
Lastly, we wish to encourage UNMISS to continue
its work. We place great value on the measures it is
taking to increase the effectiveness of its work. We
know how complicated the situation that they face on
a daily basis is. We express our support and thanks for
the work they are doing.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, as well
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Shearer, for the analysis that he has provided to us.
As Mr. Shearer pointed out, South Sudan is at a
critical juncture, in which the hope of an improvement
in the situation is unfortunately being threatened by
a number of dangers and significant shortcomings in
three areas.
First of all, with regard to security, the arrival
of the rainy season should automatically reduce the
level of fighting, just as it will ground helicopters and
heavy equipment. However, we cannot say that the
situation will improve. During the past three years of
the conflict, we have seen that the rainy season only
served to freeze the situation, with the fighting starting
back up as soon as the dry season returned. We must
remember that the outbreak of violence last year in Juba
took place in July. We are therefore not immune to fresh
violence or crises in the months to come. Moreover, in
recent years the parties have not failed to use the rainy
season to rearm. That is a constant in South Sudan. We
must act to prevent such actions, which only feed the
conflict. The imposition of an arms embargo would
help in that regard.
The second issue is the humanitarian situation and
the difficulties faced by the civilian population. South
Sudan is experiencing a large-scale humanitarian
catastrophe that is intensifying every day. In recent
weeks, for example, fighting has continued to have
an intolerable impact on civilians. We have seen it
particularly in Upper Nile state. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has had to face
many challenges in its efforts to provide assistance
to the many displaced persons, and we would like to
commend its efforts in that regard, as well as those of
all humanitarian workers in South Sudan.

17-1484111/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The spread of the cholera epidemic, highlighted by
Mr. Shearer, is a real risk, while famine, or the risk of
famine, continues to plague some areas of the country.
In that context, the cessation of hostilities and
humanitarian access remain priorities, including during
the rainy season. The parties must commit themselves
unconditionally to those points, and UNMISS must be
able to fully implement its mandate to protect civilians.
More than nine months after its creation, the Regional
Protection Force has finally begun to deploy, faced
with the many obstacles that have been placed in its
way there. It can contribute to the better protection of
civilians. The authorities in South Sudan must allow
for the full deployment of the force, without hindrance.
Thirdly and finally, the political process is also at
a critical juncture. While the implementation of the
peace agreement remains at a standstill, the opening of
national dialogue can nurture the hope that the various
constituents of South Sudanese society will finally be
able to tackle the country’s many problems. In order
to achieve that, national dialogue must be conducted
in a transparent, impartial and independent manner. In
order to meet the objectives assigned to it, it is also
essential that that dialogue be fully inclusive, including
all political sensitivities, as well as civil society. Those
actors should be able to maintain an unrestricted and
fear-free dialogue, with respect for civil liberties.
President Kiir’s directive to security services to stop
the harassment of opponents is encouraging. We hope
that it will be implemented fully.
The mobilization of the international community
remains essential to efforts to accompany, encourage
and facilitate the political process with a view to
achieving progress in the implementation of the
2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. President Museveni’s
presence in Juba in recent days is an important sign
of regional mobilization. We hope that it will help to
convince South Sudanese actors to move forward on
the road to peace. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the United Nations
and bilateral and multilateral partners in South Sudan
must remain fully mobilized and fully coordinated, in
order to move the process forward. That is essential.
In that regard, we welcome and support the efforts
of the Special Representative, and those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom, to
ensure that the international community speaks with
12/18

24/05/2017

one voice. For its part, the Council must continue to
remind South Sudanese actors that they must work to
make the necessary progress to get their country out of
the conflict. We must remind them of our expectations,
rally the parties to action and, if necessary, consider
imposing sanctions on spoilers to the peace process.
Here we welcome the one-year renewal of the
sanctions regime that which we unanimously adopted
this morning.
Given the current challenges, the Council must
keep a close eye on South Sudan. It must ensure that
the actions expected of South Sudanese stakeholders,
as set forth in the presidential statement of 25 March,
are taken.
The coming months can be an opportunity to take
strides towards peace, failing which the experience of
past years will be repeated and violence will resume.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, for the information
he provided on the situation in South Sudan. We pay
due tribute to our colleagues from the Secretariat, who
have yet again presented a balanced assessment of the
situation in their monthly report.
We note the deployment of the advance team of the
Regional Protection Force (RPF), which began in May.
It is our understanding that the general timetable for
deployment is being adjusted, but that is not the fault
of the South Sudanese. Juba has remained constructive
regarding the matter of the RPF, as demonstrated by the
Government’s decision to provide land parcels for the
deployment of the force. We call upon the Secretariat
to continue to engage with Juba so as to resolve all
pending issues in connection with the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), including the
creation of mechanisms for the swift resolution of
visa issues and the definition of arrangements for
the deployment of the RPF while upholding the basic
principles of peacekeeping.
We share the concern of colleagues regarding the
disastrous humanitarian situation in the country and note
the efforts made by the United Nations to improve it. We
appeal to all sides in South Sudan to ensure conditions
conducive to the provision of humanitarian assistance
to those in need, and we welcome the measures taken
by the Government to provide humanitarian access to
food-insecure regions.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We would be remiss were we not to note the
assistance provided to South Sudan by neighbouring
countries, in particular the Sudan, which has opened
border crossing points, and Uganda, which is hosting
a significant number of refugees from South Sudan.
We would like also to emphasize that the root causes
of the famine in a number of provinces in South Sudan
are not just human-induced. In some areas, just like
in neighbouring Somalia and Kenya, famine is due
to adverse weather conditions. Representatives of
international humanitarian organizations have spoken
about this issue as well.
We share the view that stabilization in South
Sudan is possible only if a full cessation of hostilities
is ensured and an inclusive political process launched.
In this regard, we welcome Salva Kiir’s announcement,
in the framework of the implementation of the peace
agreement, to conduct nationwide dialogue. We also
welcomed the recent oath-taking by members of the
executive committee. It is our hope that the Government
and the opposition will take measures to make this
process more inclusive.
We welcome Salva Kiir’s declaration of a cessation
of hostilities. We hope that this decision will be
implemented and call upon the opposition to take
analogous measures. We note the personal efforts of the
Secretary-General, António Guterres, to find a solution
in South Sudan. We support the African Union-United
Nations-Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) coordination initiative aimed at ensuring
peace, stability and security in South Sudan. It is our
hope that in the near future this cooperation will take
shape on the ground.
It is encouraging to note that more active and
coordinated efforts are being made by regional players
for a settlement in South Sudan. We hope that the
UNMISS working group on hate speech will continue
to work effectively. We would like to remind colleagues
of the relevant provisions of resolution 2327 (2016),
namely, on the need to curb such incitement on their
territories through the use of social networks.
Given the general situation in the country, the
Russian delegation today supported the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2353 (2017), which extends
the sanctions regime against South Sudan. Our position
regarding a hardening of sanctions measures has not
changed. Solid peace in South Sudan is not going to
be brought about by a Security Council arms embargo

S/PV.7950

but, rather, by progress towards a political solution
as well as by targeted measures for the disarmament
of civilians and the demobilization and reintegration
of combatants. We also believe that there is a need to
heed the views of regional leaders to the effect that
discussions on the levying of additional restrictions on
Juba would be untimely.
Against this backdrop, we call attention to the
duplicity of the approaches of certain colleagues who in
this Chamber loudly champion an arms embargo, but,
outside of it, bring pressure to bear on the independent
experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan who are investigating their possible involvement
in providing weapons to South Sudan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the presidency
of Uruguay for drawing attention to the growing crisis
in South Sudan and express my appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer for his
comprehensive briefing.
Kazakhstan is of the view that the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian and security conditions as
well as the escalating number of internally displaced
people should compel us to take immediate action
on various fronts: political, security, humanitarian
and development.
We are alarmed by the increase in the number of
humanitarian incidents, the highest recorded in a single
month in 2017. Both the Government and all non-State
actors, given the gravity of the prevailing food
insecurity, should ensure unhindered humanitarian
access, especially to famine-affected locations.
We are also witnessing unprecedented levels of
violence against aid workers, with an alarmingly
high death toll, which makes South Sudan one of the
most perilous countries in the world. We urge the
Government and all non-State actors to ensure the safety
of humanitarian workers and bring the perpetrators of
such acts to justice.
Kazakhstan is alarmed at the fact that UNMISS is
encountering bureaucratic impediments to its operations
and freedom of movement. Any peacekeeping mission
must, in order to be effective, have its host country
comply with the obligations set out in the status-offorces agreement. We welcome the initial deployment
of the Regional Protection Force, as seen in the setting
up of the tactical helicopter unit, the engineering

17-1484113/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

company and the high-readiness company. At the same
time, we urge that the final tax exemptions be granted
for the equipment of the Rwandan forces, together with
the finalization of other remaining procedural issues.
Kazakhstan’s position is that there can be no
military solution to any conflict, and South Sudan is
no exception. Only inclusive and transparent dialogue,
as well as implementation of the peace agreement,
can result in genuine reconciliation. In this regard,
Kazakhstan welcomes the declaration of unilateral
ceasefire made by President Salva Kiir, as well as his
promise to release political prisoners. Even though
tensions are high, we need to demand a cessation of
hostilities from all parties to the conflict and introduce
security-sector reforms in the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army law-enforcement, judiciary and correction
systems. This is necessary to ensure the rule of law and
put an end to all impunity.
The involvement of women and youth must be
important components of the conflict-prevention
and resolution process, together with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. In addition, vigilance
and checking the flow of illicit weapons is fundamental
to ending armed conflict.
Let me say in concluding that Kazakhstan will lend
its full support to the concerted efforts of the United
Nations, IGAD and the African Union’s Peace and
Security Council in the pursuit of national dialogue in
South Sudan.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I join other colleagues
in thanking Special Representative David Shearer for
his insightful briefing.
I want to highlight three points: the security
situation, the political process and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
First, Ukraine strongly condemns the violence
in South Sudan, which continues to result in civilian
casualties, massive displacement and severe food
shortages. It is shocking that this violence highlights a
startling level of impunity, as the perpetrators of gross
human rights violation generally remain unpunished.
We have taken note of the unilateral ceasefire
declared by President Salva Kiir last Monday. It is
important that this announcement be translated into
concrete deeds, which requires ensuring that those on
the ground follow instructions from the top and that
there is a mechanism for holding those breaching the
14/18

24/05/2017

ceasefire to account. It goes without saying that a longlasting peace can be achieved only through a genuine
commitment of two parties. In this vein, we urge the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition
to cease hostilities and join the ceasefire declared by
President Kiir. Any delay in doing so will only lead to
more suffering for the South Sudanese people.
Secondly, we continue to believe that a
comprehensive political dialogue is the only way to
settle the conflict in South Sudan. In this regard, we
look forward with cautious optimism to the work of
the National Dialogue Committee, the inauguration
of which took place earlier this week. It is crucial to
ensure that all major groups of South Sudanese society
are represented in the Committee. Otherwise, it will
be impossible to achieve an inclusive political process
aimed at healing the wounds of the war and paving the
way to long-awaited peace and stability. My delegation
welcomes the active engagement of regional actors
in advancing peace in South Sudan. It is important
to keep all regional initiatives as well as those of
the broader international community coordinated
and synchronized.
My third and last point is on UNMISS. We regret
that, due to a number of impediments, the ability of
UNMISS to implement its mandate remains extremely
limited. The Mission and humanitarian actors must
have unhindered access to affected areas to be able to
help those in need, in particular in the areas affected
by armed clashes. We cannot stress enough that the
freedom of movement of UNMISS and humanitarian
organizations is not some kind of privilege to be
granted or taken away on a whim, but their right,
respect of which defines the ability to carry out their
mandated tasks.
Given the deteriorating security situation in South
Sudan, UNMISS should be ready to respond to any
further scenarios. In this vein, Ukraine, as one of the
countries contributing troops and police to the Mission,
welcomes the significant work undertaken to enhance
the ability of UNMISS to protect civilians, better
plan its response to crisis situations and increase staff
safety and security. Ukraine also looks forward to the
early commencement of operations of the Regional
Protection Force in South Sudan, as envisaged in
resolution 2304 (2016). We call on the Government to
provide all necessary assistance, including granting
customs clearances and visas for participating units.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for taking the initiative to
organize today’s important meeting on the situation in
South Sudan. I also wish to thank Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS), for the quality of his briefing.
The humanitarian crisis in South Sudan, in
addition to the famine in several parts of the country,
calls for urgent action by the international community.
Indeed, human rights violations must be brought to an
end as soon as possible, and the civilian population,
including the numerous internally displaced persons
fleeing the fighting that has returned to several parts
of the country, must be protected. Efforts should also
be made to keep these same populations in need from
succumbing to famine.
This concern to put an end to the suffering of the
people of South Sudan must also motivate the different
parties to the conflict which must immediately stop
fighting and resume the dialogue in order to implement
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. In this regard, we wish
to salute the unilateral ceasefire decided by President
Salva Kiir in order to create the conditions needed for
the process of national dialogue aimed at ending the
civil war. Indeed, this national dialogue, announced by
President Kiir last December, if it were to be inclusive,
free and transparent, could help the return of peace to
the country. We therefore hope that the ceasefire will
finally materialize on the ground so that the dialogue
process can start.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to encourage
all the initiatives announced by the countries of the
region for revitalizing the political process. Indeed, we
believe that regional actors, in particular the countries
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
have a clear role to play in the search for stability and
sustainable peace in South Sudan. That is why we
welcomed the recent visit to Juba made by President
Museveni. In this regard, we also believe that it is time
for the stalled peace process to be revived on the basis
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan because we are convinced
that there can be no military solution to the crisis. But
if that is to occur, the different actors will have to show
real political will to put an end to a conflict that has
lasted for more than three years.

S/PV.7950

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the progress
made in the preparations for the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force, the first elements of which
have already arrived in Juba. However, we should note
that little progress has been made in the discussions
between UNMISS and the Government of South Sudan
regarding the distribution of tasks for the Regional
Force at Juba International Airport. We therefore
call for more cooperation from the South Sudanese
Transitional Government on the role of the Regional
Protection Force in Juba. Accordingly, we encourage the
South Sudanese authorities to take all necessary steps
for the deployment of the Force without further delay.
As for UNMISS itself, whose resolute and
courageous action we salute, we must admit that,
despite certain improvements, it continues to face a
number of recurring restrictions on the freedom of its
movements, which naturally continues to undermine its
ability to carry out swift actions in the event of an attack
on civilians, and this in a context of increasing ethnic
violence, in violation of the status-of-forces agreement.
We therefore welcome the efforts of UNMISS, which,
despite all the difficulties encountered, continues to
operate in a hostile environment. We would also like
to pay tribute to the contributing countries for their
dedication to the cause of peace in South Sudan.
Unfortunately, targeted attacks and threats
against humanitarian workers are also continuing,
as are restrictions on humanitarian access to parts
of the country. We therefore call on all actors to stop
the hostilities immediately and allow UNMISS and
humanitarian workers to gain access to civilians
in need.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by joining others
in thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, David Shearer, for his comprehensive briefing
this morning. We also welcome the Council’s decision
today to extend the restrictive measures imposed by
resolution 2206 (2015) related to South Sudan. It is
important that the members of the Panel of Experts be
reappointed without delay so that they can continue
their important work.
The dire political, security and humanitarian
situation in South Sudan remains of great concern.
Despite repeated calls from the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
(AU) and the Security Council, little progress has
been made in finding a solution to the conflict. While

17-1484115/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

we welcome the declaration on a unilateral ceasefire
by President Kiir on Monday of this week, we must
now make every effort to ensure that this time his
commitments are honoured and implemented. The
region and the Security Council should agree to monitor
the situation closely and hold the South Sudanese
Government and other relevant actors to account. We
should all make it very clear that there is no time for
playing games, and that there will consequences if
agreements are breached.
It should by now be obvious to all that there is no
military option and that only a political solution can
resolve the conflict and bring peace to South Sudan.
We therefore, once again, call on all parties to come
to the table. A national dialogue could be an important
way forward, but only if it is genuinely inclusive and led
by impartial conveners at all levels. And there cannot
be a meaningful political process unless the fighting is
brought to an end.
While it is unfortunate that the deployment of the
regional protection force has been significantly delayed,
we welcome that it is now being deployed, and we hope
that it will soon be fully operational. That force should
contribute to giving the necessary political space to
allow the parties to engage in a meaningful political
process. However, we also agree with the SecretaryGeneral that neither the regional protection force, nor
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan represent a
panacea to the crisis. Only a political process is.
The need to address the humanitarian situation,
including ending all obstacles to relief efforts, grows
more pressing by the day. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/224) illustrates how the upswing in
violence against aid workers has had a severe impact
on humanitarian operations. That includes detentions,
threats, physical assaults and killing. Such behaviour
is simply unacceptable and is a grave violation
of international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
principles must be respected. The rapid, safe and
unhindered delivery of relief across South Sudan
must be assured. We pay tribute to the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners for their efforts in that
very difficult environment. We also commend the
intensified efforts under way to prevent a large-scale
cholera outbreak.
The international community owes it to the people
of South Sudan to engage with renewed commitment
and urgency. We welcome the intensified efforts now
16/18

24/05/2017

under way by actors in the region, including the recent
visit by President Museveni of Uganda to Juba earlier
this week. The world looks to the AU and IGAD to
take the lead in efforts to set out a road map for peace.
The Security Council must remain united in support of
those regional efforts and contribute to ensuring that
commitments are implemented. Important decisions,
such as the joint declaration at the AU Summit in
January, the IGAD communiqué of 24 March and the
clear steps outlined by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 23 March (S/PRST/2017/4),
must be followed up on and implemented.
We therefore call for continued close cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations, the AU
and IGAD. We commend the leadership shown by the
Secretary-General and encourage him to continue play
an active role. In that regard, we would welcome the
inclusion in his next report of more concrete proposals
on a way forward, including on how the United Nations
can best support the region in facilitating an inclusive
political process.
There can be no more business as usual on South
Sudan. There should be no illusions — our commitment
and engagement must be there for the long term. But let
us, in the short term, seize on the recent commitments
made by the Government and build on the sense of
renewed urgency in the region, including that coming
from Uganda and Kenya, to push for a solution. We
must do all we can to bring the conflict to an end. That
is our collective responsibility.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. David Shearer,
for participating in this meeting and for his briefing,
which gives us a complete overview of the latest
developments in South Sudan, of which we have taken
careful note.
Uruguay reiterates its deep concern and alarm at
the political, security, humanitarian and economic
crisis that South Sudan is going through. Today, I
would like to refer specifically to the following: first,
the launch of the national dialogue and the unilateral
ceasefire declaration by the President of South Sudan,
Mr. Salva Kiir; and, secondly, the performance of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.
17-14841

24/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Last Monday, the President of South Sudan formally
launched the national dialogue process and, at the same
time, declared a unilateral ceasefire. We acknowledge
that both actions point in the right direction, towards
the peaceful settlement of the conflict in South Sudan,
through a process of dialogue and not through military
operations. However, it should be underscored that it
is essential to carefully monitor the dialogue process
and the effective implementation of the ceasefire. In
that respect, we encourage continued efforts aimed at
making the existing platform for dialogue increasingly
more inclusive and representative of all South Sudanese.
Only an inclusive process of dialogue will have the
legitimacy needed to provide a way out of the conflict.
The international community, including the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations, must contribute in a coordinated fashion
to ensuring that the dialogue in South Sudan meets
the necessary conditions for legitimacy. We will also
closely follow the implementation of the unilateral
ceasefire by the Government, and we call on the other
political and military stakeholders in the country to
also put an end to hostilities throughout the territory of
the country. The complete and immediate cessation of
armed action in South Sudan is key to the viability of
the dialogue process.
With regard to the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan, I would like to recognize the
difficult work that it is carrying out to prevent further
atrocities and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the neediest, all in an extremely dangerous
operating environment. In that connection, the Council
has been advised by the Secretary-General that, eight
months after the adoption of resolution 2304 (2016),
which established the Regional Protection Force, the
deployment of some elements of that force has only just
begun, and differences persist between the Government
and United Nations as to the additional grounds needed
by the United Nations and the tasks that the force
will carry out. We therefore urge the Government of
South Sudan to cooperate fully in the implementation
of resolution 2327 (2016), including the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force and the lifting of any
restrictions on UNMISS, in accordance with the terms
of the status of forces agreement.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

S/PV.7950

I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I thank you, Sir, and
the members of the Security Council for giving me
another opportunity to address the Council. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, for his briefing.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
takes note of the renewal of the mandate of the South
Sudan sanctions regime and the Panel of Experts
(resolution 2353 (2017)). The Transitional Government
of National Unity reiterates it commitment to continue
to cooperate with the Security Council and the Panel
of Experts so that they can fulfil their mandate. My
delegation still maintains that the use of sanctions
is not the best solution for addressing the conflict in
South Sudan.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
also welcomes the recent arrival in South Sudan of the
first contingent of the Regional Protection Force (RPF)
and rejects the suggestion that it is hindering the RPF’s
deployment, since it has in fact been very cooperative.
The delay in the RPF’s deployment cannot be blamed
on the Government alone since, as the Council knows,
there are other factors operating in that regard.
Since the events of July 2016 that reignited the
conflict in South Sudan, President Kiir has worked
persistently to achieve lasting peace in the country.
He has taken a number of positive steps to ensure the
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan, engaging with
relevant stakeholders such as the leadership of the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and the United Nations. He has announced
several amnesties aimed at encouraging the rebels to
lay down their arms and return to the fold so as to
rebuild the country. Unfortunately, the other side has
been unyielding, choosing to stoke the fires fuelling the
conflict and taking the war to regions such as Greater
Equatoria and some parts of Greater Bahr el Ghazal
that had previously been relatively peaceful.
On Monday, 22 May, in Juba, President Kiir
launched a national dialogue in his quest for peace. He
has instructed a steering committee, led by national
figures, to conduct across-the-board consultations
and make the process as inclusive as possible, so that

17-1484117/18

S/PV.7950

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

all South Sudanese have the opportunity to air their
grievances. The new initiative by no means replaces the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan; rather, it is an opportunity to accommodate
views and address issues that the Agreement does not
tackle, and is thus complementary to it. The national
dialogue will be inclusive, free and credible, because the
Government is not leading or controlling the process.
Effective from 22 May, and in accordance with the
Security Council’s request for an immediate ceasefire
as a vital prerequisite for the credibility of any national
dialogue, in his speech launching the national dialogue
President Kiir declared a unilateral ceasefire, in order,
as he said, “to create an environment for inclusive
dialogue and to facilitate the movement of humanitarian
aid to famine-stricken areas.” In addition, he warned
the armed and security forces against harassing
rebels and opposition members who decide to join the
national dialogue. These important pronouncements
represent a genuine effort on the Government’s part
to create conditions conducive to a free and successful
dialogue process.
In response to the Security Council’s request for
an immediate end to the obstructions and attacks on all
the national and international humanitarian personnel
who are bringing much-needed, lifesaving assistance

18/18

24/05/2017

throughout South Sudan, President Kiir stressed in his
statement that the unilateral ceasefire will facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid to famine-stricken
areas. Instructions to that effect have already been
given to field commanders to ensure that humanitarian
organizations are allowed unimpeded access. The
Transitional Government of National Unity will neither
impede nor deny access to humanitarian actors. It is
our responsibility to ensure that peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers are not caught in any crossfire
during active fighting.
In conclusion, since the signing of the 2015 peace
agreement, the Transitional Government of National
Unity has been committed to implementing it in the
letter and the spirit so as to achieve permanent peace in
our country. It will continue to leave no stone unturned
in order to achieve that goal. Ultimately, however, it
will be incumbent on the rebel movements to meet the
Government halfway if they are serious about finding
a durable solution to the conflict. The Transitional
Government of National Unity urges the Security
Council and the international community to put
pressure on those groups to join the national dialogue
with a view to achieving peace.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

17-14841
