6. That the Secretary-General is requested to
submit a report to the next regular session of the
General Assembly on the action taken under this
resolution.

6. Le Sccretairc general est invite a presenter
a la prochaine session ordinairc de l'Assemblee
gcnerale Lill rapport sur Jes mesures prises en execution de la prcsente resolution.

Hundred and twrnty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

161 (II). Provisional staff regulations and
staff rules
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the staff rules and amendments
thereto which he had promulgated to implement
the Provisional Staff Regulatiom ( d()( utn<"nt

A/435);

Cent-1•ingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

161 (II). Statut et reglement provisoire du
•
personnel
L' Assemblee generate
Prend acte du rapport du Secretaire general sur
le rcglement du personnel qu'il a ctabli et Jes
a mcnd<"mrnt~ qu'il a apportcs ace rcglement pour
la misc en application du Statut provisoire du personnel ( document A/ ·135) ;

Requests the Secretary-General to present, four
months prior to the third regular session of the
General Assembly, a codification of the staff rules
for the information of the Assembly;

Invite le Secrctaire general a presenter, quatre
mois avant la troisicme session ordinaire de l'Assemblcc generale, et pour !'information de cette
Assemblce, le tcxte codifie du rcglement du personnel;

Resolves that the Provisional Staff Regulations
relating to children's allowances and education
grants (regulations 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34) be
cancelled and superseded, with effect from 1 January 1948, by the amended regulations contained
in Annex A, and

Decide d'annuler Jes articles du statut provisoire du personnel relatif aux indemnitcs pour
charge de famille et aux indemnitcs pour frais
d'etudes ( articles 30, 31, 32, 33 et 34) et de Jes
remplacer,
compter du premier janvier 1948
par Jes artir:ks amendes qui figurent a !'annexe
..\, et

Resolves that the Provisional Staff Regulations
relating to appointment, probation and promotion
be amended by the addition of regulation 12 A
and that regulation 21 be revised, as contained in
Annex B.

Decide de modifier les articles du statut pro\ isoire du personnel relatifs aux nominations,
la pcriode de stage et aux promotions par !'addition de !'article 12A, et de reviser l'articlc 21
'nnformcment au texte figurant !'annexe B.

a

a

a

Hundred and twenty-first JJ/enary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Crnt-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

Annex A

STAFF

Annexe A

REGL 1LATIONS

XII. CHJLDREN's t\1,1,ow,\Nn:, \Nll Eot'('·\Tlo.,;
GRANl,;

STATUT DU PERSONNEL
'-~! L

biDEMNITf:s

l'Ol"R CHARGES DE l'AMILLE ET

I"IDE\I 1' rrh,

,,, ,t·1, FR.\Is o'i•:TPIJE

llt'!!,1tlatiu11 :NJ
Artie/,· :w
As from I Ja11u;iry 19 lU, f11ll-tinw 11w111hn., nf
:\ partir du 1IT pnvi<T 194H, lt-s rtH'Itlhres du
the staff, with the ,·xccptio11 of t!Hb<' ,p,-cificdly 1wrs01mcl n\,ulii·r\'lncnt cmploycs, ;1 !'exception dt:
excluded by resolution of tlw Gn1cral ,-\sq·mhly. 1T11x qui ,011t cxprrsscment ,·xclus par unc dsolushall be entith-d to .1 childr\'11', ;illow.1rn·,· of tio11 de l':\ssf'lllbl,'.,. g(ncral,·, ont droit a Lllll" in~US200 per annum i11 TTsJw<:t of c;1d1 child urnli-r d, 111nit{ JHHII' charges ck familk de 20ll dollars
the age of sixteen Y"ars, or. if tlw , I11ld i, in lull- a111fri,ains par an et par n1fant de moins d!' seize
time attendance at ;1 sch, ,o] nr a u1mTrsity ( 01 ,, 11' ou, s'il s'agit d'un n1lant qui frequente reguliesimilar educational iristitutio11), under thl' age of i n·111,·nt um· frole OU Ulll' universite ( OU un etabliseighteen or twc11ty-two )Wars JTspcctivl'ly; pro- S\'l)H'flt d'cnseigncment analogue), de moins de
vidC'd that, if both pareuts .ire nwmbcrs of the i dix-huit ou vingt-deux ans respectivcment, sous
staff of the United Nations. only 0111' allmvanu· r<'"Tvt· quc, si k pi-re t·t la mere sont tous deux
will be paid in respect of each of their children; ' 11wmhrc-, du p,-rsonncl de ]'Organisation des Naand provided further that, whn" th,· Sencta1 v- , tions LT nics. urn· sn1lt- indemnite sera vcrsfr pour
General deems it advis,1hlc. no allm,a11< ,. or ,;11 i d1a,un de !curs cnfants et sous reserve en outre
allowance of an amount othl'r· than $U S2ll0 qu", si k Senctaire general le juge opportun, ii
may be paid under special cinumst,mcc.,. as for po11rra, dans des circonstances particulieres, n'etrc
exam.pie, short-term assignment, or a,sigmm·11ts at verse aucunC' indemnitr' OU bien etre verse une induty stations where the levels of Unit1·d Natiom dnnnite d'un montant autre que 200 dollars am.esalary scales are fixed at kvcls ,.1ryi11g from th,·
ri,·ains, cornmc, par cxemple, clans le cas de nomiHeadquarters scale.
1u lions pour um· breve periode, ou de nominations
;\ des postes situfs clans des lieux ou les eehelles de
traitements de ]'Organisation des Nations Unies
snnt differentes de celks qui sont en vigucur au
-.;if'gc.

Regulation 31
The allowance shall continue to be payable in
respect of his children to a full-•ime member of
the staff who becomes entitled under the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund Regulations to
a retirement or a disability benefit and to a widow
if in receipt of a widow benefit.

Article 31
Les memhres du personnel regulierement cmploycs qui ont droit a une pension de retraite ou
d'invalidite, conformemcnt au reglement de la
Caisse commune des pensions du personnel de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies, continueront a
rccevoir l'indemnite pour charges de famille en
ce qui conccrnc leurs cnfants. Cclle-ci sera egalcment vcrsee a la vcuve beneficiaire d'unc pension
de veuvc.

Regulation 32
Upon the death of a wember of t'1e staff who
receives a children's allowance under these regulations, and following the death of the other
parent, there shall be paid to the legal guardian of
each child an allowance of $US400, or such
other appropriate amount as may be fixed by the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee, having
regard to the further proviso in regulation 30.

Article :J2
Lors du deces du pere ( OU de la mere) qm
beneficit' d'une indcmnite pour charges de familk
conformcment au present reglcment, survcnant
apres celui dc la mere ( OU du pere), ii sera verse
au tutcur legal de chaquc enfant une indemnite
de 400 dollars americains ou unc autrc somme
appropriec fixec par le Comite des pensions du
pcrsonncl de !'Organisation dcs Nations Unics,
•~ompte tenu de la deuxiemc reserve stipulee a
I' article 30.

Regulation 33
Each full-time member of the staff, with the
exception of those specifically excluded by a resolution of the General Assembly, entitled to receive
a children's allowance under regulation 30, who is
employed by the United Nations in a country
other than his own country as specified in his
letter of appointment, shall be entitled to the following education grant:

Article 33
Les mcmbrcs du personnel regulierement employes par !'Organisation des Nations Unies (a
l't'xccption de ccux qui sont exprcssement t'xdus
par une resolution de I' Assemblee gcnerale) clans
un autre pays que le pays d'origine mentionne
clans la lettre d'engagemcnt et qui ont droit a um·
indemnitc pour charges de famille conformcment
a !'article 30, auront droit, en outre, aux indemnites suivantes pour frais d'etudes:
( a) The sum of $US200 per annum for
a) Um· somme de 200 dollars amcricains par
each child, in respect of whom a children's allow- an pour chaque enfant frcquentant rcgulierement
ance is payable, in full-time attendance at a school une ccolc ou urn· univrrsite clans son pays d'origine
or a university in his home country; provided that, ,·t pour lequel !(· rnembre du personnel a droit a
where a child attt'nded such an educational insti- unc indcmnite pour chargC's dC' famille. Si l'cntution for a period of less than two-thirds of any fant a frfquC'nte un etablisscment d'education dtc
one scholastic year, the allowance shall be reduced ct·t ordn· µcndant urH· periodC' infericun· aux deu,
to such proportion of $US200 as the period tins de I' .innfr scolairc, ('1•tte allocation d,· 201)
dollars amfricains scra reduitc a urn· fraction proso attended bear~ to a full scholastic year;
portionncllc a la durcc dl' frequcntation;
( b) Once in each scholastic year the travelling
b) Unc fois par anllfr ,colain-. le~ frais de
expenses of the outward and return journey of voyage allcr l"t f<"tour dt l'cnfant, k voyage s'elfecsuch a child by a route approved by the Sc-cretary- tuant suivant un itinfrairc approuvt'.· par le Seen·•.' tairc general;
General;
( c) Should staff members elect to send their
c) Si lt:s membres du personnel dfrident d'cnchildren to special national schools in the area voycr !curs enfants clans des {coles nationaks spt>wherc thr-y are scTving, including intC'rnational cialcs de la region 011 ils ('XCn·,·nt leurs fonctions
schools organized for children of United Nations et notarnmcnt clans lcs ccoks intr-rnationales orstaff members, rather than to schools in their home ganisfrs pour ks cnfants des mnnbn-s du percountries, the· United Nations will pay for each sonnel de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, au li,·u
child otherwise eligible for the education grant, d,· k, cnvoyer clans urn· frolt· de leur pays d'orian allowance equal to the difference betwecll the gmc, !'Organisation ]Mina pour chaquc cnfant qui
cost of education at the special school which he aurait droit autrnnent a l'indemnite pour frais
attends and thc cost at a comparable school at- d'etudes, une indemnite egalc a la difference rntrt'
tcnded by children of persons normally resident in lcs frais d'ctudcs clans l'frole speciale qu'il fn'the area, provided that the allowance shall not quentc et Jes frais d'etudc clans unr ecolc analogw·
exceed $US200 per year. This allowance shall frequentec par les enfants qui resident habituellebe payable only when there is a valid reason for mcnt dans la region, sous n'serve que cette indemthe child not to attend school in the home country; nite m· depassera pas la somme de 200 dollars
for instance, in thC' case of children under eleven amfricains. Cette indemnite ne sC'ra versec quc
years of age or when the health of the child is s'il y a une raison valable qui cmpeche l'enfant d,·
such that return to the home country is not fn'quPnter l'ecole clans son pays d'originc, par
feasible.
ex,·rnp!t- dans k cas d'un ,·nfant age de moins ck
onzc ans ou si l'etat de sante de l'cnfant ne Jui
permet pas de rctoumer clans le pays d'origine.
If both parents arc members of the staff of the
Si le perc rt la mere sont tous deux mt'mbrt's du
United Nations, only onc grant will be paid in personnel, une seulc allocation sc-ra accordee par
respect of each of their children.
enfant.
Regulation 34
The Secretary-General may dccidc in each case
whether allowances or grants under regulations 30

Article :14
Le Secretaire general peut decider, clans chaquc
cas particulier, si Jes indernnites prevucs aux arti-

67

and 33 shall extend to adopted children or step- f cles 30 et 33 s'appliquent auss1 a des enfants
children.
adoptifs ou aux enfants du conjoint.
Annex B

Annexe B

STAFF REGULATIONS

STATUT DU PERSONNEL

II. APPOINTMENT, PROBATION AND PROMOTION

II. NOMINATIONS, STAGES ET PROMOTIONS

Regulation 12A
The appointment of any member of the staff for
a probationary period or on a short-term contract,
which shall include any temporary contract, may
be subject to such conditions as the SecretaryGeneral may deem desirable.

Article 12A
L'engagement de tout membre du personnel
pour une periode de stage ou sur la base d'un
contrat a court terme, ee qui s'applique a tous Jes
contrats temporaires, peut etre soumis awe conditions que le Secretaire general estime opportunes.

Regulation 21
The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a member of the staff in accordance
with the terms of his appointment if made under
the provisions of regulation 12A, or if the necessities of the service require the abolition of the
post or a reduction of the staff, or if the services
of the individual concerned prove unsatisfactory.

Article 21
Le Secretaire general peut resilier !'engagement
d'un membre du personnel awe termes de son engagement si celui-ci a ete etabli conformement awe
dispositions de !'article 12A, ou si les necessites du
service exigent la suppression de son poste ou une
reduction de personnel, ou si Jes services de l'interesse ne donnent pas satisfaction.

162 (II). United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Scheme

162 (II). Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel de l'Organisatio_n des Nations Unies
L'Assemblee generate
Prend acte des dispositions administrativcs
reglementant la Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel ( document A/397) ;
Decide de maintenir sans changement, pendant
une periode d'un an, et sur une base provisoire, le
regime provisoire de la Caisse commune des pensions;

The General Assembly
Takes note of the administrative rules relating
to the Provisional Joint Staff Pension Scheme
(document A/397);
Decides that the Provisional Joint Staff Pension Scheme now in effect shall continue unchanged, and on a provisional basis, for a further
period of one year;
Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to study the report of the Secretary-General, the implications of
the proposals of the United Nations Staff Benefit
Committee and any new proposals made by the
Joint St:1ff Benefit Committee, the communication from !\fr. A. J. Altrneyer of the United Nations St:-.ff Bendit Committee, and communications from delegations rcl.iting to the Pension
Scheme, as well as tbe record of discussions in the
Fifth Committee during the second part of the
first session and the se(·<m<l session of the: General
Assembly, and to circulate a report to the l\fembers of the United Nations before the next regular session of the General Assembly;

Declares that a permanent pension scheme
should be promulgated, if possible in 1948.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Invite le Comitc consultatif pour lcs questions
administratives et bu<lgctaircs a etudier le rapport
du Secretaire general, lcs incidences des propositions du Comite des pen~!ons du personnel des
l',ati01is Unics et de toutc proposition nouvelle
:ormu!Ce par le C,,m:tc mixte des retraitcs du perrn:rnd, la ,:omr:nmication emanant de 1\1. A. J.
Altmcyer du Comitc de, pensions du personnel
ck-; Nati,m< Unies, et Jes communications cma11ant des delegations. relatives au projet de pensions, ainsi q ue lcs co:11ptcs rend us des discussions
qni ont eu li::u dcvant la Cinquicme Commission
pendant la scconde partie de la premicre session
et pendant la deuxicmc i-ession de l'Assemhlee
gcnfrale; et de distribuer aux Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unirs un rapport avant la
prochaine S('.,<ion ordi:i;iirc de I' A<semblee generale;
Declare qu'il v a lien de mettre en vigueur un
regime permanent de pensions, si possible en 1948.
C·n t-vingt et uni,lrne seance pl!:niere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

cm.

163 CII). Provisional Financial Regulations
of the United Nations
The General Assembly resolves

163

1. That the following Provisional Financial
Regulations be adopted in place of those adopted
by the General Assembly at the second part of its
first session under resolution HO ( T; ; 1

1. D'adopter le reglement financier provisoire
ci-aprcs en remplacement du reglement financier
que l'A,,semblcc gcncrale a adoptc pendant la
scronde partie de sa premierc session, aux termcs
de la resolution 80 (I) ;

'See Resolutions adopted by the General Asjembly during the second part of its first session, page 144.

1
Voir Jes Resolutions adoptees par l' Assemblee ginerale
pendant la scconde partie de sa premiere session, page 144.

Reglement financier provisoire de
l'Orgcmisation des Nations Unies
L'Assembl!:e generate decide

68
