United Nations

S/PV.6638

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6638th meeting
Tuesday, 25 October 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Agasandyan
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2011/643)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-56243 (E)

*1156243*

S/PV.6638

aware, was awaited in order to accelerate the next stage
of the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, including, inter alia, the establishment of
committees and commissions under the authority of the
Darfur Regional Authority, as well as the confirmation
by President Omer Al-Bashir of the LJM candidates for
posts within the Regional Authority and other offices.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2011/643)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/643, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I am pleased to
be here today to brief the Council on the situation in
Darfur and on the implementation of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General dated 12 October 2011
(S/2011/643). In addition, I should like to highlight
some key points related to the peace process and the
humanitarian and security situation in Darfur.
Progress has been achieved in the implementation
of the Agreement on the adoption of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The head of the
Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM), Eltigani
Seisi, arrived in the Sudan on 22 October, together
with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Qatar, Sheikh Ahmad bin Abdullah
Al-Mahmoud. On 23 October, Mr. Seisi took the oath
as Chair of the Darfur Regional Authority, and the
following day began a weeklong visit to Darfur, which
is still under way. His arrival in the Sudan, as all are

2

The intention of the parties is to rebuild the
institutions established in the context of the Darfur
peace process, whose operations were suspended by
the Government following a breakdown in relations
with the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni
Minawi earlier this year. The parties intend to integrate
these elements into the committees and commissions of
the Darfur Regional Authority in order to avoid any
duplication or overlap.
At the fourth and fifth meetings held in
El-Fasher, on 3 and 17 October, the Ceasefire
Commission discussed the need for the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Liberation and Justice
Movement to submit to the process of the verification
of maps and information relating to the position of
their forces. A subcommittee including representatives
of UNAMID and the LJM was set up at the 3 October
meeting to assist the LJM in producing a graphic
representation of the location of its forces. The
Sudanese Armed Forces have already submitted the
required information, and the LJM is expected to also
provide, at the next meeting of the Commission, on
31 October, a list showing the current location of its
forces, so as to enable the process of the verification of
all forces by UNAMID to begin.
UNAMID is helping community leaders and civil
society organizations to devise a plan aimed at the
dissemination of information on the Doha Document
throughout Darfur. Regular contacts have been made
with the actors in Darfur from 3 to 19 October.
UNAMID has also held meetings in the larger camps
and towns to assess the first impressions of the people
with regard to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The mission noted broad support in principle for the
Document among internally displaced persons,
political opposition parties, civil society organizations
and local authorities. UNAMID also noted that many
of them deplore the lack of support for the Doha
Document by the Justice and Equality Movement, the
SLA-Abdul Wahid and the SLA-Minni Minawi, and
understand that the success of the Doha Document will

11-56243

S/PV.6638

depend to a large extent on the willingness of the
Government to implement its provisions.
While we commend the first steps taken by the
Government and the LJM in terms of implementing the
Doha Document, we must also continue to do
everything in our power to help the Sudanese people to
reach an inclusive and final agreement on this conflict.
As the Security Council is aware, the United Nations
and the African Union are working with the parties to
develop a new road map for peace in Darfur, whose
aim is to put an end to hostilities and to make the peace
process more inclusive.
(spoke in English)
Following extensive consultations between the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as with
the parties to the conflict and the members of the
Implementation Follow-Up Commission, UNAMID
presented the main elements of the road map to
international partners at the fourth retreat of special
envoys, held in El Geneina on 19 October. Those
elements were: first, support for the implementation of
the Doha Document; secondly, sustained engagement
with those movements that were holding out; and
thirdly, support, in principle, for internal dialogue
among the people of Darfur on the peace process.
Final consultations are needed within the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as with
international partners, before the road map can be
finalized. In addition, provision will be made for the
outcome of a workshop set to take place in
Washington, D.C., on 16 and 17 November to be
reflected in the road map. The development of the road
map as a whole will be completed by the end of the
year.
At the retreat for special envoys I mentioned
earlier, participants reviewed recent developments in
Darfur and discussed the way forward. The retreat
provided a useful forum for enhancing coordination
and the engagement of the international community in
the Darfur peace process. In the outcome statement of
19 October, participants, among other things,
welcomed the signing of the Agreement for the
Adoption of the Doha Document, took note of the
progress made towards the implementation of the
Agreement, and called on all parties to cease military
hostilities and pursue a negotiated settlement to the
conflict.

11-56243

While the security situation in Darfur was
relatively calm between 1 July and the end of
September, it subsequently deteriorated in El Taweisha,
in North Darfur, and in Nertiti, in the West, due to
sporadic fighting between Government forces and
armed groups. Since the issuance of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on 5 October, an unidentified armed
group attacked the compound of the Nertiti Locality
Commissioner. A Government police unit guarding the
compound repelled the attack, and there were no
reported casualties. Also in Nertiti, an unidentified
armed group attacked a Sudanese Armed Forces
observation post on 12 October. Again, no casualties
were reported. UNAMID increased patrolling in the
area and engaged community leaders, local
Government officials and movement commanders to
promote security and stability.
In North Darfur, an unidentified armed group
attacked a Sudanese Armed Forces unit in Kroya
Laban, 25 kilometres west of El Taweisha, on
6 October, killing — according to Sudanese Armed
Forces sources — three of SAF soldiers and injuring
nine. Local interlocutors informed UNAMID that the
Sudanese Armed Forces then attacked Kroya Laban
and nearby Ushandumah villages on 9 October. On
11 October, at the camp for internally displaced
persons (IDP) in Neem 60 kilometres south of
El Taweisha,
a
UNAMID
verification
patrol
encountered approximately 80 households recently
displaced from Kroya Laban and Ushandumah. The
Mission is working with humanitarian agencies to
ensure that these persons receive aid.
As I have mentioned, with regard to recent
attacks involving UNAMID patrols, on 30 September,
as a UNAMID patrol passed by a Sudanese Armed
Forces position in Foro Baranga, in West Darfur, a man
dressed in civilian clothing ran towards the convoy,
climbed on top of a UNAMID armed personnel carrier
and attempted to enter it through the top hatch. The
man was being pursued and fired upon by Sudanese
Armed Forces personnel, who shot him dead.
Approximately 40 Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers
then surrounded the convoy and took custody of the
body. I have to stress that UNAMID takes such
situations seriously, and an investigation into the
incident, including into whether patrol members
followed proper drills and procedures, is under way.
The case of the person in charge is presently being
scrutinized. UNAMID human rights officers are also

3

S/PV.6638

following up with Sudanese Armed Forces authorities
to investigate the circumstances that led to the victim
being pursued by Government soldiers.
As I reported to the Council on 11 October during
a briefing on Abyei, a UNAMID patrol was ambushed
by unidentified armed men near Zam Zam camp on
10 October. Tragically, three UNAMID peacekeepers
were killed and six injured. One of the attackers was
also killed in the exchange of fire that ensued. A
UNAMID investigation into the incident is ongoing.
The investigation will aim to establish, among other
things, the source of the attack and the steps that
UNAMID can take to deter and enhance its response to
such attacks.
In accordance with resolution 2003 (2011) and
with a view to enhancing the efficiency of the
operations of the Mission, the Secretary-General is
planning to undertake a review of UNAMID uniformed
personnel. The review will be led by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, working in conjunction with the African
Union, UNAMID and relevant Secretariat departments.
It is our intention to undertake a comprehensive review
of mission resources for mandate implementation,
with, as I said, a particular focus on uniformed
personnel. The Secretary-General expects to be able to
provide preliminary recommendations to the Council in
the first quarter of next year.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that while
important progress has been made in the peace process,
more work is required to reach an inclusive settlement
to the conflict. It will be crucial in this regard for the
signatory parties to broaden support for the Doha
Document by working to ensure that peace dividends
reach the people of Darfur. I therefore call on the
parties to implement the DDPD faithfully and in a
timely manner. I also urge international partners to
support the parties’ efforts in this regard.
The attainment of an inclusive settlement to the
conflict also requires the Government and holdout
movements to agree to cease hostilities and enter into
dialogue. The effects of clashes like those in Nertiti
and El Taweisha show that protection and humanitarian
challenges will remain so long as the Sudanese Armed
Forces and armed groups engage each other militarily.
I call on those parties that have not yet done so to
cease hostilities and enter into peace negotiations
immediately and without precondition.

4

In addition, UNAMID peacekeepers and aid
workers continue to face serious risks in Darfur. Of
course, I strongly condemn those responsible for the
cowardly attack on our peacekeepers at Zam Zam. I
call on the Government to fully investigate the incident
and to spare no effort in bringing those responsible to
justice. I also call on the Government to fully
investigate the 30 September shooting incident in Foro
Baranga.
The continued support of the Council remains
vital to enabling UNAMID to improve the security
situation in Darfur, support the delivery of aid and
advance the peace process. Despite the challenges, the
many dedicated women and men of UNAMID are
contributing to the creation of a more secure
environment for civilians, safer humanitarian
operations and more inclusive peace process in what
remain very difficult and demanding circumstances.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to reiterate our congratulations to
you, Madame, as you prepare to conclude your
presidency of the Security Council for this month,
having organized a programme ripe with momentous
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Sudan, I extend our condolences to the peoples and
Governments of Rwanda and Senegal for the three
soldiers who were killed in the attack carried out by the
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi against a
convoy of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) near the Zam Zam
camp in a desperate attempt to stifle the positive
impetus and considerable support enjoyed by the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur.
I should also like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing on the situation in Darfur.
We are inspired with hope by the fact that today’s
deliberations on the Secretary-General’s report on
UNAMID (S/2011/643) are taking place only two days
after the appointment Mr. Eltigani Seisi, the head of
the Liberation and Justice Movement who signed the

11-56243

S/PV.6638

Doha Document, as Chair of the Darfur Regional
Authority. Earlier, Al Haj Adam Youssef, an
outstanding leader and son of Darfur, was appointed
Second Vice-President of the Republic of the Sudan.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, signed
on 14 July 2011, is not merely a traditional peace
agreement. Rather, it reflects an integrated vision to
address all of the Darfuris’ demands and aspirations.
All the Council members have followed the heavy
turnout and broad participation by all sections and
factions of Darfuri society. The Sudanese stakeholders
conference was held in Doha in the framework of this
Document. In addition there was engagement by the
tribal chiefs as symbols of the civil administration,
civil society youth organizations and women in Darfur.
Immediately after the signing of the Document
we began with robust resolve the first phase of its
implementation by earmarking $2 billion annually
towards projects for recovery, development and
reconstruction, including rehabilitation of the villages
and to facilitate voluntary return and stability for the
internally displaced persons.
Contrary to previous times, the temporary Darfuri
authorities will now have their venue in Darfur and not
in Khartoum. By virtue of the provisions of the
agreement, the Authority enjoys a broad mandate with
respect to the needs and demands of its people, who are
a dear part of our people in the Sudan.
Despite the fact that all the citizens of Darfur
fully opted in favour of peace and agreed to the Doha
Peace Document, peace continues to have enemies
among those who prefer to profit from the situation of
their people in Darfur.
Although the Doha Document comprehensively
addressed the root causes of the conflict, as stated in
paragraph 2 of the report before the Council, leaders of
some movements have refused to accede to the march
of peace and have instead entered into conspiratorial
alliances with some parties that have nothing
whatsoever to do with the Darfur question. They have
stated their adoption of military action as the sole
option to topple the Government. That has showed that
the Government is more interested in achieving peace
and stability and in responding to the demands of the
Darfuris than are those movements that have appointed
themselves as custodians over the Darfuris, without
any right or any legitimate or national democratic
elections in the region.

11-56243

Yet despite that, the Doha Document did not
close the door in their face. Rather it called on those
movements to join the peace train and to sign the
Agreement. Rather than making use of the time limit
set for joining the peace train, those movements
entered into conspiratorial alliances with the outlawed
parties from the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(SPLM)-North. In Kaoda, South Kordofan, they signed
an agreement in which they promised to topple the
Government by military action. That alone constitutes
a dangerous threat to the Government of the fledgling
sisterly Government of South Sudan, because the rebel
movements in Darfur are attempting to deter the peace,
stability and security so highly needed by the sisterly
State of South Sudan. We fear that this may lead to a
weakening of the State whose success we all hope for.
That was the response of the rebel movements to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Therefore, we
expect the Council to take the requisite measures
towards those who impede the achievement of peace
and stability. This is particularly so since the Council’s
resolution emphasized its resolve to take such
measures.
With respect to UNAMID’s important role in
Darfur, my delegation reiterates its full commitment to
cooperate with the mission and to facilitate its task in
the framework of its mandate, according to the
resolution by which it was established.
At the same time, we would emphasize the need
for coordination between the mission and the
provincial authorities in Darfur with regard to the time
and the manner of managing security, administrative
and logistical affairs in order to avoid the possibility of
such regrettable incidents as the one that happened in
the Zam Zam camp, where three or four peacekeeper
guests were victims. It was carried out by the rebel
faction led by Minni Arko Minawi. That incident
would never have taken place had there been
coordination with the mission under the agreement not
to run patrols at night and to abide by requirements of
prior notification to the relevant authorities.
The report before the Council has clearly
indicated in paragraph 20, in the section on the security
situation, that skirmishes between Government forces
and armed movements have decreased. From time to
time residual armed groups undertake certain
violations, plundering, armed robbery and theft in a

5

S/PV.6638

manner that requires our armed forces to intervene to
impose the rule of law and to protect civilians.
With respect to the contents of the report, in
particular the allegations of restrictions that impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to some areas, we
would like to clarify certain important elements to the
Council.
Some personnel of humanitarian organizations
have occasionally travelled directly to the site where
they intend to work without acquiring internal travel
permits beforehand. When they reach the site, they are
asked to show such permits. Security and police
officials then have no other option but to send them
back in order to obtain the required approval. That
must not be interpreted as impeding the movement of
personnel of humanitarian organizations. Rather, it is a
shortcoming that must be blamed on the personnel of
those organizations. A high-level committee that
includes
Government,
United
Nations
and
humanitarian representatives is the mechanism with
responsibility for ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and removing obstacles to that end.
In addition, from time to time, security
assessments are carried out and United Nations staff
and humanitarian personnel are instructed not to travel
to a given area. This is first and foremost in order to
ensure their safety and to prevent kidnappings, as have
taken place in the past. It is done out of my
Government’s concern, which should be appreciated.
With regard to entry visas for mission personnel,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is well
aware of the fact that in recent weeks we have asked it
repeatedly to provide us with a specific list of persons
requiring visas. We continue to await such a list.
I would now like to address an important issue
concerning visas. In consultation with the leadership of
UNAMID, we concluded that we should prioritize the
recruitment of Arabic-speaking police personnel. There

6

is a genuine communication problem between mission
police and the citizens of Darfur. Joint Chief Mediator
Ibrahim Gambari has made some progress in that
regard in the process of the periodic rotation of formed
police units. The Council has agreed on the need for
Arabic-speaking police personnel in a society whose
language is Arabic and with whom there is a need for
communication and to provide them services.
In conclusion, having begun the practical
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace, it is
our hope that UNAMID will pay greater attention to
the other aspects of its mandate pertaining to
development and reconciliation, with a view to
implementing the provisions of the Document.
The meeting between mission officials and
various Council members, the meeting of Darfur
representatives with many members of the Council and
the meetings held in Geneina, the capital of West
Darfur, with the Government of the Sudan from 19 to
20 October all point to the extent to which stability and
peace are entrenched in West Darfur. The meeting with
the Government of the Sudan illustrates its cooperation
in bringing an end to what remains of the conflict.
The development efforts we look forward to in
the next phase through the contributions of the
international community — in particular donors,
international financial institutions and United Nations
agencies — in support of the Doha Document will
enable Darfur’s citizens to achieve stability and to live
normal lives.
Finally, I wish Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
every success on his upcoming trip to the Sudan to
meet with senior officials on all aspects pertaining to
the situation in Darfur and UNAMID.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

11-56243
