II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of Arab
territories in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and repeated United Nations resolutions;
3. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be achieved without Israel's withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since 1967
and the attainment by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, which are the basic prerequisites enabling all countries and peoples in the Middle East to
live in peace;
4. Condemns all measures taken by Israel in the
occupied territories to change the demographic and
geographic character and institutional structure of these
territories;
5. Requests once again all States to desist from
supplying Israel with military and other forms of aid
or any assistance which would enable it to consolidate
its occupation or to exploit the natural resources of
the occupied territories;
6. Requests the Security Council to take effective
measures, within an appropriate time-table, for the
implementation of all relevant resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly on the Middle East and
Palestine;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle
East of the present resolution and to submit a report
on the follow-up of its implementation to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session.
95th plenary meeting
9 December 1976
31/62.

Peace Conference on the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation in
the Middle East",
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on this
item 45 and his initiative of 1 April 1976,46
Gravely concerned at the lack of progress towards
the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East,
Convinced that any relaxation in the search for a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the
Middle East problem to achieve a just peace in the
area constitutes a grave threat to the prospects of peace
in the Middle East as well as a threat to international
peace and security,
1. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To resume contacts with all the parties to the
conflict and the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference
on the Middle East, in accordance with his initiative
of 1 April 1976, in preparation for the early convening
of the Peace Conference on the Middle East;
( b) To submit a report to the Security Council
on the results of his contacts and on the situation in
the Middle East not later than 1 March 1977;
45 A/31/270-S/12210. For the printed text, see Official Rec-

ords of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1976.
46
f\./31/270-S/12210, para. 8. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1976.

23

2. Calls for the early convening of the Peace Conference on the Middle East, under the auspices of the
United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America, not later than the end of March 1977;
3. Requests the Security Countil to convene subsequent to the submission by the Secretary-General of
the report referred to in paragraph 1 ( b) above, in
order to consider the situation in the area in the light
of that report and to promote the process towards the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the area;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to inform
the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference on the
Middle East of the present resolution.
95 th plenary meeting
9 December 1976
31/63.

Third united Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea 47

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974
and 3483 (XXX) of 12 December 1975,
Noting the letter dated 20 September 1976 from the
President of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea to the President of the General
Assembly 48 regarding the decisions reached at the fifth
session of the Conference, held in New York from
2 August to 17 September 1976,
Having considered the decision of the Conference, as
conveyed in the letter of its President, that its sixth
session should be convened in New York on 23 May
1977 for a period of seven weeks, with a possible extension to eight weeks should the Conference so decide,
Bearing in mind the request of the Conference, referred to in the letter from its President, that the Secretary-General should provide the necessary facilities for
private consultations between sessions among Governments and delegations,
Taking into account the recommendation made by
the Conference that the General Assembly should study
measures to ensure stability and continuity for the secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference,
1. Approves the convening of the sixth session of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea in New York for the period from 23 May
to 8 July 1977, with a possible extension to 15 July
should the Conference so decide;
2. Reiterates its decision at its thirtieth session49
to accord priority to the Conference in relation to other
United Nations activities, except those of organs established by the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to make available, as appropriate, the necessary facilities for private
consultations between sessions among Governments and
delegations;
. 4. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to contmue to make the necessary arrangements originally
provided under paragraph 9 of General Assembly
47

See also sect. X.B.6 below, decision 31/407.

48 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Ses-

sion, Annex~s, agenda item 30, document A/31/225.
49 Resolution 3483 (XXX), para. 2.
