A/RES/75/160

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 December 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 28
Advancement of women

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 16 December 2020
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/75/471, para. 80)]

75/160.

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female
genital mutilation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/117 of 9 December 1998, 56/128 of 19 December
2001, 67/146 of 20 December 2012, 68/146 of 18 December 2013, 69/150 of
18 December 2014, 71/168 of 19 December 2016 and 73/149 of 17 December 2018,
Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 51/2 of 9 March 2007, 1 52/2 of 7 March
2008 2 and 54/7 of 12 March 2010 3 and Human Rights Council resolutions 27/22 of
26 September 2014, 4 32/21 of 1 July 2016, 5 38/6 of 2 July 2018 6 and 44/16 of 17 July
2020 7 and all relevant agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 8
Reaffirming also that the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 9 the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 10 and all relevant
conventions, together with the optional protocols thereto, as appropriate, constitute

__________________

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 7 (E/2007/27),
chap. I, sect. D.
2
Ibid., 2008, Supplement No. 7 (E/2008/27), chap. I, sect. D.
3
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and E/2010/27/Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. D.
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1, A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A.
5
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
6
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
7
Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53), chap. V, sect. A.
8
Resolution 217 A (III).
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
10
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
1

20-17297 (E)

301220

*2017297*

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation

A/RES/75/160

an important contribution to the legal framework for the protection and promotion of
the human rights of women and girls,
Reaffirming further the Beijing Declaration 11 and Platform for Action, 12 the
outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty -first
century”, 13 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development 14 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development 15 and their 5-, 10-, 15- and 20-year reviews, as well as the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 16 and the commitments relevant to women and girls
made at the 2005 World Summit 17 and reiterated in Assembly resolution 65/1 of
22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals”, and those made in the outcome document of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, 18
Recognizing the role of regional and subregional instruments and mechanisms
in the prevention and elimination of female genital mutilation, where they exist,
Recalling Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, adopted in
Maputo on 11 July 2003, which contains, inter alia, undertakings and commitments
on ending female genital mutilation and marks a significant milestone towards the
elimination and ending of female genital mutilation,
Recalling also the decision of the African Union, adopted in Malabo on 1 July
2011, to support the adoption by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session of a
resolution banning female genital mutilation,
Recognizing that female genital mutilation constitutes irreparable, irreversible
harm and an act of violence against women and girls th at impairs and undermines the
enjoyment of their human rights, and recognizing also that it affects many women and
girls who are at risk of being subjected to the practice throughout the world, which is
an impediment to the full achievement of gender equal ity and the empowerment of
women and girls,
Reaffirming that female genital mutilation is a harmful practice constituting a
serious threat to the health of women and girls, including their physical, mental,
sexual and reproductive health, that it has no documented health benefits, that it may
give rise to possible adverse obstetric and prenatal outcomes and may increase
vulnerability to hepatitis C, tetanus, sepsis, urine retention and ulceration, as well as
to fatal consequences for the mother and child, and that the elimination of this harmful
practice can be achieved as a result of a comprehensive movement that involves all
public and private stakeholders in society, including women and men, girls and boys,
families, communities, religious leaders and local community and traditional leaders,

__________________

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4 –15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
12
Ibid., annex II.
13
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
14
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
15
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6 –12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
16
Resolution 55/2.
17
See resolution 60/1.
18
Resolution 70/1.
11

2/7

20-17297

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation

A/RES/75/160

Recognizing that female genital mutilation is inherently linked to deep -rooted
harmful stereotypes, negative social norms, perceptions and customs on the part of
both women and men that threaten the physical and psychological integrity of women
and girls, and that are obstacles to their full enjoyment of human rights, and
acknowledging in this regard that awareness-raising is critical,
Welcoming the increased national, regional and international efforts and the
political commitment at the highest levels, which are critical to successfully
eradicating female genital mutilation,
Deeply concerned that the practice of female genital mutilation persists in all
parts of the world and that new methods, such as its medicaliz ation and cross-border
practice, are emerging,
Recognizing that negative discriminatory and stereotypical attitudes and
behaviours, on the part of both women and men, have direct implications for the status
and treatment of women and girls, and that such negative stereotypes impede the
implementation of legislative and normative frameworks that guarantee gender
equality and prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex,
Stressing that men and boys play an important role in the acceleration of
progress in preventing and eliminating harmful practices such as female genital
mutilation by being agents of change,
Recognizing that the campaign of the Secretary-General entitled “UNiTE to End
Violence against Women” and the Global Database on Violence against Women have
contributed to addressing the elimination of female genital mutilation,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations system to end female genital
mutilation, in particular the commitment of 10 United Nations entities, 19 announced
in their joint inter-agency statement of 27 February 2008 on eliminating female
genital mutilation, as well as the Joint Programme on the Elimination of Female
Genital Mutilation: Accelerating Change of the United Nations Population Fund and
the United Nations Children’s Fund, to accelerate the elimination of the practice,
Commending the continued efforts and actions undertaken by States,
individually and collectively, regional organizations and United Nations agencies for
the elimination of female genital mutilation, as well as the implementation of its
resolution 71/168,
Underscoring the importance of eliminating female genital mutilation as a
contribution to the implementation of the range of Sustainable Development Goals
and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular target 5.3,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 20
Deeply concerned that a tremendous gap in resources continues to exist and that
the shortfall in funding has severely limited the scope and pace of programmes and
activities for the elimination of female genital mutilation,
1.
Stresses that the empowerment of women and girls is key to br eaking the
cycle of discrimination and violence and for the promotion and protection of human
rights, including the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
mental and physical health, including sexual and reproductive health, and calls upon
__________________

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, United Nations Development Programme, Economic Commission for
Africa, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations
Population Fund, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations
Children’s Fund, United Nations Development Fund for Women and World Health Organization.
20
A/75/279.
19

20-17297

3/7

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation

A/RES/75/160

States parties to fulfil their obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, as well as their commitments to implement the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women, 21 the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development, the Beijing Platform for
Action and the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”, and of the special session of the General Assembly on children; 22
2.
Calls upon States to place a stronger focus on the development and
implementation of comprehensive prevention strategies, including the intensification
of educational campaigns, awareness-raising and formal and non-formal education
and training in order to promote the direct engagement of girls and boys, women and
men and to ensure that all key actors, including government officials, law
enforcement and judicial personnel, immigration officials, parliamentarians, health care providers, practitioners, civil society, the private sector, community and religious
leaders, teachers, employers, media professionals and those directly working with
girls, as well as parents, legal guardians, families and communities, work to eliminate
attitudes and harmful practices, in particular female genital mutilation, that negatively
affect women and girls, and emphasizes the importance of adopting a non-stigmatization
approach in all prevention interventions;
3.
Also calls upon States to develop information and awareness-raising
campaigns and programmes to systematically reach and engage the general public,
especially relevant professionals, in particular schoolteachers, families, communities,
civil society representatives, including women’s and girl-led organizations and
religious and traditional leaders, including through the traditional and non -traditional
media, featuring television and radio discussions and information and
communications technology, about the harmful effects of female genital mutilation
and the fact that this practice still exists and about national and international levels of
support for the elimination of female genital mutilation, with a view to helping to
change existing negative social norms, attitudes and behaviours that condone and
justify gender inequality, all forms of violence against women and girls and harmful
practices, including female genital mutilation;
4.
Further calls upon States to provide the resources necessary to strengthen
advocacy and awareness-raising programmes, to mobilize girls and women and boys
and men to take an active part in developing preventive and elimination programmes
to address harmful practices, especially female genital mutilation, to engage families,
local community and religious leaders, educational institutions, the media and civil
society and to provide increased financial support to efforts at all levels to end
discriminatory social norms and practices, and calls upon the international
community to support States in these efforts;
5.
Urges States to complement punitive measures with awareness-raising and
educational activities designed to promote a process of consensus towards the
elimination of female genital mutilation, and also urges States to protect and support
women and girls who have been subjected to female genital mu tilation and those who
are at risk in order to assist them, including by developing social, legal and
psychological support services and care and appropriate remedies, and to ensure
access to health-care services, including for sexual and reproductive heal th, in order
to improve their health and well-being;

__________________
21
22

4/7

Resolution 48/104.
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
20-17297

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation

A/RES/75/160

6.
Also urges States to condemn all harmful practices that affect women and
girls, in particular female genital mutilation, whether committed within or outside a
medical institution, to take all measures necessary, including through educational
campaigns and by enacting and enforcing legislation to prohibit female genital
mutilation, to protect women and girls from this act of violence, to hold perpetrators
to account and to put in place adequate accountability mechanisms at the national and
local levels, where applicable, in order to monitor progress;
7.
Calls upon States to address the medicalization of female genital
mutilation and to encourage professional associations and trade unions of health
service providers to adopt internal disciplinary rules prohibiting their members from
engaging in the harmful practice of female genital mutilation;
8.
Urges States to promote gender-sensitive, empowering educational
processes, sensitive to the needs of women and girls, by reviewing and revising, as
appropriate, school curricula, educational materials and teacher-training programmes
and elaborating policies and programmes of zero tolerance of violence against girls
or of harmful practices, including female genital mutilation, placing special emphasis
on education about the harmful effects of female genital mutilation, and to further
integrate a comprehensive understanding of the causes and consequences of genderbased violence and discrimination against women and girls into education and
training curricula at all levels;
9.
Also urges States to ensure that the protection of and provision of support to
women and girls subject to, or at risk of, female genital mutilation are an integral part of
policies and programmes that address the practice, and to provide women and girls with
coordinated, specialized, accessible and quality multisectoral prevention and response,
including education, as well as legal, psychological, health-care and social services,
provided by qualified personnel, consistent with the guidelines of medical ethics;
10. Calls upon States to ensure that national action plans and strategies on the
elimination of female genital mutilation are comprehensive and multidisciplinary in
scope and that they include projected timelines for goals and incorporate clear targets
and indicators for the effective monitoring, impact assessment and coordination of
programmes among all relevant stakeholders and promote their participation,
including the participation of affected women and girls, practising communities and
non-governmental organizations, in the development, implementation and evaluation
of such plans and strategies;
11. Urges States to take, within the general framework of integration policies
and in consultation with affected communities, effective and specific targeted
measures for refugee and migrant women and girls, their families and their
communities in order to protect women and girls everywhere from female genital
mutilation, including when the practice occurs outside the country of residence;
12. Also urges States to pursue a comprehensive, culturally sensitive,
systematic approach that incorporates a social perspective and is based on human
rights and gender equality in providing education and training to families, local
community leaders and members of all professions relevant to the protection and
empowerment of women and girls in order to increase awareness of and commitment
to the elimination of female genital mutilation;
13. Further urges States to identify and allocate sufficient resources to the
implementation of policies and programmes and legislative frameworks aimed at
eliminating female genital mutilation, in particular measures involving information
and communications technologies to facilitate learning and knowledge-sharing;
14. Calls upon States to develop, support and implement comprehensive and
integrated strategies for the prevention of female genital mutilation, including the
20-17297

5/7

A/RES/75/160

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation

training of social workers, medical personnel, comm unity and religious leaders and
relevant professionals, and to ensure that they provide competent, supportive services
and care to all women and girls who are at risk of or who have undergone female
genital mutilation and encourage them to report to the ap propriate authorities cases
in which they believe that women or girls are at risk;
15. Also calls upon States to support, as part of a comprehensive approach to
eliminate female genital mutilation, programmes that engage local community
practitioners of female genital mutilation in community-based initiatives for the
elimination of the practice, including, where relevant, the identification and the
provision by communities of alternative livelihoods for them;
16. Calls upon the international community, the relevant United Nations
entities and civil society and international financial institutions to continue to actively
support, through the allocation of increased financial resources and technical
assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the needs and priorities
of women and girls at risk of or subjected to female genital mutilation;
17. Calls upon the international community to strongly support, including
through increased financial support, the third phase of the Joint Programme on the
Elimination of Female Genital Mutilation: Accelerating Change of the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Children’s Fund, which will run until 2021, as
well as national programmes focused on the elimination of female genital mutilation;
18. Stresses that progress has been made in eliminating female genital mutilation
in a number of countries using a common coordinated approach that promotes positive
social change at the community, national, regional and international levels, and recalls
the goal set out in the United Nations inter-agency statement that female genital
mutilation is to be eliminated within a generation, with some of the main achievements
being obtained by 2030, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals;
19. Encourages men and boys to take an active part and to become strategic
partners of women and girls and their allies in effor ts, including through
intergenerational dialogue, to eliminate violence, discrimination and harmful
practices against women and girls, in particular female genital mutilation, through
networks, peer programmes, information campaigns and training programmes ;
20. Calls upon States to engage key stakeholders, in a coordinated manner,
including various sectors of government and civil society organizations, along with
the support, upon request, of United Nations entities, in developing a
multidisciplinary approach to both preventing and responding to female genital
mutilation and to adopt laws and policies, where appropriate, providing high -quality,
multisectoral interventions for girls and women who have been subject to female
genital mutilation, as well as robust prevention strategies, taking into consideration
those girls and women who are most vulnerable;
21. Calls upon States, the United Nations system, civil society and all
stakeholders to continue to observe 6 February as the International Day of Zero
Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation and to use the day to enhance awareness raising campaigns and to take concrete actions against female genital mutilation;
22. Calls upon States to improve the collection and analysis of quantitative
and qualitative disaggregated data, where appropriate, and to collaborate with
existing data collection systems, which are crucial for evidence -based legal and
policy development, programme design and implementation and the monitoring of
the elimination of female genital mutilation;
23. Also calls upon States to develop unified methods and standards for the
collection of data on female genital mutilation, which is underdocumented and
6/7

20-17297

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation

A/RES/75/160

underreported, to develop additional indicators to effectively measure progress in
eliminating this practice and to reinforce the sharing of good practices relating to the
prevention and elimination of female genital mutilation at the subregional, regional
and global levels;
24. Urges the international community to fulfil its commitment in suppo rting
developing countries in strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices and
data systems to ensure access to high-quality, timely, reliable and disaggregated data,
while ensuring national ownership in supporting and tracking progress, in o rder,
inter alia, to inform policy and programming, as well as to monitor progress in the
elimination of female genital mutilation;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural O rganization,
the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, individually and collectively, take into account the protection and
promotion of the rights of women and girls against female genital mutilation in their
country programmes, as appropriate and in accordance with national priorities, in
order to further strengthen their efforts in this regard;
26. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly, at its seventy-seventh session, an in-depth, multidisciplinary, evidence-based
report, with accurate and updated data, an analysis of root causes, progress made to date,
challenges and needs and action-oriented recommendations for eliminating this practice,
on the basis of updated information provided by Member States, relevant actors of the
United Nations system working on the issue and other relevant stakeholders.
46th plenary meeting
16 December 2020

20-17297

7/7
