s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24271
13 July 1992
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNéIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3094th meeting, held on 13 July 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the i~em entitled "The situation in Cyprus":
"The Security Council recalls the oral report presentad on
24 June 1992 on the Secretary-General's mission of good offices in
Cyprus. It welcomes the separata meetings which the Secretary-General
had with the leaders of the two communities from 18 to 23 June. It notes
with satisfaction that the discussions focused on the issues of
territorial adjustments and displaced persons and that the other six
issues that make up the set of ideas on an overall framework agreement
were also reviewed. It is unanimous in expressing its full support of
the procedure adopted by the Secretary-General for implementing
resolution 750 (1992).
"The Council reaffirms its endorsement of the set of ideas asan
appropriate basis for reaching an overall framework agreement as
mentioned in paragraph 4 of resolution 750 (1992).
"The Council notes with satisfaction the acceptance by the leaders
of the two communities to reswne on 15 July their meetings with the
Secretary-General and to remain for such reasonable duration as may be
necessary to complete the work.
"The Council considers that the forthcoming meetings representa
determining phase in the Secretary-General's effort and calls on both
leaders to be ready to take the necessary decisions to reach agreement on
each of the issues as dealt with in the set of ideas asan integrated
whole on an overall framework agreement.
"The Council endorses the Secretary-General's intention to invite
the two leaders to a joint meeting as soon as the proximity talks reveal
that the two sides are within agreement range on the set of ideas; and,

92-30709

3342j (E)

130792

130792

/

...

S/24271
English
Page 2
subject to the successful, completion of the work at the joint meeting, to
convene an international.high-level meeting to conclude the Overall
Framework Agreement.
"The Council calls upon all concerned to fulfil their
responsibilities and cooperate fully with the Secretary-General to ensure
the success of these meetings.
"The Council reaffirms its decision to remain seized of the Cyprus
guestion on an ongoing and direct basis in support of the effort to
complete the set of ideas and to conclude an overall framework agreement.
"The Council requests that the Secretary-General provide it with an
ongoing assessment of the progress being made at the meetings beginning
on 15 July so as to enable the Council to determine, as the talks unfold,
how it might best lend its full and direct support.
"The Council looks forward to receiving at the conclusion of these
meetings a full report from the Secretary-General as reguested in
operativa paragraph 10 of resolution 750 (1992)."
