200

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

and other fields as an encouragement to the intensification
of its odious policy of apartheid,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the
oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid,
racism and colonialism and for the effective exercise of
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence demands more than ever all necessary support by
the international community and, in particular, further
action by the Security Council in accordance with Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Underlining that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its
provisions without delay are necessary for its effectiveness,
and therefore will contribute to the eradication of the
crime of apartheid,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 42
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention
that have submitted their reports under article VII thereof;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay, in particular those States that have jurisdiction over transnational corporations operating in South
Africa and Namibia and without whose co-operation such
operations cannot be halted;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Group of Three of the Commission on Human Rights,
established in accordance with article IX of the Convention, and, in particular, of the conclusions and recommendations contained in that report; 41
5. Draws the attention of all States to the opinion
expressed by the Group of Three in its report that article
Ill of the Convention could apply to the actions of transnational corporations operating in South Africa;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
intensify, in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, its efforts to compile periodically the
progressive list of individuals, organizations, institutions
and representatives of States deemed responsible for
crimes enumerated in article II of the Convention, as well
as those against whom or which legal proceedings have
been undertaken;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
above-mentioned list to all States parties to the Convention and all Member States and to bring such facts to the
attention of the public by all means of mass communication;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the States
parties to the Convention, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to provide the Commission on Human Rights with relevant information concerning the forms of the crime of apartheid, as described in
article II of the Convention, committed by transnational
corporations operating in South Africa;
9. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and international and national nongovernmental organizations to step up their activities in
enhancing public awareness by denouncing the crimes
committed by the racist regime of South Africa;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
42 N40/606.
43 Resolution 38/ 14. annex.
44 Oifinal Record• ol rhe iiNwral Asscmh/v f,,irr,erh Session, Sup1>lemem
l'i'o 18 u. ,io1 lS)

view to promoting further ratification of or accession to
the Convention;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/28.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 39/21 of 23 November 1984 on
the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and 40/26 of 29 November 1985 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 as well as its
other relevant resolutions on the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, 43
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the work of its
thirty-first and thirty-second sessions, 44 submitted under
article 9, paragraph 2, of the Convention,
Emphasizing the need for Member States to intensify, at
the national and international levels, the struggle against
acts or practices of racial discrimination and the vestiges
or manifestations of racist ideologies wherever they exist,
Bearing in mind that the Convention is being implemented in different economic, social and cultural conditions prevailing in individual States parties,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Aware of the importance of the contribution of the
Committee to the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination and to the elimination of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin,
Taking note of the decisions adopted and recommendations made by the Committee at its thirty-first and thirtysecond sessions,
I. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its thirty-first and
thirty-second sessions;
2. Also takes note of the part of the report relating to
Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 applies; 45
3. Draws the attention of the relevant United Nations
bodies to the opinion and recommendations of the Committee relating to the Territories mentioned in paragraph 2
above, calls upon those bodies to ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant information on the Territories and urges all administering Powers to co-operate
with those bodies by providing all the necessary information in order to enable the Committee to discharge fully its
responsibilities under article 15 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Considers that the Committee should not take into
consideration information on Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) applies unless such infor4 , Ihul., sect V

----

VI.

201

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

mation is communicated by the competent United
Nations bodies in conformity with article 15 of the Convention;
5. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia as a crime against humanity and urges
all Member States to adopt effective political, economic
and other measures in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and
other United Nations bodies, in order to support the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples of South Africa and
Namibia for their national liberation and human dignity
and to secure the elimination of the racist apartheid system;
6. Commends the Committee for its continuous
endeavours towards the elimination of all forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin, in particular the elimination of apartheid in
South Africa and Namibia, and welcomes the decision on
apartheid adopted by the Committee at its thirty-second
session; 46
7. Notes with appreciation the Committee's continued
participation in the activities within the framework of the
Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
8. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at the
elimination of all forms of discrimination against national
or ethnic minorities, persons belonging to such minorities
and indigenous populations, wherever such discrimination
exists, and the attainment of the full enjoyment of their
human rights through the implementation of the principles
and provisions of the Convention;
9. Welcomes further the efforts of the Committee
aimed at the elimination of all forms of discrimination
against migrant workers and their families, the promotion
of their rights on a non-discriminatory basis and the
achievement of their full equality, including the freedom
to maintain their cultural characteristics;
10. Calls upon Member States to adopt effective legislative, socio-economic and other necessary measures in
order to ensure the prevention or elimination of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin;
11. Further calls upon the States parties to the Convention to protect fully, by the adoption of the relevant legislative and other measures, in conformity with the Convention, the rights of national or ethnic minorities and
persons belonging to such minorities, as well as the rights
of indigenous populations;
12. Commends the States parties to the Convention on
measures taken to ensure, within their jurisdiction, the
availability of appropriate recourse procedures for the victims of racial discrimination;
13. Reiterates its invitation to the States parties to the
Convention to provide the Committee, in accordance with
its general guidelines, with information on the implementation of the provisions of the Convention, including
information on the demographic composition of their populations and on their relations with the racist regime of
South Africa;
14. Appeals to the States parties to take fully mto consideration their obligation under the Convention to submit
their reports in due time;
46 /hid.. sect. VII.B. decision I (XXXlll
47 !hid., decision 2 (XXXII).
48 See Report of the World Assemblv on Aging,

Vienna. 26 Julv-f> Aug,w
!982 (United Nations publication. Sales No. F.82.1.16), chap. Vi, sect. A
49 Previously known as the llnited Nat1@s Trust Fund for the World
Asscmhlv on ,\gmg

15. ( ·ommends the Committee for its efforts towards a
further universalization and a more consistent implementation of the Convention and welcomes its General Recommendation VII relating to the implementation of article
4 of the Convention; 47
16. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to ensure wider publicity of the work of the
Committee, which would facilitate its task to implement
effectively its functions under the Convention, and to
inform the General Assembly at its forty-first session of
the action taken in that regard.
96th plenary meeting
29 Novemher 1985

40/29. Question of aging
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 39/25 of 23 November 1984,
in which it recognized the increasing awareness in many
countries of issues related to aging and of the need to provide national authorities, at their request, with technical
and financial assistance m their efforts to implement policies and programmes,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/28 of 29 May 1985, in which Governments and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
were urged to continue to strengthen their efforts to implement the principles and objectives of the International
Plan of Action on Aging4 8 and in which the Secretary-General was requested to include, on an annual basis, the
United Nations Trust Fund for Aging49 among the programmes for which funds are pledged at the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities,
Emphasizing the importance of regional meetings to
consider the implementation of the recommendations of
the Plan of Action, as demonstrated by the African
Regional Conference on Aging, held at Dakar in December
1984,
Emphasizing also the positive results of the convening
of seminars and meetings to exchange information, knowledge and experience on the question of aging, particularly
among developing countries,
Recognizing that the dramatic increase in the numbers
and proportion of older adults has serious socio-economic
implications and is resulting in an increasing need for
research and training at all levels,
Recalling the recommendations of the International
Conference on Population, 50 which paid particular attention to the urgent and emerging issues of aging,
Appreciating the efforts of the Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation
to establish a steering committee and a working group to
follow up the implementation of General Assembly resolution 39/228 of 18 December 1984 on the International
Conference on Population,
Appreciating the attent10n given to the question of elder!) women by the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and the
inclusion of this issue in the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women, ' 1
so &e Report o( the lnterna11, •nal Conference on Popu/atwn. I 984. M,·x1cv
Cu,, o,/4 1ugus1 1984 (llnite,< Nations publication. Sales No F 84 Xlll.8
and rnrngenda). chap, L
11 Report of the World CvnJerence lo Revie" and Appra,sc th,· Achu'V<'mcnrs o(th,, Un11ed Nations Decade,(or Women: Equality. Development and
Peace ..V,wuh1. L'-26 Juli- /v~< (!lmtrd Nauons puhlicalion. Sales No,
E 8 '.'- I\' 111 • l.:hap

l. sect A
