UNITED NATIONS

I

NA TIONS UNIES

SECURITY

COUNCIl.

OFFIClllL RECORDS

825

THIRTEENTH YEAR
Ih MEETING: 11 JUNE 1958
---,---~~-~-

eme SE.4NCE: 11 JUIN 1958

TREIZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

I

I

TABLE OF

CONTENTS

f

Pa.ge

Provisional agenda (SjAgenda/825) . .. . . . .. . .. . .. .
Adoption of the agenda

r

I
I

,

.

.

1

,.............................

1

Letter dated 22 May Hl58 from the representative of Lebanon to the President
of the Security Council concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect
of a situation 9ri~ing from the intervention of the United Arah Republic

the internal affairs of Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenvnce of international pc«ce and security" (Si4007.
5/4022;

in

1

r

I

TABLE DES

I.

Ordrc du jour provisoire (SfAgendaf825)

f

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

f
I

I

I

MATIERES
1
.

1

Lettre. en date du 22 mai 1958. adressee au President du Conseil de securite
par le representant du libun. con(:ernant la question suivante : (( Plainte
du Unan touchant une situation creee par l'intervention de 18 ]{epublique
arabe unie dans les affaires interieures du Liban, et dont la prolongation
est susceptible de menacer le mainticn de la paix et de la securite internationale" (S/4007, S/4022)
,
.
.

1

i 20 p·l

,

,

S/PV.825

Helevant document~ noL reproduced in full in the record!i of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.
Symbols 0/ United Nations documents arc composed 0/ capital leliers combined
with figures. Mention 0/ such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Na/ions
document.

.'.
Les documents pertinents qui Ill". sont pas reproduits ill extemo duns les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composcnl de
leitres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'un cote duns un lute signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

I

fI
t

,I
t

I
r

1

[
r

[
.\

f..

r

t

r

I.

EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING

l
I,

Held in New York Oil Wednesday, 11 Juoc 1958, at 11 n.m.

Hun CENT VJNGT.CINQUIEME SEANCE
Tenue i\ New-York, le mercredi 11 juia 1958, ii 11 heUl'e.§.

I

I.
L

President: ML T. F. TSIANG (Chitu\;.

Prhidcll! : H T. f. TSIA~G (Chine)

Pnsen(: The represent<:ltives of the fo:Jowillg COllllLries: C~x-ada, China, Colonbia, France, Iraq, Japan,

Pres}n{s : Le::; repr68C[ltant~ des puys suivunts
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, Ir~k, Japon, Pannmn,
Suede, Unlr)ll des R~publiqlles soei!rlistes sovicitiques,
RClyaume-T:ni flr. Gl'ande-Bretagne et d'Irlande dl1
Nord, Etnb-Un:s d'Ameriqlle.

Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Repnblics,
United Kingdom of Great Dritain und Northern

Ireland, United States of America.

I.

I
1

Ol"nre du joUl' pJ",nigoiJ'~ (SjAgendajB25)

Provisional agenda (S(Ageuda/825)
1.

Adoption of the agenda.

1.

Adoption de l'ordrc tlu jonr.

2,

Letter da~ed 22 May 1958 from the :'eprcsentative
of Lebanon to the President of the Se~urity Council
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon il: respect
of a situation arising from t.he inten'clltion of the
United Arab Repnblie in the interll31 affairs of
Lebanon, the continuance of whicll is likely to
endanger thp maintenance, of interr.ational peace

2.

Lettre, en datel:u 22 mai t9513, Udrc58CC UIl Preside.,.t du Cor.seil de securite par le representant du
LiJ~lll, conc~rnallt la question suivante : «Plainte
du Lib"n t.on~l1flnt une situatbn CJl~ee par l'inter~
venom: de la Hcpublique arabe unie. dans Ies
aflaircs interieures du Liban, et cant la p,olongation est msce~tible de men:lcer le maintien de
la paix et de la secnritc intl.:rnationales» (S/4007).

r

and security" (5/4007).

1

Adoption de I 'ortlre du jour

AdoptiUll of the ugenda

r

r

r
f
I.

.r

r

(

I

L'ordl'(, r!1I jO'lr esl adopte.

The Q(Jcndll was adopted.

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the representative of
LebanoD to tbe Presidellt of tbe Security Council
concerning " Complaint by Lebanon in ~espect of
It situation arising from the intt~lYendon uf the
Uoited Arab Republic in Ihe internal affairs of
Lebanon. the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the mawlenanee o[ intemlltionlll peace
and security" (5/40071 5{4022)

Letb'e, en dale du 22 mai. 1958, IIdress6e au President
du Conseil de securite: par le rellresentant du Lihan,
conoornnnt 10 que81ion 8uivanle : (( PlaiDle du Lihaa
tou~hilDl une eituatioD Cl..eee pm l'in[c·.l"Vention lIe la

Republique aralle unie duns le& a£fllires interieures
du Liban, et dont la prolongation est susceptible de
menacer le maintitm de la palx et de la secut,he
inte.ruationales» (5/4001, 5/4·022)
Sllr l'invi!attrJn du

Pri.~iden[,

M. Charles Jlaliie,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Charles 1I1alik,
Lebanon, and Mr. Omru Loui(i.~epre.~
senl.'1liue of the United Arab R~public, look places al
the Council lable.

reprc:>cnfun[ du Liben. cl M. Omur LOI1{f(, representant
de la Ripublique ar'lbe unie, prennenl place ir. la table

The interprelalion into French of the stalement made
by Sir Piasm Dixon (United Kingdom) at the 824th
meeting was given.

1l ~st dQnlle leclllre de I'inlerprctalion en fran~ais de
la de.::laralion Iaife par sir Pierson Di:ron (Roi/GwneUni) a la 824e seance.

1. Mr. MATSUDAIRA (Japan): My delegation wishes
at this juncture to make a brief sta.tement on the
proh]r.m hefore us.

1. M. MATSUDAIRA (Japon) [traduil de ['anqlalsj
Ma celcgation desire }:ll-esenter, dans :es circonstances
oreBentes, une breve declaration sur le probMme qui
~ous est soumls.

My delegation notes with regret that the League

2. Ma dBlegatlon note avec regret que la Ligue des
Etab araDes n'a pas ete en mesure de regler l'amiable

reprc~e.ntalive of

2,

du Consei/.

a

of Arab States has failed to reach any amicable settle-

1

ment of this dispute through regional arrangements in
accordance with the provisions and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

le differend actuel par des arrangements reglOnaux
confol'mement aux dispositions et aux principes de I,
Charte des Nations Unies.

3. I wish to make clear that the position of my Government is to adhere to, and to uphold under the Charter,
the principles of respect for the political independence
of Member States and of non-interference in their
domestic affairs. My delegation, however, urges the
Security Council to continue to exert its utmost eHorts
to solve the problem before it. The COlUlCi! should
not be paralysed in its endeavour under any cir~
cumstances. My delegation hopes that the matter will
remain within the framework of the United Nations
and that a peaceful settlement will be pursued.

3. Je tiens a preciser la position de mon gouvernement
qui reconnalt et sontient, en vertu de la Charte, le
principes du respect de l'independance politique de:
Etats Membres et de la non-intervention dans leuT;
affaires interieures. Ma delegation recommande tou,
tefois au Conseil de securite de continueI' de faire tou·
son possible en vue de resoudre le probleme qui lu
est soumis. Le Conseil ne devrait en aucun cas se laissel
paralyseI' dans ses efforts. Ma delegation espere qUl
la question ne sorlira pas du cadre des Nations Unie:
et que l'on s'efforcera d'aboutir a un reglement pacifique

4. Regarding the Swedish draft resolution [S/4022],
my delegation is of the view that it is certainly a realistic
approach to the problem. In view of the situation in
Lebanon, my delegation will support that draft. We
hope that it will serve the cause of international peace
and security.

4. En ce qui concerne le projet de resolution de 1<
Suede [S{4022], ma delegation estime qu'il permej
certainement d'aborder le probleme de fal;on realiste
Etant donne la situation au Liban, ma delegatior
appuiera ce projet de resolution. Nous esperons qu'i
servira la cause de la paix et de la securite interna·
tionales.

5. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated from Spanish):
My delegation listened with keen attention yesterday
afternoon when the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Lebanon appealed to the Council to adopt measures to
alleviate a situation which, he said, directly affected
his country's independence and which had deteriorated
in the last few hours [824th meeting].

5. M. ILLUECA (Panama) [traduit de l'espagnol]
Ma delegation a ecoute avec un vii interet l'appei
adresse au Consei! hier apres-midi par le Ministre del:
affaires etrangeres du Liban ; M. Malik a demande au
Conseil d'adopter des mesures qui permettent de remedier a une situation qui, selon lui, met directement en
jeu l'indcpendance du Liban et s'ebit encore aggravee
au cours des dernieres heures [824e seance].

6. As a small Power, my country cannot turn a deaf
ear to an appeal of this kind, the more so because
non-intervention is one of the fundamental principles
of international law. Nevertheless, we take the view
that the Council cannot at this stage of the discussion
take a position which would imply the condemnation
of one of the parties involved in the situation we are
considering since, in justice, no person or State can .be
condemned until the facts on which the charge is
based have been fully proved.

6. En sa qualite de petite puissance, mon pays ne
peut demeurer insensible a une telle requete, d'autant
plus que le principe de la non-intervention est l'une
des regles fondamentales du droit international. Cependant, nous estimons qu'en aucun cas le Conseil ne doit
adopter, au stade actnel des debats, une attitude qui
impliquerait la condamnation de l'une Oll l'autre des
parties me-ICes a la situation dont nous sommes saisis ;
en efIet, la justice la plus stricte commande de ne
condamner une personne ou un Etat que lorsque 1'on
a pleinement verifle la porlee des faits reproches.

7. From the beginning, therefore, we welcomed the
suggestion made by the Swedish representative in his
speech at the last meeting when he said that he was
preparing a draft resolution contemplating the establishment by the Council of an observation group which
would represent the United Nations on the spot and
keep an impartial watch on events. Such a measure is
unquestionably authorized by the tenus of Article 29
of the Charter.

7. C'est pourquoi, lorsque le representant de la Suede
a annonc6 dans l'intervention qu'il a faite a la seance
precedente qu'il preparait un projet de resolution prevoyant la creation par le Conseil d'un groupe d'observateurs qui se rendrait sur place en qualite de representant de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour surveiller de fa<;on impartiale les activites qui peuvent
s'y derouler, notre delegution a immediatement trouve
cette suggestion tres judicieuse. Dne telIe mesure est
sans aucun doute autorisee par l'article 29 de la Charte.

8. During the Council's recess yesterday and in the
course of this morning, my delegation was able to
study the Swedish draft resolution, and I should like
to offer our comments on it.

S.

9. In operative paragraph 1, the Council would decide
to dispatch urgently an observation group to proceed
to Lebanon so as to ensure that there is no illegal
infiltration of personnel or supply of arms or other
materiel- we take it that this means war materialacross the Lebanese borders. As I understand it, the
proposal is to establish an observation group whose
principal and perhaps only function would be, under

9. Par le paragraphe premier du dispositif, le Conseil
deciderait d'envoyer d'urgence un groupe d'observation
au Liban de fa<;on a faire en sorie qu'ancune infiltration
illegale de personnel ni aucun envoi illegal d'armes ou
d'autre matcrlel- je suppose qu'il s'agit de materiel
de guerre - n'aient lieu a travel'S les fronW~res liiJa~
naises. Si je comprends bien, il s'agit d'un groupe
d'observateurs dont la tache principale, et peut-etre

I-lier, pendant la suspension de seance, et ce matin
encore, ma delegation a pu etudier les termes du projet
de resolution de la Suede, et eUe croit devoir formulcr
quelques observations a son sujet.

2

the draft rewlution, to observe allY movements that

la st:u[e tache, d'apres le projct de resolution, sera de
surveiller les nouYements qui peuvent avoir lieu a la
frontiere liballa[se, afin d'assllrer qu'it nc se produise
aucune in!iltration de personllcs armees ou de materiel
de guerre ; le Liban se plaint en effet que des infiltrations de cc genre sc sont produites jusrpl'a CP. jour.
mett:mt en danger son independ~1nce.

.'lugbt take place on the Lebanese frontier in order to

,ensure that there was no infiltration of armed men and
"War material of the kind which, according to the
·complaint submitted by Lebanon, has been taking
place, thus threatening the country's independence.

[-

I

t

r
1

J

T

I
r

1
f
r

i

i
r
IJ
f

f

10. In my delegation's view, such an observation
group would not have the ::l\lthority to undertake ,lu
inquiry into caUSes and pa5t incidents to find out
whether such infiltration has already :aken place. This
is the essential distinrtion bdween an observation

10. :LI'1a delegation ne croi: pas que cc gl'oupe d'obst:rvatiOll ptltSSC e,tre hnbiJite u entreprencre Ime elCJllde

com:nittee and a committee of investigation. An
Dbservation com:nittee is concerned with. the observation of future events. An investigatir-g committee. on
the other hand, is COJ.cerneu wiLlI discovering the truth
about what has happened.

sur les faits [aSSeS et leurs causes alin de determiner
si des infi]traLions se Bont produites ces temps derniers.
C'est en eela precisement qu'une commission d'observation difTere d',we commission d'enqll~te, L'UlIt:,
la commissioll d'observation, s'eflorce {\'observer les
faits a venir; l'autre. la commission d'enquete, nl>il
chercher a dherllliner (:(; qui a efl'ectivement w reu
dans le passe.

11. Clearly, in tlte present cnse, it is not the intention
to create an instrument Lo c<lrry out an invtstiglltion
in 2ccordance with Article 34 of th~ Charter, which
appears to be the only provision nnder which the
Secl1rity Council. on its own account or by tlle creation
'<)f a subsidiary instr"J.ment, can investigate any dispute
or situation which might lead to international fridion
or give rise to a dispute, in order to determine whether
the continuance of the dispute or situation is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security.

11. It ne s'agit Mdemment pas, dans le cas present,
cl'un orgHnisrne q,li entreprendrait d'enquHer all sens
de l' Article 30b de la Chalte, seule disposition, semble~
t-il, qui autonse le CODseil de sfcurite it enquetcr,
par llli-rneme ou par l'intetmediaire d'un organe
subsidiaire cr~e a eeL dId. sur tout diffcrcnd ou to'Jl.e
situation qui ponrrait entralner un desaccord entre
r:ations ou engendrer un diflerend, uJl]] de detel':nirer si la prcolongatiorl de cc dUrerend ou de cette
situation semble devoir menacer le maintien de]a
paix et de la seeurite intemationales,

12. My delegation considers that the observation
group referred to in the draft resolution under consideration should be similar in character to the Peace Observation Commission, established by the "Uniting-forpear,e " resolution approved by the General Assembly
on 3 November 1950 [resolution 377 A (V)}; this
Commi.\sion was given the task of observing and
reporting on the situation in any areil where there
existed a dllngerolls state of international tension.

12, La deler,raLion du Panama estime plutl'Jt que les
pouvoirs qu'i: faudrait cloaner au groupe d'obscrvatioH
prevu par le projet de resolution s'apparentent a cellX'.
qui ont ete Etcconles a la Commission cl'observatiou
pour la puix, crcce it la suite de l'fldop1:ion pm I'AssembIee gencrale, le 3 llOvembre 1850, de la resolution
intitulee « L'union pour le maintien de la paix)) [re~olu­
lion 371 A (V)]; cette eornmission avail ete chargee
d'observer la situation dans toute rcg:uil (,lll il existait
un (hat de ten~ion internationule, et de hire rapport
a ce sttjet.

13. I lake it, therefore, that it is a question of
observing conditi<:lns in an area in which thert may be
international tension, and reporting on tile situation.
It is clear from the terms of refereme, auuptcd by the
Ge:leral Assembly for the Peuce Observation Commission that, when an observation group is formed, the
predominant consirlpration must be to ensure that it
is not empowe-:-ed to inquire into events prior to its
constit.ltion. To give it such powe~s would create a
sit'lation which would lead to charges and conntercharges, tIns widening th~ area of disagreement. We all
kn:JW that an international dispute cannot be settled in
this way. It is c!e:lr that tile purpose of tlte Swedish
draft resolution is to help to improve re13tions between
Lebanon and the United Arab Repuhlic, two si),iter
nations. In these circumstances it would be unwise to
undertake any inquiry into situations which, however
well authenticated, might impede efforts 1:0 bring about
a settlement or a rapprochement of ~he parties.

13. n s'agit done e:t fait de s1lI'veiller lIllt region Oil
it P€ut exister un etut de tensi,or. illternationale et de
faire rapPOlt a ce sujet. La deflnition adoptee par
t'Assemhlee tlenpT:'l.le Ion; de l'etablissemenL dc la Commis!tion d'observ'ltion pour la paix montre cl~il'ement
que le premier principe a observer dans le cas d'un
groupe d'observation est que ce grOllre ne reut j"lger
de ce qui s'est passe ant6rieuremcnt iI sa constitution.
CeIa donnerait teu, en effct, a des accwmtions et d~s
eontre-accusations qlli ne ferai~.nt qu'approiondir les
rlivr,rgences. Teln'est pas, nous lesavons bien, le moyen
de regler une controverse intenHrtiona[e. Il est clair que
le ptojet de resolntion dll representant de la Suede
a pour bilt d'ameliorer la situation existant entre le
Liban et la .!1cpubliquc al"abe Uuie, cl!'lIX pays freres; it
ne serait donc ;Jas opportun de vouloir enqucter sur
(Jes situatiolls qui, bien qtle recllcs peut-etre, pourraient
cornpromettre une tentative d'acwrd ou de rapprochement entre les parties.

14.

14. Le groupe d'obselVation permettra sans aUCUll
doule d'amcliorer les relations entre le Liban et la
Republiquc ara6e Unie, car sa presence Sur les Jieux
des evenelT.ent~ incitera l~ deu.x parties a moaerer
leurs actes.

There is no doubt that such an observation group

will brill~ about an improycment in the pre!lfmt: rela-

tions between Lebanon and the United Arab Republic
sinCe its presence on the scene of evenbl will have a
moderating influence on the actions of both parties.
3

15. My delegation therefore considers thnt the limits
within which the group is to carry Ollt its task of
observation should be clearly established in order to
ensure that it does not have powers of the kind
attributed to it in this morning's local Press and does
not have more authority than it should have as an
obsenration group, which should in no circlImstances
be regarded as a court of inquiry. I shall not malie a
formal proposal on these lines, but will le<lVl' the
matter to tIte discretion of this COllOcil.

15. C'est pourquoi ma cteh~gation pense qu'il convien
drait de defl.nir cJairement la podee de la tache dl
g]·oupe d'observation, afin qu'il n'ait nulIement le
attributions que ron pOllvait lin: ce matill dans I:
presse de New-York, et que ses pouvoirs ne depassen
pas ceux qLJe doit avoil' un groupe d'observation, qu
ne saurnit s'eriger en aucun cas en tribunlll d'enquete
Je ne fai~ pus it ce slljet de proposition formelJe, et j,
m'cn rcmets it la sagesse dll ConseiL

16. My delegatiol} wishes, however, to make it dear
that it is voting for the establishment of an observation
group as provided in the Swedish draft resolution, on
the understanding that it is an observation mission
in the sense I have used the term nnd that it will 1I0t
inquire into or pnss judgement On past events or
situations, for such ::lrtion might well aggravate relations
betw['.en the two countries concerned and my delcgntion
is anxious to llelp 10 find an efl'ective formula for the
maintenance of peace and security in the Middle E::lsL
Wc hope that the Swedish draft resolution will be
accepted by both parties and will be supported by all
the members of this Council, including the permanent
members with the righl of veto.

16. Ma delegation tient toutefois a souligner que s
elle appuie de son vote la creation du groupe d'obser
vation mentionne dans le projet de resolution present,
par la Suede, c'est en supposant que la tache de cett
mission d'observation repondra aux prindpes que j,
viens d'exprimer, c'esh\-dire que les observatellfs n,
devrGnt pas entreprendre d'enquete ni prononcer d'
jugelhent sur des faits all des situations passes. Un
lelle attitude contribuerait peut-Hre a aggravel' I:
situation entre Ies deux PIlYs en cause, alors que m:
dClcgation tient a faciliter l'tl.aboration d'une formlll
effic~ce pOUf le nlaintien de la paix et de III seeUlit
au Moyen-Orienl. Nous esperons que le projet de reso
lution present~ par la Suede rencontrera l'agrement. de
deux parties et obticlldra les voix de tous les membre
du Conseil, y compris les membres permanents qu
disposent du droit de veto.

17.

ARAUJO (Colombia) (lranslafrd from
My delegation associates itself with tlte
statement made at this meeting by the Japanese
.representative, whose thinlting and position on the
question before us coincides with our own. We shall,
therefore, refrllin from making a long statement which
would lack the precision and clarity which distinguishe.d
Mr. Matsudaira's remarks. I need ollly say thnt we
shall vote in favour of the draft resolution sllbmitted
by the Swedish representative.

17. M. ARAUJO (Colombie) llraduit de l'espaqnolj
La delegation de la Colombie s'associe aux parole
prolloncees a la presente seance par le representun
du Japon, qui cofncident absolument avec la pense,
et I'attilude de la Colombie dans J'alTaire qui nou
preoccllpe. C'est pourquoi je m'abstiendrai de faire Ull'
longul'. declaration qui n'aurait ni III precision ni I:
clane des observations de M. Matsudaira. J'ajoutera
simplement que ma deh~gation votera en faveur dl
projet de resolution presente par le representant d,
la Suedc.

18. Mr. RITCHIE (Canada): I wi~h to join with other
members of tlle Security Council who have urged the
.adoption of the draft resolution introduced at
the 824th meeting by the representative of Sweden. Tl1e
situation which we sce unfolding in LebUllOll is ,me
which requires prompt <lction and, in our view, the
measures contained in the Swedish draft constitute a
constructive approach to that situation,

18. M. RITCHIE (Canada) [lraduil de I'M{flais]
Je tiens a m'associer aux declarations des mClllbres dl
Conseil qui ont preconise I'adoption du projet de reso
lution presente a la 824e seance par le represent<lll
de la Suede. Les evenements que nOllS VOyOIlS se deroulc
au Liban exigent une action rapide et, a notre avis
les mesures recommandees dans le projet suedoi~
representent une contribution positive a la solutiol
du probleme.

19. The primary aim of the draft resolution bt'fore us
is to provide United Nations machinery for dcaling
with acts of illegal infiltration of personnel and supply
of arms which are, unfOliunately, contributing to tlle
slate of unrest in Lebanon and are clear evidence of
interference frOm outside the tountry.

19. Le but essentiel du projet de resolution qui nou
est soumis est la crealion d'un organe des Nations Unie
permettant de faire face a l'infiltration illegale d,
personnes et a l'envai illegal d'armes, actes qui, lUal
heureusement, aggravent les troubles au Lihan c
sont la preuve evidente d'une intervention exterieurc

20. The Foreign Minister of Lebanon has spa ken in
detail and in deeply anxious tones about the disturbances
in his country. There are significant indications that the
tensio fiS within Lebanon are increasing and, of course,
the most dangerous element is the spread of armed
rebellion.

20, Le Ministre des afiaires etrangeres du Liban ~
parIe longucment, et f1vec une profonde inquietude
des troubles en cours dans son pays. 11 y a tout liel
de penscr que la tension s'aceroft au Liban, et I'elemen
le plus dangereux est sans nul doute I'extension de l~
rebellion urmee.

21. Lebanon has appealed to tlle Council for assistance
in this hour of national trial, and it is clearly the

21. Le Liban a demamle au Conseil de securite d,
l'aider en ('cUe heure d'epreuve notionale, et il ~st dai

Mr.

Spanish):

4

responsibility of all members to heed that appeal as it
relates to external interference in Lebanon.

que tous les membres dll COllSei! se doiwnt de repotldrc

a cet appel, provoque par t11lC inlervcnlion extcri('\ln'
dans les affaires du Liban.

'

22. It has b~en the consistent view of the Canadian
Government thot States Members of the United Nations
should have the right, and indeed should exercise that
right, of bringing to the appropriate body of the United
Nations their anxieties ::Ibout their relations with
neighbouring countries, particularly, of course, when
they consider that there is a threat from without or
some form of external interference in their domestic
aflairs. Wc ~gree wh?leheartedly with those who say
that the Ulllted Nations should be prepared to hear
tllCSC appeals for help, aod we consider it axiomatic
that its response should be particularly sumpnthetic
towards appeals from the smaller countries, whicll
must, indeed, rely largely on the United Nations for
their continued existence in independence !'Inll. peO-cc.

22. Le 90uvertlemenL canndien a Loujnurs cstinu'
que, les E~b; Membrc~ ues Nallolls l:nics devraieUl
aVOlr le drOit - et, devraienL, eu Eail, excrccr cc droit
- ,de soumcttr~ aux organcs approprics des Nations
Umcs leurs cramtes au ~ujct de le\lrs relations av,·c
les .Etats VOlsms,
"
surtout,
-- cl ccla va de sui ---lorsqu'i1s'
est!
t
")
.
, ~en qu I eXlsle une menace de l'extericur ou une.
~ng~r.ence etrll.ngere quelconqlle dnns lean aITaircR
lllteTleUr~s, Nous parlageons cntieremcllt les vueI' de
celJ~ qUI, soutitmnenl que I'Orgnnisnlion des Natjnlls
Um~s dOlt etre prcte a cntendre ecs appcls u. l'aith',
e~ c est pour nous un principe bien etahli ClIW ectLl'
repol1Se devrait clre particulieremeut favorabll'. IOl'sqlH'
ces appels ~mancnt de petits pays, qui, dmls une lRrgt'
mesure, dOlvent compter sur lcs Nations tlnies pour
co~tinuer cl'exister dans I'inciependance et dans la
palx.

23, It is also a basic tenet of Canada's policy at the
United Nations to concentrate on efforts to fmd effective
and practical solutions. This is how I now regard
the draft resolution which tlle Swedish representative
has submitted to the Council, We earnestly bope that
all members, having had timc to reflect on this proposal,
will have reached the same conclusion.

23: . Un autre prindpe fondamcntal de la IJolitiqllt;
SlilVle par le Canada a l'Organisation des Nation,~
Unies a consistc a rechercher avant tout dcs solu lions
cfficaces et pmtiques, C'est dans cet esprit que nOll~
considerons maintcnant le projet de resoIu hOIl rrl~Ren Ll:
au COllseil par le representant de la Suede. NIll.1S ('sp~­
rollS sincerement que taus les membres, nynnt t!t1 k
temps d'etudier cette proposition, sonL p:Jrvclllls a
la meme conclusion.
24. Ma delegation estime que, etllnt donne les condi·
tions actuelles, le projet de resolution suedois csL a la
fois empreint de sagesse et de diplomatic et qu'it ne
sort pas du cadre des responsabilites du Conseil de
securite dans une telle question. Nous espcl"ons qu'une
action du type de relle qui est proposee pourra (,tre
entreprise rapidement et efficacement et que, s'il
en est ainsi, elle permetttfl d'e-viter que ne s'etendent
au Liban des troubles qui, a notre avis, pourraicnt
avoir des consequences graves, nOli seulemcnl pour
re pays, mais pour cctte region tout entiere. NO\ls
sommes heureux de constater que le projet de rcsolulion
slledois contient un alinea dont les termes ofIreut :.111
Secret<tire general la possibilitc de contribucr a In
solution de cc probJCme - ainsi que la liberte <i'action
neces~aire dans Cl' but.
25, En disant cela, je nc veux nullement UOlllH']' it
penser que les Elats inl:cresse~ sont dispCI,lS~S de poursuivre leurs efforts en vue de rcgler leurs (hITe.rends, que
Cl' soit par des contacts etablis par cl'autrcs voics nu
par une action unilaterale visant a l~ conciliation: ~~e!\
dispositions de la Charte sont p.a:rf~ltement cxphcltes
en cc qui concerne la responsablhte ell'S ,Membrcs~lrs
Nations Unies quant a la recherche dune SOllllwll
pacifique par divers moyells. A notre aviH, le fail tlue
le Conseil de securite soit saisi de cctte question lIe
modifie pas Cl'S responsabiUtes. A la :critc, j;n'ai guere besoin d'ajoutcr que, san.s la pleule C-OOPl:ration des parties interessees, III reponse du Conse.11
a la demande d'aide formulec par le Lillan nc su unlit
donner de resultab; positiIs. Le rep,rtscn,t:J.nt de .Ia
Suede a souligne re fait quando il a presen~e son proJct
de resolution. L'histoire des debats des d:vers orga~I~3
des Nations Ullics, et notam:nen~ du Con~eI1 de s~curlt~,
illustre parlaitement ce que Je vlens de dlTe n cel cgurd.

24. In the circumstances in which we Illeet today, it
strikes my delegation that the Swedish draft is both
wise and statesmanlikc and that it is fully within the
scope of the Security Council's responsibility in a
matter of this kind. It is our hope that action of the
kind proposed can be t:'lkcn swiftly and efficiently
fInd that, if so, it will help to avert the spreading
disorder in Lebanon which, in our view, might have
dangerous implications not only for that country, but
for tIle area as a whole. Wc welcome the paragraph in
the Swedish draft resolution which would give to the
Secrctary-Gencro.l an opportunity and the nccessary
nexihility to make a contribution to the solution of
thi!; problem,

25. I-laving sl'lid all this, however, I do not mean to
suggest tllat tlte Stales concerned are in any way
absolved from pursuing their efforts to work out their
dil1erences, either by cOlltacts through other channels
or by unilateral action of a conciliatory nature. The
provisions of the Charter are quite clear about the
responsibility of Members to seek peaceful solutions
by various means. In our view, the fact that the Security
Council has become seized of this question does not
change that responsibility, Indeed, I need hardly say
that, without the fullest co-operation from the partics,
the Council's response to Lebanon's appeal for assistance
can hardly be elIective. The representative of Sweden
made this point at the time when he submitted his
draft resolution. The pattern of past evenh in various
bodies of the United Nations, but particularly in this
Council, fully illustrates what I have said in this
connexion.

5

26. In speaking about co-operation, I believe it may
he desirable to recall once more the assurances which
the representative of the United Arab Republic has
voiced concerning the attitude of bis Government
toward the independence of Lebanon. I have already
welcomed these assurances and I reiterate that welcome. It is the hope of my delegation that these
assurances will find practical e..xpression in the relations
between the Government of the United Arab Republic
and the Government of Lebanon. We believe thflt
there conld be a practical demonstration through unilateral action by the United Arab Republic Government. We consider, for instance, that inflammatory
broadcasts and inflammatory nrticles in the press
- not excluding, I may add, inflammatory statements
from whatever quarter in this Council - can only
have one effect, and that is a harmful one, in a situation
as disturbed as the one which exists today in Lebanon.
27. We believe that it is in the interests of the countries in the area involved, indeed in the real interests
of all the Members of the United Nations without
exception, that this issue should be settled speedily
and by peaceful means. We mllst never forget the
grave danger in the world of today that a situation
which develops in one part of the world may become
so inf1nmed that it might threaten international peace
and security.
28. The PRESIDENT; Since all other members of
the Council have spoken, I now wish to speak as the
representative of CHINA.
29. I had prepared a statement for the debate on the
question under discussion, but I have decided not to
give it. I have two reasons for this decision. First, it
appears to me that at this juncture even the best of
st£ltements cannot do as much good as a good deed.
We have the opportunity of doing a good deed by
adopting the Swedish draft resolution. Secondly, I feel
that the long: discussion in the Council up to the present
moment has served to clarify the nature of the crisis in
Lebanon. The Foreign Minister of Lebanon has presented
to the Council sufficient evidence of a trustworthy
character to convince me that his c(juntry has indeed
been the victim of foreign intervention in its dome.Stic
aITairs. Without that foreign intervention, the domestic
difficulties of Lebanon would not have assumed the
present form or the present degree of gravity.

30. The representative of Iraq, in his remarkable
speech last nigl1t [824th meeting], threw further light
on the events in Lebanon. Mr. Jamali did more than
that. He analysed for the Council the larger meaning
o[ the foreign intervention of which Lebanon is a
victim. That speech, in my judgement, deserves the
close attention, not only of this Council, but also of
all people interested in the cause of peace and freedom.
31. My delegation supports tlle Swedish draft. resolution and will naturally vote for it. I regard this draft
as the minimum which the Security Council can do
in the discharge of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world.

6

26. Puisque je parle de cooperation, il est peut-~tr
souhaitable de rappeler une fois encore les assurance
donnees par le representant de la Republique arab·
unie quant it l'attitude de son gouverllement au suje
de l'independance du Liban. Je me suis deja telicit
de ces assurances, et je m'en felicite a nouveau. Mi
delegation espere qu'elles trouveront leur expressiOl
pratique dans les relations entre le Gouvernement d,
la Republique arabe unie et le Gouvernement hbanais
Nous pensons qu'elles pourraient etre accompagnee
d'une action unilaterale du Gouvernement dela Repu
blique arab<' unie. Nous estimons, par exemple, qUL
les emissions radiophoniques incendiaires, les article
incendiaires dans la presse (ainsi que, ajonterai-je, le
declarations incendiaires faites an Conseil, d'oll qu'el1e
viennent), ne peuvent avoir qU'un effet, et un elle
nefaste, en presence d'une sitUlltion aussi troublee quo
celle qui regne aujourd'hui au Liban.
27. Nous estimons qu'il est de l'interet. de tons le
pays de cette region et de l'interet veritable de tou
les Etals Metnbres des Nations Unies, sans exception
que cette question soit regIee rapidement et par de
moyens pacifiques. Nous ne devons jamais aublie
que le monde d'aujourd'hui est expose an grave dange
qu'une situation regnant dans une region s'aggrav.
au point qu'e!Je risque de menacer la paix. et la securit·
internlltionales.
28. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Puisqn<
tous les autres membres dn Conseil sont intervenus dan
le debat, je voudrais maintenant prendre la pnrole et
qualite de representant de la CHINE.
29. J'avais prepare une declaration pour la discussiot
sur la question en discussion, mais j'ai decide de ne pa
la presenter. Il y a it cela deux raisons. Tout d'abord
il me semble que, dans Ja situation actucllc, la meiUeur'
declaration ne peut etre aussi efficace qu'une borm·
action. Nous avons en Cl'. moment la possibilile d,
faire utle bonne action en adoptant le projet de fesolu
tion de la Suede, En second lieu, j'esUme que la longu,
discussion qui s'est deroulee devant le Conseil jusqu'.
ce moment 11 permis de faire la lumiere sur la crise quo
traverse le tiban. Le Ministre des aJIaires etrangere
du Liban a apporte au Conseil des preuves suffIsante
et dignes de foi, qui m'ont convaincu que son pays ('5
reellement victime d'une ingerence ctrangere dans se
a:ITaires interieures. Sans cette ingerence etrangere, le
diffIcultes interieures du Liban n'auraient jalTIais revett
leur forme actnelle ni atteint le degre de gravite qu'elle
ont maintenant.
-~ Dans son remarquable discours d'hier soir [824
30.
seance], le representant de l'Irak a apporte des eclair
cissements nonveaux sur les evenements du Liban
:r-.I, Jamali a fait plus que cela. IL a expose devant Il
Conseil de securite le sens profond de I'ingerence etran
gere dont est victime le Liban. A mon avis, ce discour:
medte J'attention la plus profonde, non seulement dt
Conseil de securite, mais encore de tOllS les peuple:
auxquels la cause de la paix et de la liberte est chere
31. Ma d(Hegation appuie le projet de resolutiol
suedois, et elle votera naturellement en faveur de el
texte. J'estime que Cl'. projet de resolution est le moiru
que le Conseil de securite puisse faire pour s'acquitte:
de sa responsabilite principale : le maiJltien de la pab
et de la securite du mOll de.

r

I

j
I

I

32. Mr. LOUTFI (United Arab Rep:l.blic) (translated

32. M. LOUTFI (Republique arabe unie) : Comme
vons. monsieur le President, je ne compte pas faiT2 de
discours ; surtout apres le deptit du projet de resolution
de la Suede, je me bornerai a iaire quelqucs observations.

from French): Like you, Mr. Presidf'.nt.• Tllave no intention 01 making a speech, particularly in view of the

Swedish draft resolution that is now before us. I have
only a few comments to make.
33.

The United States representative supported the
Leb,lOese case without putting forward any evidence
and without explaining the reasons for his attitude.

33.

Le representant des Etats-Unis a aplJuye la these
du Ltban lOans produire de preuves et sans nous expliquer les motifs de son attitude. Malheueusement, les
Etats-Unis avalent adopte ceUe position av.ant II'.l!me
la discussion de la question au Conseil de securite,
c.omme cela r€sulte des declarations de responsables
du g::JUvemement de ce pays. Ceh est d'autant plus
regrettH hi", qu f' le depM du proj et de resolution de la
Suede - projet qui ne prejuge pns la £;uestion et que
les Etats-Unis ant declare ~tre disposes a appuyer aurait dll inciter le Gouvernement des Etllts-Unis a ne
pas prencrc en cc moment cette position n~tte Sill'
cette question.

Unfortunately, the United States t.oak this position

before the matter was even discussed in the Security
COLLncil, as is cLear from the statements of leading

ofEcials of the United States Governml"_nt. It is
regrettable that it did so, the more $0 as thcsubmissloll
of the Swedish draft resolution - which does not
prejudge the issue and which the United States stated
that it was prepared to support - should have encouraged the United States Government not to take so
definite fl position on the question at Ulis stage.

i·

I
I

I

I
I.
I
I.

I
J

r

I
,

jf.

34.

I never hoped to be able to persuade the United
Kingdom representative of the ments of our case;
his position in this dispute was decided long ago. But
I was somewhat surprised by the yehemence of the
sta tement he made at the last meeting; he seems to
be afraid that we are going to attack Lebanon. It is
net wc who commit aggression in the Middle East.
There is no need for me to remind you of what the
United Kingdom Government did in bis part of
tlle world a little over a year ago. The records of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly are
available for consultation on that point.

34. Je n'ai ja:nais espere convaincre dLl bienRfoncte de
notre thC3C le r<3presentant du Royaume~Uni : il y a
bien longtemps qu'il avait pris position dans Cl'. conflit.
Mais rai Cte un peu surpris de la violence du discours
qu'il a pronance a la seance precedente : le representant
du Royaume-Uni semble. craindre que noi.l.S n'nJioos
attaquer le Liban. Ce n'est pas nous qui comme:Jons
des agressions dans le Moyen~Orient. le n'ai pas besoin
dc rappeler le comportement du Gouvernement britannique, il y a a peine u ne annee et quclqu~s mois, dans
cctte paTtie du man de, Les proces-verbaux du Conseil
de securite et de l'AssembIee genetale sont pertinents
a ce !mjet.

35.

TIle United Kingdom delegatioll merely eadorscd
the allegations of the Foreign Minister of Lebanon
and added noLhing new to thc discussion. In the circumstances it would seem unnecessary at this stage of
the discussion for me to reply to the United Kingdom
representative on the questions of fact with which
I dealt at Length at the previous meeting. I have,
however, one comment to make. I hope that this
prejudgement of the issue is 110t intellded to inGuence
-the judgement of the observation group the e~tablish­
ment of which is proposed in the Swedis:t representat:ve's draft rcsolutiorl. Happily, the majority of the
members of the Security Council who :1ave spoken,
particularly tho~e w-w have s;:JOlcen today. 11l.'lVC not
prejudged the issue ill this way.

35. La delegation du Royuume-Uni u simplement
appuyc les allegations du Ministre dcs affaires etrange.ri>_<; du Liban, sans apporter d'eIemenls nouveaux
dans l'al1aire. C'est pourquoi, a cette phase du Q(~bat,
je n'estime pas necessnire de repliquer au repre;sentant
du Royaume-Uni all sujet des questions de faits que j'ai
traitccs longuement a la sen'!r.!'. precedcnte. Toutefois,
j'ai une remarque a fnire. J'espere que Cl'tte prise de
position, qui prejuge la question, n'a pas pour but
d'iniluencer le jugement du groupe d'observation dont
le represeulallt de la Suede propose la c.reation dans
son projet de resolution. HeureuSel1leIlt, la majorite
des membres du Conseil de securite qui ont pris la
parole, notamment fiujQurd'!1ui, n'ont pas prejuge la
question.

30. I have onc furtr.er remark to make: 1 womlerwhether I should take Mr. .Tamali's statcment seriously. It is
astonishing that a ~ember of the Secnrity Cou:J.cil
representing a region of the world should take a position
of this kind instead of making constructive proposals
similar to those made by certain other del~gRtions.
But rrothing that Mr, Jamali does surprises me; fortunately, it is difftcult to take him seriously. I shall not
deign to answer the insults: it is very ca~yto be tnwlting. I could be insulting my~df, bul it is marc difllcult
to be objective and to respect the Security Council,
of whicll Mr. lamali has ;he honour of being a member.
His speech was full of patent inaccuracies and untruthful allegations and barcly touclled on the questioll
before us, the Lebanese complaint. The United Arab
Republic has nothing to learn from Mr. JamaH. The
lhJitFrl Ar:<.h Republic has fl policy. It knows what it

36. Encore une remarque. Je me demande si je dois
prendre au serieux. le discDurs de M. Jamali. II est
etonnant de voir un membre du COllst;il de securitc qui
represente une region d:.t mO:lde prendre cette attitudE,
au lieu de fa~re des propositions constructives comme
celles qui ont ete iorITln]ees id par ccrtaine!l delegations.
Mais rien ne me surprend de la part de M. Jamali.
Heureusement qn'j] est difficile de le prendre. all scjeux I
le ne daigtle pas repliqLler aux injures, 11 est tres facile
d'insulter ; je peuJ( l'l1l3si le faire ; mais il est plus dim~
cile d'etre ob~ectif et de respecter le Conseil de securite,
oil M. Jarnali a l'honneur de sieger. Son discours, plein
d'inexactitudes flagrantes et d'allegatbns mensongeres,
n'a meme presquc pas touche au sl,jet qne nous discutons, a savoir la plainte Libanaise. La Republique arabe
unic n'a pas de legon a recevoir de M. Jamali. L:l
Republique arabe unie a nue politique. Elle sait Cl'.

7

•
wants; its sole concern is for the well-being, prosperity
and happiness of the Arab people. To discuss these
questions with Mr. Jamali would do him too much
honour.

qu'elle veut; elle ne desire que le bien-etre, la prosperite
et le bonheur du peuple arabe. Ce serait faire trap
d'honneur a M. Jamali que de discuter ces questions
avec luL

Mr, JAMALI (Iraq): What I stated yesterday

37. M. JAMALI (Irak) [tradait de l'anglais] : Ce que
j'ai dit hier I824B seance] ctait l'expose honnete de
man point de vue sur la situation. Je repete ce que j'ai
dit hier soil' : nous sommes pleins de bonne volonte et
de sentiments d'amitie a l'egard de tous les pays arabes.
Tout ce que nous voulons, c'est qu'il n'y ait pas d'intervention dans nos affaires et qu'aucun Etat arabe ne
cherche it saper notre independance.

37.

[8241h meeting] was an honest point of view about the
situation. I say again what I said last llight: we harbour

all good-will, all friendship for every Arab country.
All we want is that there should be no interference in
our affairs and that no Arab State should undertake
to undermine our independence.
38. When I spoke last night about what Nasserism
is doing, I said that I had material proofs to back up
what I said; I did not speak in an offhand manner.
I know that I am living day and night in an atmosphere
where there is propaganda at night and machinations
in the day-time; these things are going on in the Arab
world.

38. Lorsque j'ai parte hier soil' de ce que fait le nasserisme, j'ai dit que j'avais des preuves materieIles pour
appllyer mes paroles; je n'ai pas parle a la legere. Je
sais que je vis nuit et jour dans nne atmosphere Ot'! la
propagande, la nuit, fait suite aux machinations du
jour; c'est ainsi que vont les choses dans le mondearabe.

39. We want the words spoken by Mr. Loutfi to take
on real meaning. Let them stop the radio attacks; let
him tell me that as of last night the radio stopped
broadcasting attacks on Iraq. Can he assure the Council
about that? If he does that, I will be must happy. Let
them stop their agents from activating the whole
opposition and all the mobs and demagogy all over the
Arab world.

39. NoilS voulons que les paroles de M. Loutfi se
traduisent par des aetes. Qu'ils mettent fin a lem
campagne d'attaques radiodiffusees. Que M. Loutfi me
dise que la nuit derniere la radio a cesse ses attaqlles
contre l'Irak. M. LoutH peut-il en donner l'assllrance
au Conseil ? S'ille fait, j'en serai extr~mement heureux.
Qn'ils mettent un terme aux activites de leurs agents
qui encouragent toute l'opposition, agitent les foules et
font de la demagogie dans tout le monde arabe.

40. Yesterday I received the magazine which I am
holding in my hand; it is a magazine which I should
like every member of the Security Council to see. It is
called The Arab Public. I shall read to you only the
headlines of this magazine. (By the way, it is edited
and published in Syria.)

40. J'ai re9u hier la revue que rai entre les mains;
c'est nne revue que j'aimerais montrer a tous les
membres du Conseil. Elle s'intitule : «Le Public arabe ».
Je vous lirai seulement les titres de cette publication
(eIle est redigce et publiee en Syrie).

41. The headline of the first article reads: "Chamoun,
the spy of the English Intelligence Service - Victory
for the masses of the Arabs in Lebanon". T]le second
article: " In Arab politics, a cabinet of thieves, agitators
and traitors, a cabinet formed by Prince Faisal of
Saudi Arabia ". The third article: "The city of Alcppo
takes part actively in doing its duty in supporting the
masses in Lebanon in their struggle against the Government ". The fourth article: "The first message from
Lebanon explains the situation as it is. Camille Chamoun has deceived General Chehab and the Moslems do
not want him to become Prime Minister". Then it
continues: "Americans, hands off Lebanonl" The
fiftIl article reads: "The revolution of freedom in the
face of injustice and dictatorship - Camille Chamoun:
ill luck, earthquakes, mortars, fires - All that took
place in the regime of tIle criminal Chamoun since he
took powers ". After that it says: "The rulers of Iraq
are base slaves who sold themselves to imperialism. "

41. Le premier article s'intitule : (( Chamoun, l'espion
des services de renseignements anglais - Victoire pour
les masses arabes au Liban )). Le second article: l( Dans
la politique arabe, un cabinet de voleurs, d'agitateurs
et de traitres, un cabinet forme par le prince Faisal
d'Arabie Saoudite ». Le troisieme article : «( La ville
d'Alep fait son devoir et participe activement a l'action
des masses libanaises dans leur lutte contre le gonvernement ». Le quatrieme article dit : ~ Le premier
message reyu du Liban explique la situation veritable.
Camille Chamoun a trompe le general Chehab, et les
musulmans ne veulent pas de lui comme Premier
Ministre. » 11 continue ensuite ; 11 Americains, ne touchez
pas au Liban I )) Le cinquieme article dit : «La revolution de la liberte contre !'injustice et la dictature. Camille Chamoun: mauvais sort, tremblements de tene,
mortiers, incendies - tel est le bHan du regime du
criminel Chamoun )). Il dit ensuite : «( Les dirigeants de
l'lrak sont de vils esclaves qui se sont vendus a
I'imperialisme. »

42. As we can see, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and
Iraq are all included, one after the other. This is a
magazine that comes out in a sister Arab State.

42. Comme vous le voyez, le Liban, l'Arabie Saoudite
et l'Irak sont taus vises, l'un apres l'autre. Il s'agit
d'une revue publiee dans un Etat arabe frere.

43. The representative of the United Arab Hepublic
does not want to take me seriously. Let him not take
me seriously, but the facts are there. The peace of the
world and its security are being threatened, and he

43. Le representant de la Republique arabe unie ne
veut pas me prendre au serieux. Il n'en est pas moins
vrai que les faits demeurent. La paix et la securite du
monde sont menacees, mais il declare que nous ne
8

sa~

to
th:

r

l
l
,

\,

th
,t
yo
rn,
re,

W

44
R

rn
w

L
4~

tl
,I

g'

"b
p

r

J

I

r•

l'
l.

\,

f

r
f,
:)

r

(.

E
w
t

,

F
t
1
1
c

4
j

1

f
I

r

r.

!

r.

r'
I,

,

says that we will not take Mr, Jamali seriously. I appeal
to him and to his Govemmmt to put an end to such
things. If he does that, that is all we want. We say to
the United Arab Republic: We want nothi:lg from you
at all. We wish all good luck to you. We have in mind
your welfare. All we want yo u to do is to stop such
mnchinery which has hc",n detrimental to our brotherly
relations. We are yeur brothers. We want good-will.
We want peace to prevail in the Middle East.

prendrons pas au serieux M. Jamali. Je lui demande,
ainsi c;u'!t scc gO·.Ivernement, de mettre un tl'.rme cet
etat de cheses. S'ille fait, c'est tout cc que nOllS voulons.
Nous disons la Republique arabe unie : NOlls ne vous
dewnndons rien d'llutre. Nous vous ~ollhaitons la
meilleure chance possible. Votre prosperite :lOUS tient
fI creur. Tout ce que r.OllS vous demandons, c'est de
mettre fin aces machimltiolls qui ont nui :'i. nos relations fraternelles. Nous sommes vas htres. Nous youlons
qu'existe entre nous un sentiment de solidaritc. Nous
voulons que la paix regne nu Moyen-Orient.

44. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Sovir.t Socialist
Re:.mblics) (trans!ated from Russian): I SllOUld like to
make a few remarks in connexion with the discussion
which is taking ?lace in the Security Council on the
Lebanese Government's complaint.

44. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques soeialistes

45.

The Suviet delegation notes, in the first plilce.
t.hat the representativEs of certain we~tern Powers,
above all the United States and the United Kingdom,
gave unreserved support to the Lebanese GovernHleni;'s
complaint. In so doing, they took n. clear:y s'Jbjective,
biased positicn, which h an outgrowth of tlIEir foreign
policy vis-a.-vis the countries of the Near al:d Middle
E.ast. Their position cannot be described in any other
w;oy, for the representatives of the Unitfrl States and
the Cnited Kingdom completely ignored the official
statements of the Government of the United Arab
Republic and the statements by the representative of
the United Arab Republic here in the Security Council.
They paid no hee.d to the 5pecific facts and arguments
presented, which leave no doubt as to the groll:1dlessnes::;
of the Lebanese Government's complaint.

45. La delegation sovletique cor.state d'abord qu(, les
representants de c<lrtaines puissances occidentales, et
avant tout les rcpresentants des Etats-Unis et du
Rou:lume-Uni, ont apptlye, S:ins reserve la plainte du
Gouvernement libnnais. Ce faisant, Us ont adopte une
attitude nettement partiale et denuce d'objectivite, qui
nisulte de leur politiquc etrangc~e fi l'egard des p:lYs
du Proche-Orient et du Moyen-Orient. On ne peut
qualifier autrement lcrt position, car les representants
des Etai:s-Unis et c.u Hoyaume-l.;ni ant meCOllllU completement les declarations officie1les du Gouvernement
de la Rp,puhlique arabe unie ainsi quc l'intervention du
representant de ce ;Jays all Conse:1 de sec.urite, lis n'ont
pas tem, compte des faits concrets et des arguments
qui {HIt 6te expos6 et qui ne laissent suhsister aucur:
doute sur le manque de fondement de la plainte du
Gouvernement libanaffi.

4£.

Without wishing to repeat the facts we cited £It
the last meeting of the Council, which showed that the
United States and the United Kingdom were interfering
in the internal affairs of the Arab States and were
preparing £or armed intervention ill Lfh,qnnn, tlJe Soviet
delegation is conlpelled to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to cert:tin actions on which tIle
United States and United I{ilJguOlll Governments are
working while this debate is in progress here. The
United States evidently places greater reliance on its
racket-carrying jet aircrait than or. United Nations
decis:ons. How else can one explain the fact that, ut the
very time that Mr. Lodge i, arguir.g here :n the Security
Council for tIle dispatch of United ~atiOlls observers
to LeballOn, the United States Government decides to
send a large new consignment of jet aircraft to Leb:won
to ftght against the Lebanese population?

46. Sans vouloir l'epeter les faits que notts avons cites
a la dernicre seance ell Conseil, et qui temoignent de
I'ingerence del; EtaLs-Uui:> et du RO)'alu:lC-Uni dans les
afIaires intericures des Etats arabcs et de l'intervention
8rmee que ces pays preparent all Liban, la delegation
soviCtiqlle ne peut manquer d'appeler l'atlelltion dei>
membres du Conseil sur eertaines mestlres que le.'>
GouvernE',ments des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni
mettent au point au moment mem~ ott la question
libanaise est disclltce id. Les Etats-Unis comptent
111u5, ~emblc-t-il, sur Leurs avian,> !l rear,tion armcs de
fusees que sur les decisions de l'Orgatisation des
Nations Unies. Comment expliquer autrerr.ent que, au
moment merne 0(; M. Lodgt: preronise jci, flU ConJ;eil
de securite, l'envoi au Liban d'observateurs de l'Organisation des Nations Unie.~, le Gouvernemer.t des EtatsUnis decide d'expedier dans cc pays, de nouveall, un
grand nombre d'avions it reactlon devant servir a la
luttc r.ontre la population libanaise?

47. I should r.ow like to :'jay a few words about the
statement by tile Iraqi represcntlltive, Mr. Jnmuli.
This is not the first statement he has made that is,
J would say. imbued with uncorcealed hatred for the
Soviet Union and certain Arab peoples which have
freed themselves from the yoke of colonialism. In itself,
the ~tlltcmcnt would not call for a re;Jly, were it not for
the fact that it eonstitutes a frank confession of faith
hy a man who has linked his fate to tlle colonialists.

47. Quelques mats maintenant sur l'intervention de
M. Jamali, le rcpreser.tant dt l'Irak< Cette intervention,
qui n'est pas la premiere, exprime d'un bout it l'autre
une Jwine non deguisee de l'Uniw sOyjetiqllc et cc
certains peuplcs nrnDes qui se ~ont !iber-cs du jOllg
coloniali5te. Cetle intervention, en soi, n'exigerait pas
de reponse si eUe n'etait pas la franche confession d'un
homme qui a lie ~on destiu au ~olonialism~.

48. From Mr. Jnmali's reasoning, it appears that he

48. Si ran suiL l'argumentation dc. M. Jamnli, on yoit
que, d'apres Jui, le peeM mortel de l'Union 50vietique

a

a

sovictiques) [lraduil dll lUsse] : Je voudrab faire quelques
observations dans le cadre de l'examen par le Conseil
de serurjt.~ de la plainte du Gouvernement libanais.

regards as the Soviet Union's mortal sin the fact that

9

we consistently and decisively support the Arnb peoples'
striving for unity, tllat we ndvocate letting the Arabs
live as a haml.oni<Jlls family. If that is a sin in the
opinion of some members of the Council, then we
confess to it. Yes, we are in favour of the establishing
of friendly, brotherly relations among tlle Arab peoples,
the stre~athening of the independence of the countries
of the Arab East, and the consolidation of peace and
security in that area. Tllis policy of the Soviet GOYern~
ment is mpported by the Arabs, for the very same
goah are sougllt by all peoples that are divided by
centuries-old colonial oppression and that know bow
much imllortance to attach to the commnnist bugaboo,
which has long since ceased to frighten anyone, hut
has been dragged out once again by Mr. Jamali.

est d'appuyer constamment et energiquement les aspirations des peuples :;.rabes it. \'unitr E't de vouloir que
les Arabes vivent dans I'amitie et l'harmonic. Si certains
membres d..1 Conseil considerent cela comme un pecM,
nous sammes prets a nOus confesser. Cui, nous sommes
pour l'etablissement de relations fraternelles et amicales
e:ltre les peuples arabes, pour le renforcement de
l'independance des pays de l'Orient arabe, pour la
consolidation de la paix et de la securite dans cette
region. Cette politique de l'Union sovietique rencontre
l'appui des Arabes, car nos objectifs sont ceux de tous
leg peuplcs divLSC9. par des siccle.s a'oppression coloniale, qui savent a quoi s'en tenir sur l'epouvantail
du commllnisme. qu'agite une fois de plus M. Jamali
et qui, dep:lis longtemps, n'e{Traie plus personne.

49. 1 must say, however. that here. too, Mr. Jamuli
is merely repeating what the United States Secretary
of State, Mr. Dulles, had already said about Lebanon.
Mr. Dulles also declared that the events in Lebanon
were the handiwork of the conmunists. It is interesting
to see how the Leh<lnr.s~ ;\nswPrea Mr. Dunes on tlus
point.

4'9.

lu: aus5i que le.:; evenernents du Liban sont l'ceuvre des
communistes. Il est interessant de voir ce que les
Libnnnis cux-m~mes reponol:ut a M. Dunes.

50. On ~4 r..lay 1958, the Lebanese newspaper the
Telegraph-Beiru.t published a statement by former
Prime Minister Saeh SaIAf:lm, rr.plying to Mr. Dulles'
assertion that the events in Lebanon wert the handiwork
of the communists. I shall quote this statement, which,
incidentally, answers Mr. Jamali as well:
"It is regrettable lhal a responsible statesman
like Dulles :>hould make a statement of this kind,
which completely ignores the actual ~tate of ai1airs
in Lebanon, where armed bands, incited and supplied
by the authorities, are killing and wounding citizens.
Dulles' statement that the Opposition's activity is
communist-inspired is refuted by the fact that tile
leaders of the country's various religious communities,
including the Maronite Patriarch, the Shiah Mufti
and the Ulema. and the Druse sheikhs, have given
their blessing to the popular Dovement and are
openly supporting it. The Lebanese want only one
thing - to maintain. Leban<)rJ.'s existence and independence and to ensure peace in their own country
and in all the Arab countries. The sooner the United
States understands the great trutil UUl't the present
national movement against United States policy
has no connexioll with communism, the better for
the United States and the greater contribution it
will make to the cause of world pr.Bee."

Cepcndant, M. Jnmnli se borne a repeler la encore

ce que le Secre.taire d'Etat des Etats-Unis, M. Dulles,
a dit avnnt lui au slljet du Liban. M. Dulles a declare

50. Le journal liballais Telegraph-Beirul a publie le
14 mai 1958 une declaration de M. Saeb Salaam,
:mcien premier ministre, sui reponJ a l'lissertion de
M. Dulles selon laquelle les evenements survenus au
Liban sont imputables aux communistes. Je voudrais
citer cette declaration, qui constitue aussi, d'ailleurs,
une reponse aux arguments de M. Jamali.
« 11 est regrettable qu'un dirigeont politique aussi
important que Dulles fasse de semblables declarations
sans ',enit le moindre co:npte de la situation reelle
au Uban, oil des bandes armees, encouragees et
equipees par les autorites. tU1'.nt et blessent les
civik La declaration de Dulle.s d'aIJrcs laquelle
I'opposition agit !'instigation du com:nunisme est
dementie par le fait que les chefs des differentes
communautes religieuses du pays, notamment le
patriarche marnnite. le Mufti et les ulemas chiitcs, ct
les cl1eiks des Druzes, ont donne lellr benediction
BU mouvement populaire, qu'ils soutiennent ouvertement. Les Libanais ne souhaitent qu'une chose :
assurer l'existence et l'independance du Liban et
garantir la paix chez eux et dans tous les pays aH.bes.
Plus tM les Etats-Unis comprendront cette grande
verite, a savoir que le mOllvement national actuel
dirige contre la politique americaine n'a rien a voir
evec le comrnunisme. mieux its s'en trouve:oont et
plus il~ contribueront a la paix internationale. n

a

I

51. Mr. Jamali referred to the relations between the
Soviet Union and the United Arab Republic and, in
particul.ar, to the support which the S<lviet people is
giving to the President of the UnitE!d ArBh Republic,
Mr. Nasser. It is diHJcult for me to say anything about
Mr. JamaJi's quotation from the statement allegedly
made by the Prime Minister of the Soviet Union,
Mr. !{hrushchev, <In 16 May 1958 [824/11 meeting,
para. 202]. We h[lVI' hp-cn linable to fmd it. We de kn.ow
something €lse, however, namely, that on 17 May, on
his return to Cairo, President Nasser stated that Prime
Minister Khrushchev had assured him tha-::
" ... he wants nothing from us (that is, from the
United Arab Republic) but cordial friendship and

51. M. Jamali a parle des relations de l'Union sovietiql:e avec la BepllbJique arabe unie, et notamment
de I'appd que le peuple sovietique donne au President
de la Republiquc arabe unie, M. Nasser. n m'est difficHe de faire le moindre commentaire au suiet des
citations que M, Jamali dit avoir tin~es d'lIne" declaration que le Premier Ministre de l'Cnion sovietique.
M. Khrouchtchev, aurait faite le 16 mai 1958 [824 e
seance, fXlf. 202}. )fous n'avons pu 6:1 trouver trace.
Mais nou~ savons qu'a wn retour au Caire le president
Nasser a declare le 17 mai que M. Khrouchtchev lui
avait donne I'assurance
«[.•. } qu'il ne nous demande (c'est-~-dire a la
Republique arabe unie) rieu d'autre qn'une amitie
10

·---------------------------------------------~r--11IIII

love, that no conditions are attached to the relations
~t une affection sinccres, que les relations entre nos
between our two peoples, and that our mutual
eux peuples ne sont soumises a aucune condition
advantage does not depend on any kind of condipas plus que le respect de nos intercts mutuels ll. '
tions. "
52. The Soviet people in fact holds the Arab peoples 52. 11 est exact quo J
" •
b
" e pcup Je Sovletlque
rcspecte
in high esteem and has the warmest feelings of friend~aucoup I~s, peup]es arabes et a la plus grandc amitie
ship towards President Nasser. These warm feelings p Udr ]e preSIdent Nasser. Ce sentiment d'amiti6 pmof friendship are, above all, attributable to what fNoneacte ,SUSCI't'e avnnt tout par ce que le president
President Nasset has done for the national liberation
asser a fait p'0~r la li?eration nationale de son pays.
of his country. The Soviet people sees in the President L~ peuple sovlebque VOlt dans le President de la Repuof the United Arab Republic a national hero who has blique arabe unie lm heros national qui a courageuboldly raised the banner of struggle against the colo- sement Iev~'J"etendnrd de la lutte contre les colon1niaiists, who has fought and is still fighting for the s,~teu,rs, qUI a mene et qui mene toujours la luLie pour
independence of his Republic and of the other Arab Imdependance de sa republiql1e et pour cellc des antres
peoples which have not yet freed themselves from peuples arabes qui ne se sont pas encore liberes du
loug colonial.
colonial oppression.
53. :Mr. Jamali has repeated the hackneyed contention 53. M. J~mali a repris un slogan eculc de la propaof Western propaganda that the Soviet Union is seeking ~an~e occld~nt.ale touchant le pretendu desir qu'aurait
to « penetrate" the countries of the Near and Middle 1Umon S~Vletique de "penetrer» dans les PflYS du
East, exploiting for that purpose its friendly relations Proche-Onent et du Moyen-Orient, et de se :-;ervir t\
with the United Arab Republic and" world commu- cette,fm des relations amicales qu'elle clltretient flVec
nism ". It is hardly necessary to demonstrate the la Republique ambe unie ainsi que du ',commllnismc
absurdity of such assertions. Everyone, including mondial ». II n'est guere utile de prouver combien de
Mr. Jamali, knows that the Soviet Union's friendly scmbl~blcs asserti~ns sont ridicules. Chacun sait, y
relations with the Arab peoples rest on a foundation compns M. Jamah, que les relations d'amitic entre
of mutual advantage and are expressed in agreements ],Uni~n ,sovietiqu,e et les peuples arabes reposcnt sur
on matters of culture, trade and economic relations le pnnclpe de I avant~ge mutuel et se manifcstent
concluded on the basis of equal rights. We seck no par ~es accords culturels, commerciaux et economiqucs
conditions from the Arab peoples which are incompa~ fondes sur le principe de l'egalitc des droits. Nous ne
tible with their sovereignty and national interests. The cherchons pas a imposer aux peuples nrabcs des condiSoviet Union has no colonial ambitions, We neither tions qui seraient incompatibles avec Icur souvcrainetc
possess nor seek oil concessions in Arab countries. et leurs intefl!ts nationaux, L'Union sovietique n'a
We have no oil pipelines on the territory of the Arab pas de visees colonialistes, Nous n'avons pas dc
countries, nor do wc have military bases intended for concessions petrolif~res dans les pays arablOS et
the waging of aggressive wars. The Soviet Union did nous ne chercl10ns pas a lOn obtenir. NOlls n'avons pas
not suppress the national liberation moyement of the de pipe-lines sur le territoire des pays arabes, et nous
n'y possedons pas non pltlS de bases militaires desArab peoples.
Unees a des guerres d'agression. L'Union sovietique
n'a jamais reprimc le mouvement de liberation nat1onale des peuples arabes.
54. In view of this, Mr. J:mmli's assertion that West- 54. Dans ces conditions, il est pour le moins curieux
ern colonialism is dead sonnded, at the very least, _ j'y l'elcve meme Hne certainc provocatioll - que
strange _ provocative, I would say. This is what he M. Jamali vienne nous affil'mer que le colonialisme
said: " ... Western colonialism is a dead lhing, a thing occidental est mort, C'est la cc qu'il a dit : «Le coloof the pasL." [ibid" par::!. 227] Consequently, it allegedly nialisme occidental appartient au passe, il a ces:;e
no longer constitutes a thrcat to th.c peoples of the d'exister ~ [ibid" par. 227]. En d'autres tcrmes, le coloNear ani! Middle East, Asia and Africa, Is this assertion nialisme ne constituerait plus une mcnace pour les
in accord with what was said at the African~Asian peuples du Proche-Orient et du Moycn-Orient, d'Asie
Conference, held atBandllng in 1955, which, Mr. Jamali et d'Afrique. CeUe affirmation s'accorde-t-elle uvcc cc
tells us, he himself attended? Wc all know that the qui a cite dit a la Conference des pays d'Afrique e~
Bandung Conference recognized colonialism as an evil, d'Asie, tenue aBandoung en 1955, a laquelle M. JUlllflh
a present evil, and that the subjection of peoples to nous dit lui-mllme avoir assistC ? On sait qlle la Confeforeign enslavement, rule by exploitation, is contrary rcnce de Bandoung a reconnu que le colonialisme cst
to the United Nations Charter. The members of the un mal et qu'il sevit toujours, que l'as~ervis~em~nt
Security Council are no doubt aware of the decisions of des peuples par l'ctranger et le regn~ de I ex:plOltation
the Conference of Independent African Stab~s, held at sont contraires it la Charte des NatJons UTIles. Je ne
Acera in April 1958 - a conference of countries whose doute pas que lcs membres du Conseil d~ securitC
connaissent les decisions prises par la Conference de,S
most acutc and burning problem is that of liquidating
Etats independants africains, tenue a Accra en avnI
colonialism. The Conference's main decision was a
1958 conference reunissant les pays pour lesqucJs le
condemnation of colonialism and an appeal for all probicme de la liquidation du colonialisme est le plus.
possible support of the dependent peoples in their urgent et le plus grave, La princ,ipale decisior.l ~c cette
struggle for liberation.
conference a etci une eon~amnahon, ~ud COlolll,abhJsme et
un appel en vue d'obtClllr toute I al e pOSS,l e p,our
les peuples dependants qui luttent pour leur llbCratJon.
11
'Z'-

-0'-.----

•

•

55. Would Mr. J3mali have dared to make such a
statement before the peoples of the African continent?
How would the peoples of, say. Muscat and Oman or
"Yemen have re,plied to his statement that westerrr
colonialism is dead?

55. M. .ramali se serait-il permis de faire une semblable declaration dev31lt les peuples du contiup.nt africain? Que lui nipondraient les peuples de Mascate et
Oman ou du Yemen, par exemple, s'il lelU' disait que
le wlonialisme occidental est mort?

56, In conclusion, the Soviet delegation feels obliged
Lv IJoiut out ome again t11at it is the duty 01' all members
of lite Security Council to consider in [l thoroughly
responsible manner the q'lestion before us and to
refrain horn the in tolerable policy of stiTTing up con flicts
between the Arab peoples - in the present instance,
of supporting Lebanon's groundless accusations and
ignoring Lhe well-founded position of th~ Government
of the UniLed Arab Republic, which categoricall),
rejects these accusations. Only this appr(Jach will make
it possible to thwart the plans of certain Powers to
intervene in Lebanon's domestic affairs and to exploit
the events in Lebanon to the detriment of the Arab
peoples' national interests.

56. En conclusion, la delegation sovietique jugP. necp_~.
saire de repeter que tous les membres du Canseil de
sec\lrite ant le devoir de rester pleinement conscients
de leurs responsnbilites lors de l'examen de la question
dont nous sommes saisis, et de renoncer a la politique
inadmissible qui consiste it semer la disliellssion entre
les peuples arabes, el, dans le cas qui nollS occnpe, a
appuyer les accusations sans fondernent du Liban en
me.connaissant la posiLion parfaite:nent fondee du
Gouvernemcnt de la Republique arabe unie, qui rejette
categoriquement ces accusations, Ce n'est qu'en adoplaut une telle attitude que l'on polU'ra faire echoucr
les plmls de certaines puissances qui voudraieut intervenir dans les afTaires interieures du Liban et exploiter
les evenement~ du Liban uu detriment des inLereLs
llatiom.wx des peuples arabes.

57. Mr. MALI[{ (Lebanon): At this point in the Secu~
rHy Council's debate, 1 should like to malcc a very fe·w
ob~ervations. 1t is app:ucnt tlU'1t. the Council is now
approaching the moment of decision, or indecision, in
this matter. It may thereiore be appropriate for me to
make one or two remarks.

57, M. MALIK (Liban) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je voudeais, a. cc stade des debats dll Conscil de securite,
presenter [Iuc]gues trcs breves observations. ]I est
evident que le Conseil approche maiutenl1nt du moment
oil il se prononcera, ou non, sur cette question. Il
comient done peut-etre que je formuk une Oil deux
observations,

58. First, I must comment on some oJ the quotations
whlch Mr. Sobolcv has made from Lebanese newspapers.
It is apparent that Mr. Sobolev has been quoting from
one of his favourite newspapen - the Te1cgraphBeirut. Everybody knows Lhat the newspaper TelcgraphBeirut is like L'Bumanite in Paris and the Daily Worker
in New York - if the latter still exists. We are happy
to allow that point of view to find expression in Lebanon,
It is impossible to quote ~'rom any newspapr.rs in
Moscow whicll do nGt ~xpres8 the official point of view
of the Soviet Union Government, Our struggle in
Lebanon today is aimed precisely at preserving that
mode of life in which there will be room in our society
for a vuri~ty of opinio:l, including comffilluisL opinion,
to find free expression. That raises the issue of the
extent to which freedOlll accorded to that type of
opinion will in the end subverl freedom altogether.
That is the ultimate issue facing Lebanon and many
other countries.

58. Tout d'abord, je dois commenter certaines des
citations puisees par M. Sobolev dans les journaux
libar.ais. 11 est evident que M. Sobolev a cite un de
5es journaux. favoris, le Telegraph-Beirut. Chacun sait
que le journal TelEgraph-Beirut est a Beyrouth cc ql1'est
L'Iiumaniti a Paris et ;e Daily Worker - s'il existe
enco,'e - a New York. Nons sommes heureux de permettre a cette opinion de s'exprimcr au Liban. Il est
impossible de citer un journal del Mosc(lu qui n'expri:ne
pas l'opinion officielle du Gotlvernement de l'Union
sovietique. La lutte que nous menons Imjourd'hui au
Liban a precisement pour but de preserver ce mode
de vie qui permettra a toutes les opinions, y compris
l'opinion cIJmmunlste, de s'exprimer librement dEns
notre societe. Cela souleve la question de savoir dans
queUe mesure la liberte accordee a ce genre d'opinion
mettm en danger, en fin de c(Jrnpte, la liberte en generaL
Telle est l'llltimp, proh)l'>me nuquel font face le Liban
et de nombreux autres pays,

59. I must, however, point out that Mr. Sobolev's
qltotations from Telegraph-Beirut and other newspapers
slant the picture of what is happening in my country
completely in the direction of Lhe point of view of tlle
Soviet Un:on and the international communist move
ment,

59. Je dois, toutefois, souligner que les eitations tirees

--I
,

}

,

"

,

,•

par M. SoboIev du 'Telegraph-Beirut et d'autres journaux nonnent de ('.e qui se passe dans mon pays une
image qui correspond uniquement aL point de vue
de l'Union sovietique et du mouvemcnt communi~te
international.

M

60. \1". Sobolev a cite emmitc le patriarchc, d'unciens
premiers ministres, et d'autres personnalites. La encore,
110US ,90mmes heureux qu'existe au Liban cette liberte
qui permet ~ chacun d'exprimer son opinion. La crise
que nollS traversons actuellement soul~ve la question
de savoir dans queUe mesure on peut abuser de cetre
liberte - au point oll ellc risque de se detmire ellememe et oil toutc manifestation d'opposition ser"it
supprimee dans notre pays: nous luttons pour que ce
stade ne soit pas HUp.int.

60. Then, Mr. Sobolev has quoted from the Patriarch,
former Prime Ministers, and so forth. Again, we are
happy that there is this freedom in Lebanon in which
everyone can express his opi:lion. We are now going
throllgh the crisis involved in how much t~at freedom
enn be abused --to the point of possibly undermining
itself, so that a stage is reached in which there is no
exprnssion of opposition in our country; we are fIghting
so tllat that stage will not be reached.

12

1"
,1

r
I

r

61.

At a previous meeting of the Council, I said

able man, He can absolve the sins of !Jis flock. But his
political views are shared by fewer than onc-tenth of
1 per cent of his flock. Therefore, politically spealdng,
the Patriarell represents no one.

61. Au cours d'une seance llntel'ieurL' du COIl~cil, j'f1i
sU~ls.amment pllrlli dll patriarchc et de ses opinions
politlques [823 C seance, par. 185J. Le llillriarche est till
h~mme hOl~orable. II peut absonul'e ses Jidcles dl:.' leurs
pec.hes. Mm~ ~~s opinions poliUqucs sont pnrLng:ues par
~OlOs dll illlllieme de 5es .fi{]~les. Par consequent, polilquemellt parlant, le plltnarche ne represclltl; person ne.

62.
With ri'gard to the former Prime I\'lini~ters and
Presidents of the country, from whom Mr. Sobolev
quotes, again wc arc IHlppy that they exist there and
that tllcy are free to express themselves. 1 can only
say that I wish thflt the dozen or so former Prime
Ministers from whom we never hear at all in other
parls of the Middle East could be heard from at this
juncture. I v,,-ish that their voices could be heArd and
that Mr. Sobolev would qUale f!'Om thenl when they
were.

62. ~.n Cl'. qui conCCflle le~ anciens premiers miuistres
cl pres~dents de nohe pays, que cite M. Sobolev, eneon'
I,l~e fOl~, nous ,somI!'cs heurcux qu'ibi vivent et fjll'ils
SOl?llt.lihr;os el exp~'mlcT leu.r opirJioll. Tont cc CjllC je
pUIS ~Ire, c est que Je vOllrlrms {]ue la dOllzainc (]';meiclIs
premiers ll1illistres dont 1I0llS n'entcnrlons janwis
parle: duns d'autres parties dlt Ivloyen-Orient iluisscnt
se .fmre .entcndre en cc moment. Je vondrab que Cl'S
VOlX pmssent etre cntcndues et que M. Sobolcv cite
leurs paroles.

63.
lL gives me a great deal of pleasure, and honour
even. to fIDd MI'. Sobolev quoting: Olll' Oppositionthe Opposition ill a country wllere theTe is a rrlll
opposition, and where wc give it every freedom to
express itself, Blit obviously it is not fail' or objectiv~
- to use a word which he himself used 011 more than
Olle occasion - for him to quote from only the onc
shade of opinion which Iwppeus to interest him most.
Tha-t is obviously the revolutionary method, the method
of supporting a certnin point of view everywhere it
exists and encounlging it, promoting it, giving it
publicity all over the world and thus helping the
revolulion - the revolution not only in Lebanon,
but everywhere else as well.

63. Je. suis tres hellL'<ClIx, et mfunc honcrc, que 1\1. Soholey .cl.te les dcclnratiollS cmllnant de notre oPPOSitioll,
OppOSItion, d'Ull paye; 0/1 existe une opposition \'critable, et a Inqudle IlOUS <10rmOIlS to lite libertc de
s'e~pr~mer. ;\'1llis, de tOIl le evidcnce il n'cst ni juste ni
objectJf - pour reprenrJrl:.' les termes qu'il 11 eluploycs
it plus d'une occasion - de la part de 1\1. Sobolcv de
ne citer que la seule Dllance de I'opinion qui se trouve
etrc celle qui l'interesse le phls. C'est evidcmmcnt la
me.thode revolutionnaire, la methode qui COllsiste a
appuyer un certain point de vue parlout ou il exislc,
a l'encourllger, a le fuvoriser, a le. raitl~ eonnuitrc clans
le monde entier et a aider ainsi la revolution ~- la
revolution non seulemcnt au Libl.lll, mais partout ailleUfs
clans le mondc.

64. This monolithic point of view, whereby one picks
and chooses exactly according to one's own desire and
goes ahead to strenglllCn the movements that are
politically akin to one, is what we [lre facing at the
present moment in the Middle East. ] am sure that we
have to go through that phase. 1 lwpe that we shall
overcome the difficulty, I hope that we shall retain
variety, plurality, dilTerenee of opinion and fre~.dom
- not only in my country, but also in the Near East
as a whole

64. CeUe atlitude mor.olithique, en vcr[n de lnqnene
on setectionne et choisit exactcmcnt st·lon son propre
desir afin de pouvoir renforcer les mouvi'ments qui SP
rapprochent politiqLlement du votre, c'est cc qne now;
voyons actueIlernenl au Moyen-Orient. Je suis ct"rt<lin
que nous devons passer pllr cette phase. J'esJlI~re que
nom surmonterons la difficulte. J'espere que 1I0US
saurons conserver la diversite, la mllltiplicite, la varielc
el'opinion et la liberte, non seulement dans mon p<lys,
mais egalement dans le. Proche-Oricnt tout cntier.

65,
Thlls Mr. Sobolev's quotations - alld I am sure
that he is wonderfully documented on newspapers
and magazines and all thc statements of our former
Prime Ministers and other leadl:.'rs - please us and
plead for us, and they have demonstrated to the
Council the renj stmggles which are going on at the
mOlnent in lhe Middle East, behind and beyond our
present difficulty, which we hope we will overcome.

G5. Ainsi, les citations de M. Sobolev - et jc suir;
certain qu'jJ est remarquablement documente sur 110S
journaux et nos revues et sur les declarations de nos
anciens premiers minis'tres et autres dirigellnts - not!.'.
font plaisir et plaident en notre favcur ; cUes o~t mon'tre
au Conseil quel est le caractere de la lnttc qUI se po.ursuit actuellement au Moyen-Orient derriere les dlfficultes actueIles, que oous esperons surrnonter.

66. ",rlwtever decision or indecision the Council may
come to shorlly, I tuli:e it that - llnd I hope that
when I hllve finished, the President will inform me on
tbis point - the Council will continuc to have this
problem befol'e il, regardless of the outcome of tlJis
meeting lluel regardless, as I say, of the decision or
indecision that the Council may come to in fI moment.
It is important for us to lmow that the Council continues to have this issue before it, even beyond the
attempt at a decision tcday.

66. Que le ConseD p~rvienne ou non a llTIe d~cisio~
dans un pro chI'. llvenir - et respere que lorsque (atIrlll
ti'rrnine le President me renseignera sur cc POlllt it l'estera saisi de la question queUe que ~oit l'i~5ue ~e
cette seance, et independamment du faIt, com:n.e , Je
l'ai dit, que le COllseil prendra ?u non une deCISIOl1
dans quelques instants. Il est Important que n.ous
sachions que le Conseil reste saisi de cet~e questIon,
meme apres la tentative faite aujourd'hul pour pllTvenir a une decisiOll.

enough l:onccrning the Patriarch and his political views
[823rd meeting, para. 185J. The Patriarch is an honoul'-

67.
One last word. '111is whole Dlatter which has
been under considerlltion here can be viewed on two

Un dernier mot, L'ensemble de la question .c/ui
I 67.
a ete examinee ici peut etre considerc de deux pOIDtS,
13

distinct levels. There is the level of the immediate and
the urgent, and there is t11e level of the ultimate
aud the fundamentaL The level of the imlllediate and
urgent is the one with which we have all been for the
most part engaged. There is trouble in Lebanon, there
is massive intervention in our afTairs, and we bring
this conflict to the Council here. Various Governments
ex.press their points of view. Some kind of decision
is or is not arrived at by the Council, and then we ull
go home and await developments. That is an important
level on whicl1 this question may be viewed. In fact,
it is the level of artion and of urgency, and it is tIle
level with which the Council is, for the most part,
concerned,

de vues differents, 11 yale point de vue de l'inter~t
immedint et de I'urgence, et il yale point de vue de
l'interet final et essentieL Nous nous sommes prcsquc
constamment places sur le plan de l'interet imrncdiat
et de l'urgence. Il existe des troubles au Liban, il y a
une intervention massive dans nos affaires, et nous
avons soumis ce conflit au ConseiL Plusieurs gonvcl'nements ant exprime leur opinion. Le Conseil prend
ou ne prend pas de decision, et no us rentrans tous
chez nous et attendons les evencments. II est possible
d'envisager la question SOilS cet aspcct important. En
fait, c'est le plan de I'action et de l'urgence, et c'est
le plan qui, d'une fa~on gcnerale, rcticnt l'attention
du ConseiL

68. But, as I say, there is a more basic, a more ultimate
and a more fundamental level of questions which this
ma Her raiscs. That is the levcl, if I may so caU it,
of history, namely, the basic questions which history
is asldng through the crisis of Lebanon. The crisis of
Lcbflnon raises fundamental questions in history and
for history, and very briefly I wish to teJl you what
they are in my view.

88. Mnis, ainsi que je l'ai dit, le probleme se situe
aussi sur un plan plus fondamental, plus ele:ve et plus
essentiel. Cest, si je puis I'appeler ainsi, celui de l'histoire, a savoir le plan des questions historiqucs fond amentales doni. la crise du Liban ne peut Hre CXclllC.
Cette crise pose, dans le contexte de l'histoire, des
questions fondamentales pour l'histoire; je voudrais
vous dire tres brievemen! queUes sont, selon J1loi, ces
questions.

69. Our crisis raises two qucstions for the United
Nations as an organilation. There is, fIrst, the question
of the small nations. What is their fate in the United
Nations? Can the United Nations save the small
States? Is the United Nations an arena of struggle
only between th~ big, so that the small must be left
to their fate, must be submerged, must be pushed
aside to the margin of existence in the United Nations
- or is there a modicum of protection tllat the small
nations can count upon from the United Nations?
The crisis of Lebanon puts tillS test to the United
Nations.

69. Notre crise presente deux problemes pour l'Organisatiott des Nations Unies en tant qu'organisalion.
Tout d'abol'd, le probleme des petit~ nations. Qucl
est leur sort it l'Organisation des Nations Unies ? Celleci peut-elle sauver les petits Etats ? Est-elle UI1C arene
oil ne peuvent lutter que les grands. les petits etant
abanc10nnes a leur sort et devant etre submerges, ou
rejeies en marge de l'existence de l'Organisatioll ? Ou
bien les petites nations peuvent-elles compter sur uue
certaine protection de la part de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies? C'est la question que la erise du Uban
pose a l'Organisation.

70. The Lebanese crisis puts a second test to the
United Nations, namely, whether the United Nations
machinery and whole conception is fit to deal with
subversion, with indirect aggression. It is easy to deal
with direct, palpable and demonstrable aggression
such as the crossing of frontiers by regular troops;
but is the United Nations machinery capable of
handling indirect aggression or subversion? This is
the second test which our crisis historically puts before
the United Nations.

La crise du Libfln pose une autre question, celle
de savoir si les rnoyens d'action de l'Organisation et
sa conception meme permettent de combattre la subversion, l'agression indirecte. Il est facile de prendre
des mesures pour repondre a l'agression directc, tangible, ouvel'te, telle que le passage des fronth~['es par
des troupes regulieres - mais les org-anes de l'Orgallisntion des Nations Unies peuvent-ils f!lire face a
l'agression indirecte ou it la subversion? C'cst la
seconde question que notre crise pose, sur le plan de
l'llistoire, a l'Organisation.

71. These, then, are the two historic questions which
our case raises before the United Nations and before
the world.

71. Tels sont les deux problemes historiques que son~
leve notre crise pour l'Orgallisation des Nations Unies
et pour le monde.

72. Our case also raises two fundamental, historic
questions for the Arabs. This is the second order of
fundamental questions to which I wish to refer. The
11rst of these questions is tltis: is there room for a
small, independent, free Arab Statc, or must all Arab
States sooner or later merge into a larger whole? TIns
is a basic historic question which the present moment
in history, through our crisis, raises with the Arabs
flS a whole.

72. Notre situation souM.ve egalement deux problemes
historiques essentiels pour les Arabes, C'est la deuxieme
categorie de problemes essentiels dont je veux faire
mention. Le prcmier de ces problemes est le suivant :
y u-t-il place pour un petit Etat arabe, libre cl; independant, ou bicn faudrawt-il que, tot ou tard, les Etuts
arabes fusionnetti tous en I1n Etat plus vaste 1 C'est
la une question historique essentielle qui se pre.sente
en ce moment a l'ensemble du monde arabe a travers
notre crise.

73. It raises a second question, namely, whatever
the answer to this first question may be, would the
new state of affairs in the Arab world, however it

73. Le. second probleme est celui de savoir, queUe
que pmsse ~tre la solution du premier. si le nouvel
etat de chose dans le monde arabe - sous quelque

I
I.

I

•

70,

14

I

,I

I

is going to emerge and develop, emerge and develop
llDder the sign of what I call the universal, or under
the sign of what I would call the special, the particular,
the exclusive? Is the basic philosophy which is going
to permeate the new shape of things in the Arab world
one which has the universal man as its basis, or i.'> it
one which will be based upon special, particular and
exclusive considerations? This is the second historic
question which our crisis raises before tlle Arab world.

forme qu'll SE'. degage et evolue - se prcsentera et
evolllera SOllS le signe de ce que j'appeUerai I'universel,
ou sous le signe de cc que l'appellerai le pUl"~iculier,
le relatif, l'exch13if ? La doctrine essentielle qlll inspirera
le nouvel ordre des chOl>es uans le monde m·ahe scru·
t-elle centreI' sur l'homme universel, ou sera-t-elle
fondee sur des considerations particulieres, relatives.
et exclusives ? C'cst le second des probh~mes historiques
que noire crise pose atl monde arabe.
ll.;1

74. Our crisis also raises two fundamental questions
for Lebanon itself. The first is this: can Lebanon stand
the pressure? Does it have the political and moral
wisdom and the resiliency which will enable it to
survive its present trial? This, indeed, is the historic
lest of the stature of Lebanon. It puts ,before us a
second question: does Lebanon have enough friends in
the Middle East and in the world to enable it to stand
this pressure? This is tlle test of the reality of the
friendships of Lebanon.

74. Notre crise sonleve egalement deux problemes
essentiels pour le Liban lui-meme. Le premier est
celui-ci : le Liban pent-il resister li la pression ? A-t-il
la sagesse politique et morale et la souplesse qui Jui
permeUront de survivre a l'e.preuve actuelIe ? C'est la,
a lu verite, l'epreuve l1istorique pour la structure du
Lib:m. Elle suscite une seconde question : le Liban
a-t-it suffisammcnt tl'ami.~ au Moyen-Orient et dnns le
mOnde pour resister a cette pression ? La n~alite des
amities du Liban se trouve aussi mise a l'cpreuve.

75. It also puts historic quesLions of a fundamental
character to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union is
today present in the Middle East. Its presence is felt,
and the question that is put to it in its presence there
is whether we are going to have an em of co-operation
and peace, not only among ourselves in that area,
but also between ourselves and the oiher countries
of the Middle Ellst and tlle rest of the world. Does the
real presence of the Soviet Union in Lhe Middle East
mean not only the elevation of tlle masses, not only
social ch:mge, not only fundamf'ntal revolution - and
much of that revolution has been long awaited llnd is
long overdue - but also, as far as peace and trnnquillity
and freedom are concerned, nil these tl1ing~ not only
umong ourselves, but also between ourselves and the
rest of the world? That question, too, is put critically,
fundamentally and bistorically to the Soviet Union
in its presence in the Middle East at the present moment.

75. La crise presenteegalement pour I'Union sovictique
des prnbl~mes llistoriqucs et d'un csraciere essentiel.
L'Union sDvietique est aujourd'hui presente au MoyenOrient. Sa presence se fait sentir, et la question que
soniC-vI". Sll presence meme est de savoir si cette presence
va nous apporter une ere de collaboration et de pai'X,
non seulement parmi nous, dans ceUe region, moos
entre no liS et les autres pays du Moyen-Orient et le
reste du monde, La presence effective de l'Union
sovietique au Moyen-Ol'ient se traduira-t-clle non
seulement par le progres des masses, les modifications
de la structure sociale et une revolution profonde et une tellc revolution est dans une large mesure aUendue et necessaire depuis longtemps - mais egalernent
par la paix, la tranquHlitC et la libert~, nOn seulement
parmi nous, mais entre nous et le reste dlt IDonde ?
Telle est aussi Ill. queslion grave et essentielle qui se
pose, sur le plan de l'bistoirc, a l'Union sovietique
du fait de sa presence actuellc au Moyen-Orient.

76. There are also questions to the Western world
which our crisis raises - fundamental questions. Is
the Western world in its relalions with the Middle
East adequate to meet the fundamental cha.nges
which ure arising in tile Middle East at the present
moment, or must it, because of certain fund limen tal
imldcquacies from which il may be suffering from,
withdraw inevitably from the Middle East? By
withdrawal, I do noL mean political control, because
we do not want political control from any corner of
the earth; by withdrawal, I mean withdrawal in the
matter of ideals and of influence and of interest and
of presence.

76. Noire crise pose aussi des questions pour le monde
occidental - des questions essentieIJes. Le monde
occidental, dans SI'S relations avec le "'foyen-Orient,
est-il en mcsur<'. de [aire face aux transformatiorls
profondes qui se prcduisent actuellement au ?I'loyenOrient, ou devra-t-il, en raison de certaines insuffisance:; fonuarnentales dont il soufTre peut-Hre, se
retirer ineIuctablement dll Moyefl-Orient ? Par retrait,
je ne veux pas parler de contr61e politique, car nOllS
ne souhaitons aucun contr6le politique d'ou qu'il
vienne; par retrait, j'entends un retrait sur le plan
de l'ideal. de I'influence, des interets et de la presence.

77. Mr. Sobolev referred in one of his statements to
certain people, including myself, being described as
"pro-Western" 1824lh ml'.cling, para. 181]. J have
never felt it a source of dishonour for me to be called
"pro-Western". I think that the Westem world is
not a wholly evil world. I think that it is a great thing
to know, to read ::md to contemplate the great masters
of thougllt and of life in the Westcrn tradition. I
thinl. that even Russia itself owes a great deal to that
Western trHciilion which, for the last 300 years, has
been pen8trating Russia. But the question that arises
for the \Vest in the Middle Eust today is, to wllat

77. Dans une de SI'S declarations, M. Sobolev n parle
de certaines personnes, y compris moi-meme, que
l'on qunlifie de «pro-Western"
(pro-occidentales) ISUe seance, par. 181]. n ne m'a jamais semble
que ce pouvail el:.re un deshonnellr ponr moi que d'etre
appele ainsi. Je pensc que le mondc accidental n'est
pllS {'ntif~remcnt mauvais. Je crois que c'est itnI' grande
cllose que de eonnaitre, de lire, d'etudier, les grands
matLres de la pensee et de la vie dans la tradition
occidentale. Je pense que la Russie elle·meme doit
beaucollp :\ celte tmdition occidentale, qui, depuis
trois cents ans, la pcnetre. Mllis la question qui se
15

extent is being called "pro-Western" a reproach,
and what is the ,~allse of that reproac~? The West
has got to think about chese things. It has got to save
its ilame in the Middle East, and not only througll
political activity, but through much dse indeed.

pose aujol1rd'hui pour l'Occident au Moyen~Orient
est de savoir dans queUe mesure le qualificatif de
pro-accidental constitue un reproche, et queUe en est
la cause? L'Occidcnt ~e doit de mediter sur lOlll cela.
Il doit sauver sa reputation au Moyen-Oricnt, mm
seulement par son activiU politique, mais aussi de
nombreuses autres manieres.

78. So our problem raises these basic issues: witll
respect to the Wcs':ern world.

78. TeHes sont :linsi les questions fondamentales que
notre problc:ne pose pour le monde occidcrrtal.

79. Finally, so far as these ultimate hisLoric qllcsLions
are concerned, there is a problem raised by our crisis
for ~lte region from which we come, namely, for the.
whole of the Middle East. The question is this: would
it serve peace and stability for the area, for the Middle
East, if Lebnnon's ind~pendcmce were lost, if there
were a kind of Anschluss beL'Ween Lebar.on and certain
parts of the Middk Ea~t? Would that be a service
to peace and ~ecudy, or might it not rather be the
beginning of a chain of events whose end we may not
now foresee? It may well be - ] bel:eve it is - a
necessity for pe::lr.r. and ~tability in the area that
Lebanon should retain its complete independence
and its compl~te irrtegdy and freedom. If tllat is
so, then the region as a whole must be interested in
that fact and must see to it that no Anschlus.\' occurs
because it would upset the peace in the area and its
stability.

79. Enfin, en ce qui concel'lle les questions histol'iqlles
d'importance supreme, il est un probIerr.c que pose
notre crise pour In region a laqueHe nous appartenons,
c'est-.1~dire le Moyen-Orient tout entler. Cc probleme
est le suivant : la cause de la paix et de la stabiliLe de
la region, dll J\'IDyen-Orient, serait~elle servie si le
Liban perdait son independanec, s'il y avait une sorte
d'Anschluss entre le Liban et certaines padies du
Moyen-Orient? Serail-et: un sf'.rvice rendll a la paix
et a la securite, ou ne serait-ce pas plut6t le co:nmencement d'utlc suite d'evenements dout IlOUS ne POllVOns
pas actueIJemenL !Jrevuil' la flll ? ee pourmit etre et pour ma part je le crois - une necessite pour la
paix et ]a st~bilite de ('ette region que le Liball conserve
son enbere independance, sa pl.:ine integrite et sa
liberte. En ee cas, la region dans son ensemble doit
etre interessee :l ce qu'iJ en soit ainsi et doit veiller a
cc qu'aucun Anschluss i1'ail lieu, car un tel evenement
bouleverserait la paix et la stabilite de la region.

80. These are some of the ultimate questions which
history is raising for all of us thraugh our little crisis
in Lrbanon today. ] feel pro,ld when r realize that
this little country of mine raises all these issues, because
these are que.stions of the essence of the world situation
today.

80. Cc sont la certaines des questions u:thnes que
l'histoire nous pose a tOllS, a I'occasion de notre petite
crise libuoaise actuelle. J'eprouve quelque fierte ~
penser qlJe le petit pays qui est l8 mien s()ulcvc tous
ces ?robJemes, caf ce sont la des problemes qui, dam,
la situation mondiale aetuelle, sont d'nne importance
capitale.

81. We ure most ;;:rateful tD Lhe Sec'lrity Council
for having considered our problem with such sympathy,
1I.n.dersL'dlldillg lInd aUer,Lion as Vie !\ave ohtaillerl.
Whatever decision you come to is yours. You arc
primarily responsible ior the l:Jaintenance of inter:lational peace an~ security. You lmow wllat is best to
be done in the circumstances. We only want to live
in peace with our neighbours, to do our little bit in
furthering the cmlSCS uf freedom and prosperity and
the welfare of the peoples of the Middle East. \Ve
can do that only if we feel tltat wc are noL Itarasserl
or threate:led":"'- if we feel that we are free und
independent. We cannot work in an atmosphere of
threat and fear. We will be completely stilled in sl;ch
an ntmosphcrc. Therefore, to enable l!S to make the
little contribution that we eau make in that area
and, through the arC8, to the world. we mllst feel
absolutely secure in our freedom and independence.
That is wily we brought our case to YOlI; that is why
we trust your judgement; and that is why we await
that judgement.

81. Nous somllles tres reconllai;.;sants au Conseil de
securite d'avoir examine notre probll'.me avec t.a'lt de
bienveillance, de cDmprehensiDn et d'aUention. C'est
it vous qu'il appartient de prendre une decis:on, queUe
qu'eJIe soit. Vous etes responsables au premier chef
dll rnaintim de la paix et de la securite internationales.
Vous savez ce qU'il convient de faire dans les circons~
lances acluelle5. Tout ce que nous voulons, c'est vivrp.
en paix avec nos voisins, apporter noire modeste
contribution it la cause de la liberte, de la prosperite
et du biec-etre des peuples du Moyen-Orient. Nons ne
pouvons le faire que si nous ne nons sentODs ni harceles
ni menaces, si nous nous sentons libres et independants.
Nons ne pouvons agir dans une atmosphere de mmace
et de crainte. Nons serions completemeni etouffes
dans line telle atmosphere. Aussi, pour nons permeUre
d'apporter no:re modeste contribution dans eette
region et, par la, au monde entier, nOllS devons nous
senti::- entierement en sceurire dans notre liberle et
dans notre indcpendance. C'est pourquoi nous vons
avons soumis notre cause; c'est pourquoi nous avons
con fiance en votre jugement, et t'est pourquoi IlOUS
attendons ce jugement.

82. The PRESIDENT: TIle list of speakers is
concluded. The Council will now vote on the Swedish
draft resolution [SJ4022].

16

I
I

\,
,

I
·'1

I
.(

I
I·

1
-,
.,.

I

82. Le PRESrDENf (traduit de l'anglais) ; La liste

.,

des Drateurs est epuisee. Le Conseil va maintenant
vuler sur le projet de resolutiDn presente par ]a Suede

\

\814022J.
Il est procedl au vole a main levee.

A vote was laken by show of hands.

l

In favour: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq,
Japan, Panama, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

•

I
I
,

I

The 'draft resolution was adopted by 10 voles to non e,
with 1 abstention.
83. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet SocialiHt Republics) (translated from Russian)~ I should like to ex.plain
the reasons for my vote on the resolution adopted by
the Security Council. In view of the fact tllat neither
the representative of the United Arab Republic nor
the Lebanese representative objected to the Swedish
draft resolution, the Soviet delegation abstained in the
vote on it; this in no sense means, however, that we
have changed our attitude towards the Lebanese
complaint.
S'!. After studying the facts, the documents and the
statements on this question, the Soviet delegation continues to regard as unfounded the complaint by the
Lebanese Government that the United Arab Republic
is interfering in Lebanon's affairs. Nor have our views
in this regard been shaken by the debate which has
taken place in the Security Council.
85. Th~ Soviet delegation notes that the Council has
not expressed its opinion on the substance of Lebanon's
complaint and its accmations that tIle United Arab
Republic is interfering in Lebanon's domestic affairs.
The Soviet delegation is convinced that it is the inalienable right of the Lebanese people to resolve questions
relating to the Lebanese State 3,nd that a settlement
of the domestic conflict in Lebanon should be sought
not in the Security Council, but in Lebanon itself. We
therefore saw no necessity for the Security Council to
take any action whatever,

Volent pour : Canada, Chine. Colombie, France,
Irak, Japon, Panama. SuMe, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande au Nord, Etats-Unis d'Ameriqul.'.
S'abstienl : L'Union des Republique~ socialistes
sovietiqlles.

Par 10 voix conlre zero, avee llne abstention, le projei
tIe resolution esf adopll!.
83, M. SOBOLEV (lJnion des Repuhliques socialistes
sovietiqlles) [t/'GduiJ du l'usse] : Je voudrais expliquel'
mon vote sur la resolution adoptee par le Conseil de
securite. Etant doune que ni le representant de la
Republique arabe unie ni le representant du Liban
n'ont e.leve a'objection contre le projet de resolution
pnisente par la Suede, la delegation de I'Union sovietique
s'est abstenue lors dll vote sur ce projet, cc qui ne
signifie nuIlemellt que nous ayons modin,,; notre attitude
a regard de la plainte du Liban.
84, Apres avoir etudie les faits, les uocuments et
les declarations relatifs a cette question, la deICgatioll
sovietique estime toujonrs que la plaintc du Gouvernement ]ibanais concernant une pretcndue intervention
de la Republique arabe unie dans les afTaires du Liban
est denuce de fondement. La discussion qui a en lien
au Conseil de sccllrite ne nOlls a pns fait non plus
ehanger d'avis.
85. La delegation ~ovi~tique consLate que le Comeil
ne s'est pns prononce ~ur le fond de la plainte et de~
accusations dn Liban tOllcbant une pretendlle intervention de la Hepublique ambe unie dans ses affaircs
interieures. La delegation sovietiqllc est cOllvaincue
qu'il appartil',nt exclllsivement au pellple libanais
de resolldre les problemes qui interessent l'Etat libanais,
et que le reglement dll conflit intc'tieur libanais doit
etre rechercM non pas au Conseil de seeurite, rnais
au Liban meme. C'est pourquoi nous n'avons pas juge
necessairc (Jue !e Conseil de securiM prenne des mesures
qllelconque~.

86. Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the fact that
there is actually a threat of interference in the domestic
affairs of Lebanon - not, however, by the United
Arab Republic, but by certain Western Powers which
are openly preparing for armed intervention in Lebanon.
This dangerous playing with fire must be halted. The
Soviet delegation once more ex.presses its confidence
that all States will display common sense, that the)'
will not interfere in Lebanon's domestic affairs in any
way, and that they will not peTmit the creation of a
new hotbed of war in the Middle East.

On ne peut cepcndant meconna!tre ql\'j[ existe
veritllblement une menace d'illtervention dans les
affaires interieures du Liban, qui vient non pas de la
Republique arabe unie mais de certaines pnissances
oecidentales, qui prcparellt onverLement unc intervention arme". au Libal\, C'esi a ce jell. dangereux qu'it
convient de mettre nn terme. La delCgation sovidtique
exprime line Iois de plus la conviction que tous les
Etats feront preuve de sagesse, qn'ils s'abstiendront
d'intervenir dfins les affaircs intcrienres clu Liban sous
quclque forme que ce soit, et qn'ils ne permettront pas
la crcntion d'un nouveau foyer de gllerre dalls le
8B.

Moyen~Oriellt.

87. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States is gratified by the action of the Security
Council today. First, the Council adopted the Swedish
resolution which is a practical step towards peace. We
trust that our esteemed Secretary-General will act
with his accustomed speed and that he will have someone in Lebanon within twenty-four hours,

88. Then, in addition to the resolution, ten speeches
were made in the Council, speeches which reflected
clearly the regard which members of the Council felt
for. the merit of the statements made by the represen-

87.

M. LODGE (Etats~UnL~ d'Amerique) [lraduit de

l"anglaisJ : La ddlCgation des Etats~Unis se feUtite de

la decision prise aujourd'hni par le Conseil de securite.
D'abord, le Conseil a adopte le projet de resolution
presente par le representant de la SuMe, ce qui repl'csente une contribution tangible a la cause de la pnix.
Nons comptons que notre esthm\. Secretaire genernl
agira avec sa cclerite habituelle et enverrn riu personnel
all Liban dans les 24 heures.
8B. En oub'e, 10 discours ont tte prononces devant
le Conseil, discours qui ont nettement montre toute
I'importanee que les membres du Conseil attachent aux
declarations faites par le representant dn Liban. Ces

tative of Lebanon. Both the speethes and the resolution
are responsible, constructive actions for which we think
the Council i~ entitled to congratulations.

discours, comrne la resolution elle-merne, constituent
des actes reflechis et cOIlstructifs, et nous estimons
que le ComeO mmte d'en etre f6licitc.

~g. ThP- SECRETARY-GENERAL: Rf':ff':rrillB t.o what
the representative of the United States has just said,
r wish to inform the rnerr,bers of the Council t1\at, as
of last night, J took the necessary preparatory steps,
and r hope that it will be possible for us to live up
to the expectations expressed by Mr. Lodge.

89. Le SECHETAIRE GE~ERAL (traduit de l'anglais) : A propos de ce que vient de dire le representant
des Etats-Unis, je tiens a fRire savoir aux membres
du Conseil que, des mer soir, j'ai pris les mesures
prcparatoires necessaires, et j'espere qu'll nous sera
pos:;ible de repondre it l'attente de M, Lodge.

90. I envisage an operation, so to say, on two levels:
the observatioll group proper, mentioued in the resolution, wl\ich may nut be on the spot t<lmOIT(lW because
it should be composed of highly qualified and experienced men who have to be collected from various
corners of the globe; a second categcry which is, so
to say, the group servicing the main group which can
be recruited from the personnel we have at present
in Jerusalem in tile United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in Palestine. Some of them could be in
Lebanon tomolTow.

gO. J'envisage en quelque sorte une operation en
deux temps: le groupe d'observation lui-m~me, mentionne dans la resoluUon, qui ne peut pas e.tre su~
place demain, car il devra etre compose d'hommes
hautement qualifies et ayant une vaste experience
qui devront venir de toutes les parties du monde ;
et une seconde categorie qui sera, pour ainsi dire,
un groupe au service du groupe principal et qui pourra
etre recrutc parmi le personnel qui se trouve actuellement a Jerusalem a I'Organisme des Nations Unies
charge de la surveillance de la treve en Palestine. Une
partie de ce personnel pourra etre all Liban des demnin.

91. There is, of course, a difficulty which arises in
the planning of the activities of the Truce Supervision
Organization and as to the statns of its personnel, but
I do not believe that this will introduce any delay. I
feel. therefore, happy to be able to say that I think
that the expectations of the represmtative of the
United States will prove justified.

91. Il existe evidemment une difficulte quant a la
definition des activites de l'Organisme charg6 de la
survelllance de la treve et au statut de son personnel,
rnais je ne crois pas qu'il en resulte un retard. Je suis
done heureux de pouvoir dire que je pense que les
espoirs du representant des Etut&-Ullis lie seront pas
us.

92. The PRESIDENT: Under the terms of the resolution we have just adopted, the Security Council is
entitled to receive constant informatiDn through the
Secretary-General from the observation group. We all
hove that the information we will receive will be favour·
able to our hopes. V,'hatever the future developments,
the Council remains seized of this question.

92. Le PRESIDENT (lradu.it de l'anqlais) : Aux
termes de la re$ollltioll que nous venous d'adoptef,
le Conseil de securite doit etre tenu constalllment
au courant des activites du groupe d'nhservation par
l'intermediaire du Secretake general. NOlls eSperQIlS
tOllS que les renseignements que recevra le Consdl
repondront a nos esperances. QueUe que sait l'evolution
ulterieure de la situation. le Conseil demeure saisi de
la question.

The meeting rose at l.dO p.m.

La siance est levee II 13 h. 40.

dev

I

I
I

\,

J

r

'I

I

1

I
;

I
'f
I

!

18

Printed in France

Price: SO.S: 0.20; 1/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 0.75
(or eqUlvalent in other cutrencies)

22534-Novembcr 1958-1,800
