United Nations

S/PV.6111

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6111th meeting
Friday, 24 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Manana
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (S/2009/199)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-31234 (E)

*0931234*

S/PV.6111

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2009/199)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the Central African Republic,
Chad and the Czech Republic, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukré-Kono
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table; Mr. Palouš
(Czech Republic) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/199, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad. I should also
like to draw the attention of members to photocopies of
a letter dated 21 April 2009 from the Secretary-General

2

to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the two reports on the activities of the European Union
military operation in the Republic of Chad and the
Central African Republic, which will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2009/214.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give the
floor.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I thank members
for the opportunity to update them on the situation in
eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic. The Council has before it the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT)
(S/2009/199),
which
contains
comprehensive information about the situation. I
should like to take this opportunity to highlight several
points of special interest and to inform members about
several key developments that have occurred since the
issuance of the Secretary-General’s report, in particular
concerning force generation and the Détachement
intégré de sécurité (DIS).
As members are aware, MINURCAT, which took
over from the European Union-led military force
(EUFOR) on 15 March 2009, is a new force. It has
benefited from the decision of several countries that
have contributed troops to EUFOR to extend the
deployment of their troops under MINURCAT. In
addition, several other Member States, including
Ghana and Togo, were also able to deploy troops
before the transfer of authority between EUFOR and
MINURCAT on 15 March. Thanks to those
contributions, MINURCAT’s force numbered 2,085
troops when authority was transferred and 2,425 on
22 April.
Despite those auspicious beginnings, there is now
an urgent need to reinforce MINURCAT up to its
authorized strength and to equip it to meet the
challenges facing it. As a result, we are concerned by
the difficulties that we have encountered in the area of
force generation. In a context of strong global demand,
MINURCAT had only an extremely brief window of
time between the Council’s authorization of the force
and the transfer of authority; the troop-contributing
countries had only two months to prepare.

09-31234

S/PV.6111

Thus, Ghana recently indicated that it would not
be able to deploy a full battalion to Farchana by
15 May, as initially planned, because of delays in
acquiring equipment for the contingent. Ghana will be
able to deploy only a vanguard of 200 troops by
mid-May; the remaining 600 troops will deployed by
October. Moreover, the Nepalese battalion, which will
constitute the reserve force in Abéché, will be able to
deploy only 285 troops before the rainy season begins,
also because of delays in acquiring equipment for the
contingent.
In his report, the Secretary-General foresees a
progressive strengthening of MINURCAT’s force from
2,085 troops on 15 March to 3,845 by the end of June,
to reach its full strength of 5,200 by the end of 2009.
Regrettably, we are now obliged to make a number of
adjustments following the delays to which I have just
referred. When the rainy season begins at the end of
June, MINURCAT’s force strength will probably be
approximately 3,000 troops, with units present in all
sectors and a small reserve force in Abéché. We expect
that, with the full deployment of contingents later in
the year, the force’s strength will reach 4,700 troops by
the end of 2009. We will reach the ceiling of 5,200
troops only if Member States provide the Mission with
military helicopters and their support elements.
That leads me to the second difficulty, which we
must overcome as soon as possible: the lack of
elements essential to the force, particularly a
communications unit in Abéché and most of the
military helicopters required. Currently, we have
received offers of only six military helicopters,
including four Mi-8s provided by the Russian
Federation; 12 more helicopters are still needed. It has
also been difficult to operationalize the helicopters that
we already have. Those four helicopters can be used
for operations only with the written agreement of the
troop contributor. We are trying to obtain such
authorization as swiftly as possible. In addition,
although Uruguay has pledged to provide two
helicopters, that commitment must still be approved by
the Uruguayan parliament.
I cannot stress strongly enough the risk posed by
the lack of military helicopters to the operational
effectiveness of the force. The concept of operations
provides for the presence of military helicopters with
the capacity to carry out both day and night operations,
to ensure that the force has the required mobility,
capacity to project and deterrent force 24 hours a day.

09-31234

The Mission’s civilian helicopters have a capacity that
is limited to medical evacuations and providing support
to patrols as a result of restrictions concerning night
operations and the need for prior approval regarding
their landing sites.
Furthermore, although MINURCAT is capable of
conducting an average of 15 ground patrols per day,
these are currently limited in duration and scope, as
longer patrols require reliable and effective air support
to guarantee medical evacuation capacity. I would
therefore like to call upon the members of the Security
Council to do everything within their power to ensure
that MINURCAT has the military helicopters required
to implement its mandate and to minimize the risks
facing the Mission’s troops.
It is all the more urgent to strengthen
MINURCAT given the security, political and
humanitarian challenges described the report of the
Secretary-General. At the political level, there has been
little progress in the implementation of the political
processes under way in Chad and between Chad and
the Sudan. The implementation of the 13 August 2007
agreement between the Chadian Government and the
political opposition is currently deadlocked as a result
of disagreement regarding the electoral law. The troops
of the armed Chadian opposition remain outside the
process and continue to consolidate their forces in
western Darfur. On the Chadian side of the border,
Chadian National Armed Forces have also strengthened
their positions, and the climate is tense.
In such a context, relations between the Sudan
and Chad remain difficult. I hope that the Contact
Group for the 13 March 2008 Dakar agreement
between Chad and the Sudan will be able to meet again
in the near future. I would like to encourage the
members of the Council to use their influence to
re-launch the Dakar process and to prompt the
Government of Chad, the political opposition and the
armed opposition groups to make more progress in
moving towards lasting and inclusive peace in Chad. In
this regard, the Secretary-General welcomes the efforts
of Libya and Qatar.
In the absence of political reconciliation,
especially in Darfur, the humanitarian situation
remains particularly difficult. As the Secretary-General
indicates in his report, 250,000 Sudanese refugees,
160,000 internally displaced persons and 700,000
among the local population in the east of Chad are

3

S/PV.6111

dependent on humanitarian assistance. In March,
15 non-governmental organizations wrote to the
Government of Chad to express their concern regarding
the security situation, which, according to them, is
currently deteriorating. They cited the great number of
incidents of banditry and armed attacks against
humanitarian personnel.
Beyond the zone of responsibility of
MINURCAT, in eastern Chad, other developments are
also ground for concern. A meningitis epidemic has
developed in the country, with 914 cases counted by
the World Health Organization as of 15 April. In
southern Chad, the ongoing flow of refugees from the
Central African Republic into the Salamat region was
the result of clashes between Central African Armed
Forces and rebel factions in the north of the country.
Between mid-January and 19 April, 17,621 new
refugees were counted in a number of sites near the
border, where they have been receiving assistance from
the humanitarian community since February. Access to
these sites, however, is difficult and will be even more
so after the start of the rainy season.
(spoke in English)
Given the lack of security in eastern Chad,
MINURCAT support to the Chadian community police
force known as the Détachement intégré de sécurité
(DIS), which provides law and order in refugee camps
and other humanitarian sites, is particularly critical.
The 850-strong DIS is now fully trained, and 775
officers are deployed across eastern Chad, a significant
achievement on the part of MINURCAT and the
Government. But the DIS is a very new body and needs
to be further consolidated and guided to carry out its
vital functions in a manner consistent with its concept
of operations. This is made clear by recent incidents of
DIS ill-discipline, notably the alleged murder of a
civilian by a DIS commander in Farchana on 22 March.
We are working with the Government of Chad to
ensure that DIS posts are equipped with gun safes and
weapons storage facilities, where the weapons of offduty DIS officers would be kept. We are also
encouraged that the Chadian authorities have submitted
this case to the judicial system.
In a further troubling incident, DIS officers
themselves came under attack on 15 April, when a
group of around 25 armed individuals attacked the DIS
station in Farchana and stole a number of weapons, as
well as ammunition, communications equipment and

4

personal belongings. A DIS officer and a security guard
were injured. Information gathered by a MINURCAT
fact-finding team suggests that the attackers may have
been military elements. The Government of Chad has
also launched an investigation into the incident.
The events just described highlight two different
problems: cases of ill-discipline and the vulnerability
of the DIS to attacks. In our response to these
problems, we must strike a balance between
maintaining the credibility and safety of the DIS and
the need for the contingent to retain the trust of those it
is intended to support, namely internally displaced
persons, refugees, the local population and the
humanitarian community. Following the attack on the
DIS of 15 April and given the current lack of law and
order in eastern Chad, the Government of Chad has
proposed to equip the DIS with AK-47 submachine
guns. This proposal requires careful consideration in
order to ensure that the DIS maintains its community
policing character, consistent with the concept
endorsed by the Council in resolution 1778 (2007) of
25 September 2007.
In the coming weeks, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will conduct a midterm
review of the DIS, in cooperation with other
departments and United Nations agencies. The review
will take stock of the concept and performance of the
DIS, including the issues I have just described, as well
as the impact of United Nations support and the way
forward. We will also assess the funding situation and
means of increasing international support for the DIS
and broader rule-of-law efforts by MINURCAT in
eastern Chad. It is vital that we match the deployment
of the DIS with corresponding progress in the areas of
judicial and penal reform and respect for human rights,
and I encourage Council members and donors to
support these needs through the Trust Fund for the
Support of the Activities of MINURCAT.
As outlined in the report, significant efforts were
made during the reporting period to put in place the
necessary legal and administrative arrangements for the
deployment of MINURCAT’s military component. As
the Council is aware, on 13 February the United
Nations and the Government of Chad signed a
memorandum of understanding on the transfer of sites
and infrastructure. In accordance with that agreement,
MINURCAT is working to build new airport parking
spaces as quickly as possible. Following a recent
Government request that MINURCAT provide prior

09-31234

S/PV.6111

notification of its aviation parking needs, we have
reiterated that the memorandum of understanding
provides for unimpeded access to the two airport
parking spaces in N’Djamena and Abéché.
Unfortunately, certain legal arrangements are yet
to be finalized, including amendments to the Status of
Mission Agreements to reflect the military component
of MINURCAT. We have called upon the Governments
of Chad and the Central African Republic to conclude
these amendments, which were submitted to them in
draft form on 3 and 18 March, respectively. We also
look forward to the finalization of memorandums of
understanding with Libya and Cameroon to provide for
the transit of goods through their territories, which are
currently under discussion with both Governments.
Finally, further to the request of the Council, I am
pleased to report that the Mission is developing a
strategic workplan, including mechanisms to measure
and track progress on the implementation of
MINURCAT’s benchmarks. The plan is expected to be
finalized by July 2009 and will be presented in outline
form in the next report of the Secretary-General on
MINURCAT. I would like to reiterate, however, that
achieving the benchmarks endorsed by the Council —
including the voluntary return and resettlement of
internally displaced persons, the demilitarization of
refugee and internally displaced person camps, and
improvement in the capacity of Chadian authorities to
provide security with respect for human rights in
eastern Chad — will require broad efforts involving
many actors. In particular, we will continue to rely on
the support of the Council to ensure that MINURCAT
has the military assets and political support necessary
to carry out its very important mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mulet for his briefing. I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.
Let me begin by expressing our appreciation for
having been invited to participate in today’s meeting

09-31234

on behalf of the European Union. I would like to thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing.
The European Union-led military force (EUFOR)
in Chad and the Central African Republic was a
success story and proof of exemplary cooperation
between the European Union (EU) and the United
Nations, from the launching of the operation to its
successful handover on 15 March 2009. The European
Union provided a bridging military arrangement in the
region, pending the deployment of a United Nations
force, for a period of one year.
It is my honour to briefly introduce the report of
the European Union requested under Security Council
resolution 1778 (2007) of 25 September 2007. This is
the second of the two reports on the operations and on
the fulfilment of the EUFOR mandate requested by the
Security Council, and covers the final six-month period
from its full operating capability on 15 September
2008 to the mandate handover to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) on 15 March 2009. As Council members
will remember, the first report was delivered by
Secretary-General/High Representative Javier Solana
on 24 September 2008.
Throughout its mandate, EUFOR made a tangible
contribution towards protecting civilians in danger and,
in particular, refugees and displaced persons who have
been profoundly affected by the crisis in the region.
During the reporting period, it conducted over 2300
short-range patrols in the areas of the main internally
displaced persons sites and refugee camps, and over
260 long-range patrols in order to affirm its presence in
other areas as well. EUFOR activities also included
active engagement with humanitarian actors. The force
integrated human rights issues and the protection of
women and children in armed conflicts into its conduct
of the operation, consistent with relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Beyond its mandate, EUFOR provided medical
care for the local population. It also facilitated the
removal of unexploded ordnance devices, thus
contributing to the safety of the local population, and
extracted humanitarian non-governmental organization
(NGO) personnel from Ouandjia in the Central African
Republic in November 2008. Throughout its mandate,
EUFOR acted in an impartial, neutral and independent
manner and was recognized as such by all actors.

5

S/PV.6111

EUFOR’s engagement with MINURCAT was
highly significant from the beginning of the operation
and was further intensified as the handover
approached. EUFOR assisted MINURCAT with
facilitation and the development of capabilities to train
and deploy the United Nations-trained Chadian
Détachement intégré de sécurité officers. EUFOR
established infrastructure, including six spacious and
fully fledged military compounds in theatre, that were
transferred to Chad and onwards to MINURCAT at the
end of its mandate, thus setting the ground for the
deployment of the United Nations follow-on force.
EUFOR, EU members and other EUFOR troopcontributing countries contributed in many other ways
to the transfer of authority to MINURCAT that took
place on 15 March 2009, including through early
planning, support to MINURCAT and the re-hatting of
an important part of the EUFOR contingents, which
made up most of MINURCAT’s strength at the date of
the transfer of authority.
The European Union welcomes the holding of the
inclusive political dialogue in the Central African
Republic and stresses the need to keep this new
momentum. The EU is concerned about the recent
spate of violence in the North of the country. All
groups concerned must refrain from the use of
violence. In Chad, where the fragile situation also
contributed to slowing down progress on the overall
political agenda, the EU continues to actively
encourage the political process in the framework of the
13 August 2007 agreement in the context of
preparations for the legislative elections.
The EU also accords great importance to the
amelioration of relations between the Sudan and Chad
in order to reduce tensions in the region and to
contribute to a solution to the conflicts. In that regard,
we hope that the next meeting of the Dakar Contact
Group will take place shortly. The EU is concerned that
the expulsion of a number of humanitarian
organizations from Darfur and the subsequent reduced
capacity to deliver humanitarian aid could raise the
prospect of a large number of new refugees crossing
the border into Chad.
The European Union would like to welcome the
close cooperation with the United Nations at the
Secretariat and field levels throughout the mandate of
the European operation. In order to preserve the
positive outcomes of EUFOR, the European Union

6

would like to encourage the Secretariat and new troopcontributing countries to sustain their efforts towards a
quick achievement of MINURCAT’s full operational
capability.
I would like to assure the Council that the
European Union will remain active at the political and
diplomatic level in Chad and in the Central African
Republic. Although EUFOR’s mandate has formally
ended, the European Union will remain an active
player in the region. Approximately 2,000 of the
soldiers who participated in the European operation
now serve under the MINURCAT banner, further
underlining European support to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for the month of April. Allow me also to greet the
Assistant Secretary-General and to stress the great
interest with which the Government of Chad heard his
briefing. It is also my pleasure to welcome the
statement of the Czech Republic presidency of the
European Union and to express yet again the gratitude
of my country to the European Union, which has
responded to our expectations and those of the
humanitarian community by protecting, in the best
possible manner, the people affected by the insecurity
in the eastern part of our country. On 15 March, the
authority of European Union-led (EUFOR) military
force in Chad and the Central African Republic was
transferred to the United Nations, to the satisfaction of
all. We are pleased to note the acknowledgement by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/199) of the
cooperation of the Chadian Government, which
allowed the transfer of authority to take place in the
best possible conditions. We reiterate our willingness
to pursue that cooperation with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) so that it may effectively accomplish its
mandate in the East of our country.
Turning to the report of the Secretary-General,
my Government has instructed me to make some
observations.
We wish to reassure the Secretary-General of
Chad’s unwavering will to resolve its internal
problems. That is why we cannot understand why it is

09-31234

S/PV.6111

stressed in paragraph 62 of the report that
implementation of the political agreement of 13 August
2007 has reached an impasse. Unfortunately, some
have been quick to bring up only that point of the
report in order to dramatize the political situation in
Chad. There have been difficulties, to be sure, but they
have already been overcome thanks to the mediation of
partners. A compromise was found between the parties
on a parliamentary amendment of the statute of the
National Independent Electoral Commission to ensure
that its independence could not be contested. It must be
recalled that the Commission’s membership is based on
parity — 15 members of the majority and 15 of the
opposition, while its presiding officer must be
appointed by consensus among all parties. All
provisions have been made for the population census to
begin on 20 May 2009 with a view to organizing free
and transparent elections.
As for national reconciliation with the so-called
political and military elements, the Government is
doing its best to that end. Now that the implementation
of the political agreement on the national issue to
which I have just referred is on the right track, it is for
those whom the report mistakenly refers to as armed
opposition to renounce the use of force and to return to
the country in compliance with the Sirte agreement of
25 October 2007, instead of rejecting it on the pretext
of its supposed obsolescence. Those so-called
opposition groups would thus contribute to
consolidating the rule of democratic law, to which we
expect them to display genuine commitment by
adhering to the political agreement of 13 August 2007.
Perhaps, however, we should not dream too much,
since we know that they are not free to choose that
route, which goes against the Machiavellian schemes
of their patron. That is why we call them mercenaries
paid by our neighbour, and not “opposition”.
We are cheered by the reference in paragraph 13
of the report to the fact that they have “continued to
consolidate in West Darfur near El Geneina”, in the
Sudan. That is why we have taken the military steps
necessary to respond to any eventuality. We cannot be
blamed for defending ourselves. However, not to draw
undue attention to the situation, contrary to what the
report says, the Chadian Minister for External
Relations, Moussa Faki, at a meeting informed some
diplomats of that, but individually and not all. I also
alerted the Secretary-General, who sent his assistant
responsible for peacekeeping operations to meet me.

09-31234

We would also like to reassure the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council that taking measures
to defend ourselves militarily does not obviate our
determination to normalize our relations with our
neighbour, the Sudan, with which we have historic,
multifaceted and unavoidable neighbourly relations.
That is why we reiterate our commitment to respecting
the provisions of all peace agreements — from Tripoli
to Dakar and Riyadh — that link us to those brother
countries. We are ready, if it asks, to help the Sudan
settle the Darfur crisis as we have in the past, before it
betrays us by arming Chadians against its own
rebellion and then against the legitimate institutions of
the country. We hope that the Chadian-Sudanese peace
talks, to be held soon in Doha, Qatar, will open the way
for a true normalization of our relations.
Allow me also to refer to some specific points of
the report.
With regard to the document establishing
MINURCAT II, we cannot accept a document prepared
in advance, a sort of ready-to-wear item that we are
asked to take or leave. For our part, we propose that
negotiations take place in N’Djamena between the
competent authorities and the Secretariat to reach a
legal and administrative agreement that takes into
account the sovereignty and concerns of Chad, without
of course losing sight of the model status-of-forces
agreement annexed to the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/45/594.
Furthermore, the Chadian authorities deplore the
fact that they did not know about the 15 patrols and
military escorts that the report mentions in
paragraph 28, since the MINURCAT liaison officer
never mentioned such patrols during meetings of liaison
officers, as the EUFOR liaison officer did in the past.
With regard to paragraph 34 of the report on the
question of installing a VHF radio communications
system, we do not understand the delay, since on
5 February 2009 we were promised that the
communications system would be installed by the end
of February. Since the communications system is still
not operational, the patrol and escort missions of the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) elements are
handicapped because they are cut off from their base.
Still with regard to the DIS, it should be noted that
there are serious logistics difficulties, as paragraph 34
of the report stresses. It is particularly under-equipped
in vehicles, although we had placed great hope in

7

S/PV.6111

logistics financing from the Trust Fund. It therefore
seems to us untimely to suggest, as in paragraph 58 of
the report, the transitioning of DIS from a donorsupported initiative to one financed by the Government
of Chad. Is my Government not already making
sufficient financial efforts ensuring the security of the
border?
Moreover, unlike the indications of paragraph 49
of the report, the Chadian authorities are completely
unaware of the onset of construction work for two new
parking spaces at the airport of Abéché and the
international airport in N’Djamena, which at present
are completely overtaken by the military activities of
the Chadian national army, the United Nations, and
even Opération Épervier. It is absolutely necessary that
the parking spaces at the airport of Abéché and the
international airport in N’Djamena be built.
Finally, in general, there is a real need for
consultation
and
close
cooperation
between
MINURCAT and the Chadian authorities responsible
for implementing the issues covered by the report in its
sections IV B on justice and prisons, IV C on human
rights, IV D on civil affairs and IV E on gender. The
success of the Mission and the sovereignty of Chad
depend on that.
All our observations have been made in a
constructive spirit so that MINURCAT can deploy in
eastern Chad taking into account the realities of the
country. In other words, my country once again
reiterates before the Security Council its willingness to
cooperate fully and on a sound footing with the United
Nations for the fulfilment of its noble mission to
maintain peace and security in the region in general
and in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic in particular.

8

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Central African
Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Edmond Mulet for his briefing and for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/199), which describes developments in the
region, both in Chad and in the Central African
Republic. My gratitude goes to the troops of the
European Union-led military force (EUFOR) in Chad
and the Central African Republic for their contribution
to easing the tension in the subregion between certain
rebel groups and the civilian population.
I wish to thank Mr. Mulet also for having sent a
very strong signal to the Security Council: that the lack
of military equipment now be taken seriously and that
a solution be found quickly. In my view, if we
genuinely wish to see stability in the political and
security spheres, it is only proper that the Security
Council should consider the matter, and should in
particular take into account the human aspect, with
civilians caught between rebel forces and loyalist
forces defending the territory.
I believe that today’s briefing and the report of
the Secretary-General call on us all to find a concrete
solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now like to invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

09-31234
