S/PRST/2005/51

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 October 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5290th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 October 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Security Council
resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the report prepared by the United
Nations Secretary-General’s Standards Review envoy, Ambassador Kai Eide,
on the Comprehensive Review of the implementation of Standards, as well as
of the overall situation in and relating to Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro),
forwarded by the Secretary-General on 7 October 2005 (S/2005/635). The
Council pays tribute to Ambassador Eide’s work in compiling his important
report.
“The Security Council recalls the Secretary-General’s report of 23 May
2005 (S/2005/335) in which he initiated the Comprehensive Review conducted
by Ambassador Eide. In light of the findings in Ambassador Eide’s report, the
Council stresses that further, more sustained progress is required, and that the
implementation of Standards in Kosovo must continue with undiminished
energy and a stronger sense of commitment, as underlined by the SecretaryGeneral in his letter. It urges Kosovo’s leaders to increase their efforts to
ensure the implementation of standards at all levels, allowing tangible results
to be delivered to all Kosovo’s citizens. Particular and time-conscious
attention should be given to protecting minorities, developing further the
process of decentralization, creating the necessary conditions to allow
sustainable returns, preservation of cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo,
and promoting reconciliation. The Council also urges the authorities in
Belgrade to do their utmost to facilitate this process, and to engage
constructively. The Council reaffirms its full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, and
UNMIK in their continuing work to support the implementation of Standards,
which must continue during the Future Status process and will be an important
factor in determining the degree of progress.
“The Security Council agrees with Ambassador Eide’s overall assessment
that, notwithstanding the challenges still facing Kosovo and the wider region,
the time has come to move to the next phase of the political process. The
Council therefore supports the Secretary-General’s intention to start a political

05-56634 (E)

241005

*0556634*

S/PRST/2005/51

process to determine Kosovo’s Future Status, as foreseen in Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). The Council reaffirms the framework of the resolution,
and welcomes the Secretary-General’s readiness to appoint a Special Envoy to
lead the Future Status process. It looks forward to an early appointment. The
Council offers its full support to this political process, which would determine
Kosovo’s future status, and further reaffirms its commitment to the objective
of a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo, which must reinforce regional
stability.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Contact Group
(France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States) to remain closely engaged in the political process that will be
led by the United Nations, and to support the Secretary-General’s Future
Status Envoy. The Council calls upon interested regional and international
organizations to cooperate closely in the process to determine Kosovo’s future
status. The Council also supports the meaningful involvement and cooperation
of countries in the region.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General provide
regular updates on progress in determining Kosovo’s Future Status, as defined
by Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), and will remain actively seized of
the matter.”

2

05-56634
