Resolution~ adopted on the report., of tht> First Comn1illee
-

----

---

--------------------------------------------------

of qualified experts and competent bodies selected by
the Secretary-General;
8. Requests that the statement be transmitted to
the Ad H oc O!mmittcc at an e'.irly date, if possible by
31 March 1974;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "lmplementatirn, l 1 f th:.: D.:clar;:tion of the Indian Ocean a~ a Zone
of Peace".
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3U~2 (XXVIH). International co-operation in the
peaf'efu1 mws of out<'r !lpace

The General Assembly,
Ifrwlling its resolutions 2914 ( XXVII), 2915
(XXVII), 2916 (XXVII) and 2917 (XXVII) of 9
November 1972,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 17
Noting with appreciation the way in which the 500th
anniversary of the birth of Nicolaus Copernicus, the
great Polish astronomer, was reflected in space activities,
Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Reaffirming further its belief that the benefits deriving from space exploration can be extended to States
at all stages of economic and scientific development on
an expanding basis if Member States conduct their
space programmes increasingly with a view to promoting maximum international co-operation, including
the widest possible exchange of information in this
field,
Convinced of the need for increased international
efforts, particularly through the United Nations, to
promote and expand practical applications of space
technology and believing that wider participation by
Member States in the activities of the United Nations
relating to space matters may contribute to the objective of such increased international efforts,
Bearing in mind that, since the establishment of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in
I 96 L the membership of the United Nations has been
considerably increased and a corresponding enlargement of the Committee is therefore desirable,
Reaf]irminR the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space.
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites State, which have not yet become parties
to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Cdesti:il Bodies, 18 the
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronaut, the Return of

Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space 19 and the Convention on International
Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects 20 to
g,v-: early consideration to ratifying or accl.'ding to
those international agreements, so that they may have
the broadest possible effect;
3. Notes that the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites has discussed the question of elaborating
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth
satellites for direct television broadcasting referred to
in General Assemblv resolution 29 I 6 ( XXVII) and
endorses the decision· of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space, as set out in paragraph 66 of its
report, to reconvene the Working Group in 1974;
4. Notes that, in responding to the request of the
General Assembly, the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space and its Legal Sub-Committee have
achieved further significant progress towards the completion of the draft treaty relating to the Moon and the
<lraft convention on registration nf objects launched
into outer space;
5. Recommends that the Legal Sub-Committee
should, as a matter of the highest priority, make every
effort to complete at its next session the draft treaty
relating to the Moon and the draft convention on registration of objects launched into outer space;
6. Recommend1· further that the Legal Sub-Committee should consider at its next session, as a matter of
high priority, the question of elaborating principles
governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites
for direct television broadcasting with a view to concluding an international agreement or agreements in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2916
(XXVII), taking due accnunt of the interdisciplinary
character of the subject and of the work of the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites;
7. Recommends also that the Legal Suh-Committee
at its next ,c,sion should respond to the request, m:ide
by the Working Group on Remote Sensing t)f the Earth
hy Satdlite,, for the Sub-Committee's views on the legal
implications of the earth resources survey by remote
~L·nS:1~;! s,1tcllites, devoting part of that sc~sion to this
purpose:
8. Agrees that the Legal Sub-Committee at its next
session, as time permits, should consider matters relating to the definition and/ or delimitation of outer
space and outer space activities;
9. Welcomes the comments of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, contained in paragrnph 57 of its report, regarding the role and functions of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee
and agrees that, with regard to its future work, the
Sub-Committee should proceed on the lines indicated
in section V of its report; 21
10. Notes with satisfaction that, in promoting international co-operation in the application of space techll'.1lou;v, considcrahlc attention h;1s been given to the
pote;tial of remote sensing of the earth by satellites
for development programmes of all countries, especially of developing countries;
0

11. Welcomes the various efforts envisaged by the
Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the
Working Group on Remotl' Sensing of the Earth by
1

17 Tbid., Supplement No. 20 ( A/9020 and Corr. I).

rn Resolution 2222 (XXT), annex.

19

n Resolution 2345 (XXII), annex.

w Rcsolntion 2777 (XXVI), annex.
11 A/AC.105/116.

20

General A&sembly-Twenty-eighth Session

Satellites with a view to bringing the benefit of this
new technology to all countries, especially developing
countries, including the preparation of a second survey of potential users of remote sensing, in regard to
which a questionnaire on remote sensing of the environment and natural resources from satellites, covering technical, legal and organizational aspects, has
been sent to Member States;
12. Commends this questionnaire to the attention
of Member States and requests them to respond to it
as soon as possible with a view to making progress in
identifying, studying and analysing the best means of
disseminating remote sensing data;
13. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to include in its report to the General
Assembly at the twenty-ninth session its views on
further measures to promote international co-operation
in the field of remote sensing of the earth by satellites;
14. Considers that the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space and its appropriate subsidiary organs will have to give further in-depth consideration
to the legal, organizational and other related aspects of
remote sensing of the earth by satellites;
15. Welcomes the continuing progress achieved in
developing the United Nations programme on space
applications into a significant means of promoting international co-operation in this field, commends this programme to the attention of Member States, the specialized agencies and other interested United Nations
bodies, and draws attention in this respect to the request contained in paragraph 43 of the report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
16. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications, as referred to in paragraph 36 of
the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, and recommend, the continuing develop-nent of the programme, taking especially into account
fue needs of the developing countries;
17. Notes with appreciation that several Member
States have offered educational and training facilities,
under United Nations sponsorship, in the practical
application of space technology and draws the attention of Member States, particularly the developing
countries, to those opportunities as outlined in paragraphs 45 to 50 and 52 of the report of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
18. Further notes the value of United Nations panels
and training seminars in various fields of space application and hopes that Member States will continue to
offer to serve as host to these panels and training seminars, with a view to the widest possible spread of information and sharing of costs in this new area of development, especially~ that of the developing countries;
19. Welcomes the efforts of a number of Member
States to share with other interested Member States
the practical benefits that may be derived from programmes in space technology;
20. Welcomes further efforts of Member States to
keep the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space fully informed of their space activities and invites all Member States to do so;
21. Approves continuing sponsorship by the United
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station in India and the CELPA Mar del Plata Station
in Argentina, expresses its satisfaction at the work being
carried out at those ranges in relation to the use of
sounding rocket facilities for international co-operation

and training in the peaceful and scientific exploration
of outer space and recommends that Member States
continue to give consideration to the use of those facilities for space research activities;
22. Notes that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI), the Secretary-General
continues to maintain a public registry of objects
launched into orbit or beyond on the basis of information furnished by Member States and welcomes the
co-operation of Member States in providing relevant
information to the Secretary-General;
23. Notes with appreciation that a number of the
specialized agencies, in particular the World Meteorological Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, have continued to take an active part in the United Nations programme for the promotion of international co-operation
in the practical application of space technology, including the organization of technical panels;
24. Agrees with the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space that proper co-ordination is necessary for activities within the United Nations system relating to the peaceful uses of outer space;
25. Requests, therefore, the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue,
as appropriate, to provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space with progress reports on their
work relating to the peaceful uses of outer space and
to examine, and report to the Committee on, the particular problems that may arise from the use of outer
space in the fields within their competence and that
should, in their opinion, be brought to the attention of
the Committee;
26. Reiterates its request to the World Meteorological Organization to pursue actively the implementation of its tropical cyclone project, continuing and
intensifying its other related action programmes, including the World Weather Watch and, especially, the
efforts being undertaken towards obtaining basic meteorological data and discovering ways and means to
mitigate the harmful effects of tropical storms and to
remove or minimize their destructive potential, and
looks forward to its report thereon in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 2914 (XXVII);
27. Notes that the Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organization has been involved in discussions on the use of maritime satellites, and expresses its interest in receiving information concerning
activities in this field and other related work;
28. Decides to enlarge the membership of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with the regional groups and with the Chairman
of the Committee, to appoint, at an early date and not
later than 15 May 1974, not more than nine additional
members, taking into account the principle of equitable
geographical distribution;
29. Endorses the view expressed by the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in paragraph 68
of its report regarding measures for enhancing the
effectiveness of the Outer Space Affairs Division of the
Secretariat in order to enable it to meet its expanding
responsibilities in carrying out the United Nations
programme on space applications and in assisting the
Committee to discharge its co-ordinating functions as

21

Reaolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

-------------

the focal point in promoting international co-operation
in this field, as envisaged by the General Assembly;
30. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present resolution and in previous resolutions of the
General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session.
2205th plenary meeting
18 December 1973

•

*

•

The President of the General Assembly subsequently
informed the Secretary-General~ 2 that, in pursuance
of paragraph 28 of the above resolution, he had appointed the following nine additional members of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: CHILE,
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF), INDONESIA, KENYA, NIGERIA,
PAKISTAN, SUDAN and VENEZUELA.

As a result, the Committee will be composed of the
following Member States: ALBANIA, ARGENTINA, AusTRALIA, AUSTRIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHAD, CHILE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, FRANCE,
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF), HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA,
IRAN, ITALY, JAPAN, KENYA, LEBANON, MEXICO, MONGOLIA, MOROCCO, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, POLAND, ROMANIA, SIERRA LEONE, SUDAN, SWEDEN, UNION OF
SOVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA and VENEZUELA.

3183 (XXVIII). World Disarmament Conference
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations under the Charter for the maintenance of international peace and for disarmament,
Convinced that all peoples of the world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
Deeply convinced that substantial progress in the
field of disarmament can be achieved only by ensuring
adequate conditions of security for all States,
Convinced also that all States should contribute to
the adoption of measures for the achievement of this
goaJ,
Believing it imperative that all States exert further
efforts for the adoption of effective measures of disarmament and, more particularly, nuclear disarmament.
Believing also that a world disarmament conference,
adequately prepared and convened at an appropriate
time, could promote the realization of such aims and
that the co-operation of all nuclear Powers would
considerably facilitate their attainment,
Recalling its resolution 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971,
Recalling also its resolution 2930 (XXVII) of 29
November 1972, by which it decided to establish a
Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference,
Bearing in mind the note by the Secretary-General
of 17 October 1973 23 and the statements made during

the consideration by the First Committee of the item
entitled "World Disarmament Conference",
Noting that, before any conclusion may be reached
with regard to preparation for the convening of a
world disarmament conference, it will be necessary to
carry out considerable study of the relevant existing
conditions,
1. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee on
the World Disarmament Conference to examine all the
views and suggestions expressed by Governments on
the convening of a world disarmament conference and
related problems, including conditions for the realization of such a conference, and to submit, on the basis
of consensus, a report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session;
2. Decides further that the Ad Hoe Committee shall
consist of the following forty non-nuclear-weapon
Member States appointed by the President ot the General Assembly after consultation with all regional
groups: Algeria, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Colombia. Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Ethiopia, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Netherlands. Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Tunisia, Turkey, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire and
Zambia;
3. Invites the States possessing nuclear weapons t<1
co-operate or maintain contact with the Ad Hoe Com~
mittec, it being understood that they will enjoy the
same rights as the appointed members of the Committee;
4. Invites all States to communicate a~ soon as possible to the Secretary-General, for transmission to the
Ad Hoe Committee, any views and suggestions they
deem pertinent to submit for the purpose defined in
paragraph 1 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assL~tance to the Ad Hoe Committee in its
work, including the preparation of summary records;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "World Disarmament Conference".
2205th plenary meeting
18 December 1973

3184 (XXVIII). General and complete
disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 A ( XXIV) of J6
December 1969, relating to the initiation of bilateral
negotiations between the Governments of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America on the limitation of offensive and defensive
strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Recalling further that the first phase of such negotiations resulted in the conclusion, on 26 May 1972, of
three bilateral instruments on that matter,2 4
Reaffirming resolution 2932 B (XXVII) of 29
November 1972, whereby the General Assembly:
(a) Appealed to the above-mentioned Governments
to make every effort to expedite the conclusion of

22 A/9492.
28 A/9228.

14 See A/C.1/1026.
