S/PV.8534

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8534th meeting

Thursday, 23 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Marsudi/Mr. Djani/Mr. Syihab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Annen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen/Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2019/373)
Letter dated 8 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/385)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-15004 (E)
*1915004*

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2019/373)
Letter dated 8 May 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/385)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Georgia,
Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal,
the
Netherlands,
New
Zealand,
Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Peter Mauer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of
the Center for Civilians in Conflict.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special
2/96

23/05/2019

Representative of the NATO Secretary-General for
Women, Peace and Security.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
It is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/373, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2019/385, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 May 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Indonesia for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions, a cornerstone of international
humanitarian law. And it is with enormous pleasure that
I see with us Peter Mauer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, guardian of the Geneva
Conventions. It also marks the twentieth anniversary
of the Security Council’s adoption of the protection of
civilians as an item on its agenda, a response to the
Council’s “deep concern” at the erosion of respect for
international humanitarian law.
However, while the normative framework has been
strengthened, compliance has deteriorated. We are
rightly critical when assessing the state of the protection
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of civilians, for there is great cause for concern. But let
us first recall that we have seen some progress over the
past 20 years. A culture of protection has taken root,
in the Security Council and across the United Nations.
To use the Council’s own words, the protection of
civilians is “one of the core issues” on its agenda. A
comprehensive protection framework now exists, based
on international law and Security Council practice.
The protection of children, and of all civilians,
from loathsome acts of sexual violence in conflict has
been strengthened through the deployment of specialist
advisers in peace operations, thereby reinforcing
the work of humanitarian agencies. Monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in
conflicts and engagement with warring parties has led
to the demobilization and reintegration of thousands
of children.
Security Council-mandated United Nations peace
operations have protected and saved countless civilian
lives. In South Sudan, nearly 200,000 internally
displaced people are currently sheltering at sites for the
protection of civilians. In the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Mission has supported local peace
and ceasefire agreements that are monitored by civilian
and military components. Civilian casualty recording
by the United Nations in Afghanistan has led to the
adoption of measures by pro-Government forces to
minimize harm. Millions of civilians receive crossborder humanitarian assistance in Syria. And war
criminals, from Cambodia to the former Yugoslavia,
have been tried and convicted.
Security Council resolutions on the protection of
medical care in armed conflict and on conflict and
hunger have given important focus and urgency to
these issues. I look forward to working with Member
States to ensure they are implemented.
But, despite those advances, grave human suffering
is still being caused by armed conflicts and a lack of
compliance with international humanitarian law. As
my report (S/2019/373) underlines, civilians continue
to make up the vast majority of casualties in conflict.
In 2018 alone, the United Nations recorded the
death or injury of more than 22,800 civilians in just
six countries — Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali, Somalia,
South Sudan and Yemen. In Idlib, in north-west
Syria, we saw a new wave of shelling and airstrikes
against hospitals, schools, markets and camps for the

S/PV. 8534

displaced, killing, wounding and creating panic among
the civilian population.
In all conflicts, when explosive weapons were used
in populated areas, 90 per cent of those killed or injured
were civilians. Overall, approximately 1.4 million
people were newly displaced across international
borders, while a further 5.2 million were internally
displaced. Widespread access constraints jeopardized
humanitarian and medical assistance to civilians in
need. Violence against humanitarian and medical
workers and facilities persisted. The World Health
Organization recorded 705 attacks against health-care
workers and facilities in just eight conflicts, resulting in
451 deaths and 860 injuries. Three hundred and sixtynine aid workers were kidnapped, wounded or killed.
And starvation of civilians was used as a method of
warfare, as were rape and sexual violence.
Chief among our challenges is enhancing and
ensuring respect and compliance for international
humanitarian law in the conduct of hostilities. In many
cases, our information suggests that respect for these
bodies of law is at best questionable; in others, and
as detailed in several of my country-specific reports,
we have witnessed blatant violations. Nonetheless,
there are examples where warring parties respect
the law and are implementing precautions, collateral
damage estimation and other efforts to minimize the
impact of fighting on civilians. Those practices must
be implemented effectively and standardized across
parties and theatres of operation.
Greater attention must be paid to those who are
already vulnerable during peace time — such as the
elderly, children and the disabled — who are rendered
all the more vulnerable and in need of protection during
flight and conflict. We must also take urgent action to
reduce the humanitarian impact of urban warfare, and
in particular of explosive weapons. Member States
should do more to condition arms exports on respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
law. And they must call for greater respect for the law
and protection of civilians by parties to conflict, and in
particular, partner forces, including in the context of
multinational coalition operations. We also need greater
progress on accountability by closing the gap between
allegations of serious violations and their investigation
and prosecution.
Progress is needed most at the national level.
My report recommends action in three areas: first,

19-150043/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

developing national policy frameworks that establish
clear institutional authorities and responsibilities for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict; secondly,
principled and sustained engagement by humanitarian
organizations and others with non-State armed groups
to negotiate safe and timely humanitarian access and
promote compliance with the law; and, thirdly, ensuring
accountability for serious violations.
As a practical matter, the Security Council can do
much to enhance compliance with the laws of war. That
includes providing financial and technical assistance to
support the investigation and prosecution of war crimes
in conflict-affected States.
We also need action at the global and multilateral
levels. For the Security Council, that means being more
consistent in how it addresses protection concerns
within and across different conflicts and being more
comprehensive in terms of, for example, grappling with
the protection of urban warfare. It also means keeping
today’s conversation going, with Member States, United
Nations actors and civil society engaging on a sustained
basis to implement the actions I have outlined.
For, as bleak as the current state of protection is,
there is considerable scope for improvement if we each
do our utmost to promote and implement the rules that
bind us to preserve humanity in war. This is the best
way that we can honour the twentieth anniversary of
the protection agenda. We have the rules and laws of
war. We all now need to work to enhance compliance.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mauer.
Mr. Mauer: We thank Indonesia for its stewardship
of this debate and we note with appreciation its continued
support in hosting an important regional conference for
armed forces in Jakarta in a few weeks from today. We
trust the conference will follow the debate here and
lead to further efforts to strengthen the protection of
civilians through better peacekeeping.
Madam President, we appreciate your country’s
and your personal commitment to this issue, in
particular your focus on a strengthened role for women
in peacekeeping. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his strong leadership in highlighting the critical
protection gaps with which we are confronted today.
4/96

23/05/2019

Twenty years ago, the Security Council invited the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
brief it on the protection of civilians (see S/PV.3977) and
adopted a presidential statement that further welcomed
its contribution to this issue (see S/PRST/1999/6). The
past two decades have shown us how the political and
military decisions made in this Chamber impact the
human conditions on battlefields around the world.
These decisions can save lives or end them; they can
create hope or misery; and they can bolster or break
the norms that protect universal humanitarian laws
and principles — whether a city is bombed to rubble
or whether civilians and hospitals are spared; whether
children are sent to school or recruited into armed
groups; whether prisoners are tortured or treated with
decency; whether families ever hear from their loved
ones again.
Not only are the decisions of all United Nations
Member States and especially those of the Security
Council important; the absence of decisions by the
Council also takes its toll on civilians. On battlefields,
where the ICRC is present today, too many actors take
the absence of political convergence among Council
members as a free ride for military operations without
any limitations and without accountability. Seventy
years after the universal ratification of the Geneva
Conventions; more than 40 years after the adoption of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions;
and 20 years after the Security Council held its first
protection of civilians debate, we are still seeing
outrageous violations on a daily basis.
While we understand that political consensus is
difficult, we ask the Council to be clearer in its support
for respect for international humanitarian law and in
stating and following through on the simple truth that
no one is above the law and no civilian can be excluded
from protection. Today, in the face of changing
conflict dynamics, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law continue to be
the bedrock.
Humanitarian action is adapting to people’s
changing needs, and we call on States to adapt, too,
by prioritizing the protection of civilians; by upholding
international humanitarian law and influencing their
partners to do so; by setting clearer frameworks for
their troops and for those supported; by setting clearer
ground rules; by vetting, training and instructing
partners; by applying the highest standards of
precaution in weapons transfers; and by setting up clear
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

oversight and accountability frameworks. Through
these measures, the Council can influence behaviour
and protect populations exposed to war and violence.
This debate must be anchored in the experiences
and needs of people and communities who suffer the
daily brutalities of war and violence. Measures must
be taken that protect civilians not only from physical
harm but also from invisible, psychological harm; from
abuses like sexual violence or torture in detention; or
from not knowing the fate of missing loved ones.
We must also move beyond a victim mind-set to
understanding people and communities as agents of
their own protection and experts of their own situations.
They have individual needs, but they also have
individual skills, capacities and enormous resilience.
They do not wait for external interventions to address
the problems and threats they face. They decide how
best to travel in groups and to ensure that children, older
people and people with disabilities are not left behind
during flight, choosing in advance which road to take,
discussing locations to avoid and negotiating directly
with weapons-bearers. Connectivity has strengthened
the possibilities for self-protection measures and we all
need to adapt to these new developments.
While we ask more of the members of the security
Council and the international community at large, we
ask at the very least that they do not hinder people in
need in their effort to protect themselves. Too often,
we see that in addition to being exposed to war and
violence, populations are stopped from reaching safer
spaces, constrained by bureaucratic obstacles and
limited in their free movement.
In putting people at the centre, we can see
that protective layers must be built across three
interconnected spheres in which proactive policies
and practices of protection are needed; these are the
individual, community and contextual levels. When an
individual faces immediate threats to safety and dignity,
harm can be greatly reduced through strict adherence
to the rules regulating the use of force, through more
stringent arms controls and through humane treatment
in transfers of detainees and in detention.
We cannot gloss over the issue of missing people.
Hundreds of thousands of people — if not millions — are
missing worldwide. Their family members suffer deep
losses and unanswered questions, their pain only
deepening with time. Such festering wounds can harm
the fabric of whole societies, undermining relations

S/PV. 8534

between groups and nations, sometimes decades after
the original events.
For the sake of individuals, and whole communities,
the humanitarian imperative is clear. Families have a
right to know the fate of their loved ones and States
must take steps to prevent people from going missing
in the first place, for instance by registering detainees
and notifying their families. The ICRC and the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement overall stand ready
to support States in these efforts.
The ICRC has made specific efforts to ensure
that community-based protection approaches are
integrated more systematically into its response. This
is part of our commitment to being accountable to
affected populations. Importantly, these activities can
never be considered a substitute for the protection
responsibilities of authorities, and States must put
measures in place to protect their population, in line
with their obligations under the law. Communities need
space to protect themselves and States must be more
proactive in granting it.
The ICRC is looking to build on our role of neutral
intermediary to support these activities, for example in
supporting communities to self-advocate to authorities
or weapon bearers in order to ensure their safety as
they go about their daily lives, collecting food and
water, seeking medical help, attending schools and
more. The ICRC also organizes information sessions
for families on their legal rights so they can themselves
approach authorities.
Additionally, the ICRC is broadening its
assistance to create stronger communities through
micro-economic projects aimed at reducing exposure
to risk, distributing seeds that can be grown in towns to
avoid women being assaulted while going to the field,
or providing income-generating activities to reduce
harmful behaviour such as sending children out to work.
Protections in fragile settings will also require broader
investments that go beyond the work of humanitarian
actors, such as the restoration of markets and enabling
sustainable economic activities.
In the wider context of protection, with increasingly
urbanized warfare, it has become starkly evident that
the effects of bombing and shelling in cities are almost
never limited to military targets. In densely populated
areas, the wide-area impact of heavy explosive weapons
is now well known and their use against targets that are
smaller than their area effects is all too often ethically

19-150045/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2019

and maybe even often legally indefensible. The price is
too high to be justified; beyond the deaths and injuries
of civilians, we see damaged infrastructure leading
to the collapse of essential health and water systems
and more.

I am honoured to address the Council on behalf of
my colleagues at the Center for Civilians in Conflict,
especially as the Council marks 20 years since placing
the protection of civilians on its agenda and the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.

It is not only civilian infrastructure that is harmed;
the environmental consequences of conflict are often
overlooked. International humanitarian law protects the
natural environment as a civilian object. This includes
vital natural resources that, if damaged, can have
implications not only for the survival of the civilian
populations, but also for environmental risks.

Sixteen years ago, a young woman named Marla
Ruzicka, the founder of the organization I lead, made
it her mission to document the impact of conflict
on civilians. Marla worked tirelessly to collect the
testimonies of civilians harmed by conflict and bring
their stories to policymakers. Tragically, Marla herself
became a victim of war, killed in 2005 in Iraq. But her
ideas live on — that civilians are not collateral damage;
that they deserve recognition, especially in times of
conflict; and that those who go to war have it in their
power to spare civilians from its worst effects.

The ICRC this year will release updated guidelines
on international humanitarian law and the natural
environment. We will be engaging with militaries
about these guidelines, and with parties to the conflict
to ensure practical measures are taken that protect the
natural environment.
We are also seeing gaping protection risks and
vulnerabilities in the digital environment. People
may face hate crimes, violence, discrimination,
digital surveillance and profiling because of their
online presence and/or use of digital technologies,
including by Governments, the private sector and other
non-State actors. In conflict zones, this can be lethal.
Data collected on affected people, including through
humanitarian operations, must not become a source
of additional risk for populations or humanitarian
organizations. States should promote a do-no-harm
approach, backed by accountability mechanisms, for
the responsible use of technologies and data.
Twenty years after the International Committee of
the Red Cross first addressed the protection of civilians
in the Council (see S/PV.3977), violations and abuses
continue. Let us work together to respond on these three
levels: individual, community and the wider context.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions this year, we urge States to recall their
spirit, which is to uphold human dignity in the midst of
armed conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Mauer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Borello.
Mr. Borello: I thank you, Madam President, and
the Government of Indonesia for inviting me to address
the Security Council at this important open debate.
6/96

Today’s open debate is a pivotal moment to reflect
on the past 20 years and to set out an ambitious and
concrete vision for the future. On that note, I would like
to draw the Council’s attention to the joint statement
issued by 22 non-governmental organizations in
advance of this open debate. The statement makes an
urgent call to strengthen the protection of civilians.
This is a make-or-break moment. The situation is not
hopeless, but we need action by the Security Council,
the United Nations and all Governments to reduce the
suffering experienced by millions of civilians caught
in conflict.
I wish to focus my comments on three important
topics: minimizing civilian harm in conflict; protecting
civilians through peacekeeping; and engaging
communities on their own protection.
Over the past 16 years, we have worked directly with
armed actors and civilians to find solutions to civilian
harm. In Afghanistan, Nigeria and Ukraine, important
strides are being made, many of them through the
development of national policies on civilian protection.
Every Government should have such a national policy,
and that policy should include six key elements.
First, we must have a strong gender lens, recognizing
that women, men, girls and boys experience conflict
differently and that they must all be protected equally.
Secondly, we must create specific capabilities to
track, analyse and respond to civilian harm. These
capabilities have had an impact in reducing harm in
contexts like Afghanistan and Somalia.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Thirdly, we must make a commitment to avoiding
the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects
in urban areas. I strongly urge all nations to support a
political declaration on this issue this year.
Fourthly, we must prioritize civilian protection
in arms transfers and security partnerships. Rigorous
safeguards are needed, especially where there are risks
of violations by partners.
Fifthly, we need dedicated training on the protection
of civilians within national military education systems.
Sixthly, we must find a way for civilians to receive
acknowledgement, amends and accountability for the
harm they have suffered in conflict.
There is no substitute for high-level and public
political commitment to civilian protection. This is
why we fully echo the call of the Secretary-General
on all Member States — including the members of the
Council — to adopt national policies on the protection
of civilians.
Twenty years ago, the Council endowed the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone with the first
explicit mandate to protect civilians. Since 1999,
United Nations missions have been an essential tool in
protecting civilians and interrupting cycles of violence
that threaten international peace and security. There
is currently no other kind of operation that can bring
to bear the comprehensive set of capabilities to protect
civilians that a United Nations operation can. In South
Sudan, a woman living in a protection of civilians site
powerfully expressed this, telling us: “This living soul
talking to you now is because of the protection provided
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.”
Yet, United Nations missions are beset by recurring
challenges that have been identified across consecutive
reform efforts since 1999. The Council, Member
States and the United Nations can help in three main
ways: providing political support, adequate financial
resources and the right capabilities.
First, diplomacy and political action are urgently
needed to support United Nations operations in contexts
where Governments or non-State actors threaten
civilians and peacekeepers.
Secondly, Member States and the United Nations
must ensure that mandates are matched with resources.
Pressure on peacekeeping budgets has undermined
efforts to protect civilians. In the Congo, after a base

S/PV. 8534

of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
closed following budget and troop reductions, a woman
told us that she felt that “even the United Nations has
abandoned us”.
Thirdly, United Nations operations need the right
mix of civilian, military and police capabilities. These
include well-trained, equipped and rapidly deployable
contingents, expert civilian staff and appropriate
enablers, such as vital air assets. Without these essential
ingredients, peacekeeping operations will continue
to struggle to deliver on their mandates to protect
civilians. Action on critical peacekeeping reforms is
essential in 2019.
I want to end by discussing the critical work of
engaging communities on their own protection. We
strongly believe that engaging communities in a safe,
effective and meaningful way is essential to national
and international efforts to bring peace and stability
in conflict. Civilians are not just victims in armed
conflict; they are often the best stewards of their own
protection. They can devise and implement highly
effective solutions. We have seen communities demand
and obtain armed escorts for women leaving their
homes to gather firewood. We have seen community
leaders convince both parties to a conflict to agree to a
daily ceasefire that allowed civilians to go about their
daily lives. We have seen girls return to the classroom
as a result of advocacy by their own communities with
armed actors.
Efforts to protect civilians and resolve conflict will
more likely succeed if undertaken in full consultation
and partnership with civilians and communities.
Community engagement should empower and support
existing community-based protection initiatives and
abide by the do-no-harm principle. Furthermore,
community engagement should be conflict and gender
sensitive and ensure equal opportunities for all civilians
to voice and address differing protection concerns.
Finally, engagement cannot be a substitute for State
and non-State actors upholding their obligations under
international law.
Twenty years ago, the Council made a solemn
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict.
There has been much progress, but to the people of
Syria, Yemen, Mali and the Central African Republic,
and civilians caught in too many other conflicts, that
commitment remains unfulfilled. I strongly urge the

19-150047/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

members of the Council, the Secretary-General and
all Governments to take concrete action to strengthen
the protection of civilians. The days of accepting
civilian casualties as an unwelcome but unavoidable
consequence of conflict must end. Parties to conflict
can minimize civilian harm and Governments can
prioritize the protection of civilians. With the right
support, peacekeeping operations can support civilians.
Safe, meaningful and effective community engagement
can lead to better protection on the ground.
With committed leadership at the global level by
the United Nations, the political will of all Governments
and the engagement of affected communities, a higher
standard of protection can be achieved. We all can
do more to protect civilians in armed conflict, and,
because we can, we must.
The President: I thank Mr. Borello for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
Indonesia welcomes this opportunity to preside over
today’s open debate marking the twentieth anniversary
of the Security Council’s adoption of the first-ever
resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict — resolution 1265 (1999) — and coinciding
with seventieth anniversary of the Fourth Geneva
Convention — part of the backbone of international
humanitarian law.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been an integral part of Indonesia’s constitutional
mandate and foreign policy, and sets the tone for the
theme of our Security Council presidency, namely,
“Investing in peace”. Over the years, we have been
unwavering in advocating the protection of human
rights and humanitarian access for civilians in conflict
and post-conflict situations. I have made this position
crystal clear in addressing, inter alia, the recent
situations in Palestine, Syria, and Yemen. In situations
of conflict, the safety and security of civilians, the
safety and security of people, must always come first.
In other words, the protection of civilians must continue
to underpin our work at the Security Council.
Yet the path leading towards that noble objective
continues to be plagued with challenges. As the
Secretary-General has reported, the state of civilian
protection today remains similar to that of 20 years ago.
That is truly a source of concern. Under the mandate
of the Charter of the United Nations, all 15 countries
8/96

23/05/2019

represented around this table bear the collective
responsibility to end and reverse that travesty.
The adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) was a truly
momentous achievement. It affirms the Council’s
commitment to humankind in line with the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention. Over the years, the world has
come to a better understanding on the multidimensional
nature of this agenda, from addressing physical threats
to ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
and from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. In order to strengthen the implementation of the
protection of civilians agenda, there are some pertinent
points worth considering.
First, the national capacities of the concerned
must be strengthened. The task of protecting civilians
lies primarily in the hands of the State concerned,
particularly with regard to upholding the rule of
law and establishing good governance. However,
as States in conflict often have limited capacity to
do so, international partnerships become crucial to
address the root causes of the conflicts and enable
them to emerge from conflict into a better, more
secure future. Moreover, community engagement and
empowerment also play an important role in developing
national capacities.
In that regard, civilian protection programmes
should be tailor-made to the needs of affected
communities. Local leaders and community members,
especially women, must become part of the design and
implementation of such programmes. Recognizing
that women and children face the highest risks in
situations of conflict, the participation of women in
such programmes will help increase their effectiveness.
For its part, Indonesia has been proactive in efforts to
empower Palestinian communities to allow them to
gain better access to basic needs. Just three years ago,
we built a hospital in Gaza that has provided muchneeded health-care and eased the suffering of civilians
living under the occupation.
Secondly, ensuring effective implementation
and compliance is key. We already have in place
the normative frameworks guiding the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, namely, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and a number of United Nations
resolutions. The challenge now is how to effectively
implement them. That ultimately requires respect for
international humanitarian and human rights laws
by State and non-State actors alike. To that end, we
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

believe that engagement with all parties to a conflict
is crucial to encourage them to implement the existing
legal frameworks.
Thirdly, we must pursue innovative and practical
ways to protect civilians on the ground. As the front
line, United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors remain our primary agents. As such, the skill
sets and capacities of peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors must continuously be updated and strengthened
so that they can be better equipped in tackling new and
emerging challenges on the ground.
Based on the experience of Indonesia’s peacekeepers,
mastery of soft-skills, or people-to-people skills,
has been demonstrated to positively contribute to
building the trust of local communities. Furthermore,
intelligence-gathering skills are necessary to ensuring
the success of early-warning systems to detect and
prevent potential humanitarian crises.
The twentieth anniversary of the first Security
Council resolution on the protection of civilians
should serve as a reminder not only of our political
commitments, but also our duty to implement those
commitments to ensure the primacy of human safety and
security. After all, the United Nations was established
upon the mandate “we the peoples of the United
Nations”. We cannot afford to let our people down.
I now resume my functions as President of the
security Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Annen (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s debate. We highly
appreciate Indonesia’s commitment to the multilateral
order and the strengthening of international law.
Rest assured that Germany is with you in this
crucial endeavour.

S/PV. 8534

to conflicts all over the world — in Syria, Yemen,
Myanmar and the Central African Republic, to name
just some examples. In addition, sexual violence, rape
terror and starvation — deeply despicable methods of
warfare — are still being used, and those who attempt
to help those most in need are attacked on a daily basis.
I believe that I speak for all of us here today by
thanking all humanitarian and medical personnel for
their dedication and service. In the north-western part
of Syria — in Idlib — the recent heavy bombardments,
including attacks on humanitarian and civilian
infrastructure, have led to the loss of life of too
many innocent civilians, including health workers. I
agree with what Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark
Lowcock said here in this very Chamber, namely, that,
“some of those attacksare clearly organized by
people with access to sophisticated weapons,
including a modern air force and so-called smart
and precision weapons.” (S/PV.8527, p. 4)
It bears repeating that the fight against terrorism can
in no way justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and
civilian
infrastructure.
Counter-terrorism
operations do not override the responsibility of parties
to protect civilians, nor should they impede impartial
humanitarian action.
I am also deeply worried about the deteriorating
situation of journalists and interpreters, as for example
in Afghanistan, as well as in Syria and Yemen.
Impeding their work is often a particularly cynical way
of covering up grave human rights violations.

We are also glad to align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians.

All in all, we live in a world where the
accomplishments of earlier generations in guaranteeing
at least a basic respect for the human rights of
civilians, who have come increasingly under attack,
as Mr. Borello and Mr. Mauer made very clear. We
must not acquiesce to that. It is the Council’s task to
safeguard international humanitarian law, to create the
legal framework for the protection of civilians and to be
consistent in implementing its own resolutions. All of
us must live up to that.

Like our briefers today, I am frustrated and
saddened that, in the seventieth year of the Geneva
Conventions, we still have to condemn direct and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and the deliberate
targeting of places of education, hospitals and other
services essential to civilian populations by parties

In the light of that distressing state of affairs, allow
me to encourage the Secretary-General to continue
to speak up loudly when it comes to violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, and to use his good
offices whenever he can to prevent those violations

19-150049/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2019

from happening in the first place. He can count on
Germany’s support.

a reality and preventing further atrocities by bringing
perpetrators, wherever they come from, to justice.

Germany decided to use its term on the Security
Council to advance the protection of civilians. Just in
April, within the framework of our twin presidencies
with France, we initiated the drafting of a humanitarian
call for action for which we will be seeking broad
support within the membership. In September,
the General Assembly will provide us with an
opportunity to do so. We also introduced a resolution
on sexual violence in conflict (resolution 2467 (2019)),
strengthening a survivor-centred approach, protection
and accountability. We invited the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the High Commissioner for
Refugees to brief the Council on protection concerns,
and we presided over a meeting of the Council where
for the first time a refugee with disabilities was able to
share her views on the challenges facing people with
special needs in a conflict setting (see S/PV.8515).

Secondly, the protection of civilians is a key task
of many peacekeeping missions. For the protection of
civilians to become a reality and not remain a lofty
ambition of us here in New York, we must collectively
work towards that goal. That starts with turning the
protection of civilians into a priority for us Member
States, the United Nations, the host nation and the
whole mission — military, police and civilians
alike — as well as for all United Nations staff deployed
in mission settings.

Undoubtedly, the international community has
taken a number of important steps in the past 20 years,
including the establishment of the International
Criminal Court and, more recently, other accountability
mechanisms; stronger focus on protection of civilians
in peacekeeping mandates; and the development of the
powerful children and armed conflict monitoring and
reporting system.
But we still have a long way to go. We, as States and
the international community, have to step up our efforts
to build on those achievements and do better. In that
regard, I would like to share four concrete proposals.
First, international law is weakened when
violations go unpunished. That is why Germany is a
strong supporter of the International Criminal Court.
That is why we support the commissions of inquiry set
up by the Human Rights Council and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, set up by the General Assembly; the mechanism
for Myanmar and the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It is
important that those mechanisms also address the
actions of non-State armed groups. We must enforce
international law, making the fight against impunity
10/96

In addition, peace missions need to be adequately
resourced. We need to ensure that a sufficient number
of posts for protection personnel are provided to the
missions, in particular child and women protection
advisers, as well as for early warning and community
alert systems, for liaison arrangements and public
information, for human rights monitoring and for
programmatic funding to support the missions’
work. That includes strengthening the host countries’
capacities to fulfil their responsibility in protecting
civilians through the rule of law and security
sector reform.
A systematic gender analysis of protection facilitates
better understanding of the needs of civilians and
allows for the development of strategies that meet the
specific protection needs of women, men and children.
Furthermore, troop- and police-contributing countries
need to prepare their personnel more effectively for the
task of protecting civilians. That includes conveying a
thorough understanding of local conflict dynamics, as
well as promoting clear adherence to United Nations
standards and protection of civilian policies, including
on how to prevent and address sexual and genderbased violence.
Raising the number of women in peace missions is
also an essential part of the protection of civilians. The
participation of women enables a closer relationship to
local communities, particularly women, and contributes
to trust-building, which is an essential precondition for
protection. Germany has announced several initiatives
to increase the number of female peacekeepers in
United Nations peace missions.
Thirdly, we need to better care for humanitarian and
medical workers in armed conflict and to strengthen
humanitarian negotiation capacities. Tailored trainings
and confidential spaces for humanitarian front-line
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

workers to discuss their experiences with each other
are promising approaches. We need to scale them up.
Finally, red lines have to be drawn for the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. Germany has
initiated a dialogue series in Geneva, bringing together
military practitioners, diplomats and humanitarian
actors to work out best practices on how to minimize
civilian casualties in urban theatres of conflict. We are
glad that many States and the International Committee
of the Red Cross are playing a leading role in that
joint endeavour.
In his report, the Secretary-General observes
that “the state of the protection of civilians today is
tragically similar to 20 years ago” (S/2019/373, para. 4).
That is a damning assessment for the Council; it is a
damning assessment for all of us. Let us therefore join
forces to ensure that the next report will come to a more
positive conclusion.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): A century ago, when
international humanitarian law was still in its infancy,
civilians represented only 10 to 15 per cent of the total
casualties in armed conflict. Today, civilians account
for more than 80 per cent of all casualties. As we sit
here today, civilians are bearing the brunt of conflicts
in Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Libya, the Lake Chad
basin and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
international community’s failure to prevent mass
atrocities, such as the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 and
the genocide against the Tutsi in 1994, remains a stain
on our collective conscience. Anyone witnessing the
bombing of schools and hospitals in Idlib or the plight of
children starving to death in Yemen might be forgiven
for wondering why we have not made no progress since
those dark days.
We need to keep strengthening the normative
framework and support robust protection for the
needs of specific groups who are particularly at risk
in conflict situations. Much progress has been made in
recent years on the protection of groups such as women
and girls, children, internally displaced persons,
refugees, journalists and media professionals but it is
important that we continue to examine where further
developments can be made. That is why we are very
proud to be working in the Council with Poland on a
draft resolution on persons with disabilities in armed
conflict. I very much agree with what the Minister
of Germany said with regard to the need for us to be
examining the use of high explosives in urban areas.

S/PV. 8534

However, our priority should be to redouble
our efforts to ensure implementation of established
international humanitarian law and the Council’s
resolutions on the protection of civilians and to
combat impunity. The protection of civilians should
be integrated into the Council’s approach to country
situations, for example, in monitoring the ceasefire
around Al-Hudaydah in Yemen. In some cases, out
of necessity, we may need to carve out separate
humanitarian tracks from wider conflict resolution
efforts, such as cross-border authorizations in Syria.
But we must be clear that that cannot substitute for
supporting efforts to find viable long-term political
solutions to conflict.
Eight of the 14 United Nations peacekeeping
missions operating around the world are mandated to
protect civilians. We need to work to ensure that wider
efforts to improve peacekeeping performance in general
include a specific focus on improving the protection of
civilians. Better mandating, as we have been asked by
the Secretary-General in his Action for Peacekeeping
agenda, is of course part of that. But ensuring that
protection elements in mandates are translated into clear
tasks on the ground will require mission leadership and
personnel to understand the practical implementation
and implications of their protection duties. There needs
to be an integrated approach in missions and across the
United Nations if protection strategies are to come off
the page and onto the ground.
All troop- and police-contributing countries also
need to ensure that their uniformed personnel are
trained to the required core standards on the protection
of civilians. That is a key part of operational readiness.
Peace enforcement operations, mandated or supported
by the Council, such as the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the Group of Five for the Sahel, must
also have strong training and compliance frameworks.
It would be good to make sure that the Department of
Peace Operations is working with those troop- and
police-contributing countries to understand how such
training can be most effective and report back on it
so that Member States, both trainers and trainees, can
improve their performance.
The Council should receive regular reporting on
mission performance in relation to the protection of
civilians, as part of the wider performance reporting
under resolution 2436 (2018). Where serious protection
failures arise within missions, we will continue
to support the Secretariat in holding individuals,

19-1500411/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

contingents and mission leadership accountable and to
make sure that we all learn lessons.
I agree very much with you, Madam President,
that protection is not only a matter for United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The primary responsibility to
protect all civilians on their territory of course rests with
host States — States Members of the United Nations.
In order for peace to be enduring and sustainable,
host State authorities and civil society actors all have
a role to play. I agree very much with what Federico
Borello had to say about the need for national plans.
The United Kingdom has a human security policy for
our armed forces, and we have published a voluntary
national review on the domestic implementation of
international humanitarian law. We are very happy to
work with anyone else interested in such an approach.
In that context, we welcome the focus on the role of
local communities in today’s open debate, as they not
only have an important voice in conflict resolution but
are best placed to understand their own environments.
We need to hear more from them.
Turning to accountability, whatever progress is
made on implementation, strengthening the protection
of civilians over the next 20 years will also depend on
how we collectively address the issue of accountability,
including, of course, in the Council. Combating impunity
is partly about establishing robust mechanisms for
justice and accountability. In some cases, international
mechanisms, such as the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Court,
sanctions regimes and the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which
we set up in Iraq, will be the best tools at our disposal.
In other cases, accountability can best be delivered
through domestic or hybrid mechanisms, such as the
Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic
or the establishment of a hybrid court, as provided
for in the South Sudan peace agreement. We can also
achieve accountability through national prosecution. I
hope very much that those gathering evidence of crimes
in Syria or against the Rohingya will one day see that
evidence presented in effective tribunals in Syria and
Myanmar. But if not, those responsible should be held
to account wherever national law permits.
Accountability is about doing what is right by the
victims and survivors of atrocities against civilians, but
it is also a key condition for building sustainable peace.
If post-conflict efforts to establish good governance,
12/96

23/05/2019

security and the rule of law and, crucially, to maintain
peace, are to succeed, then accountability is vital for
the rebuilding of trust and confidence between civilian
populations and the parties to the conflict.
Let me conclude by saying that the Council has an
important role to play. When we receive reports about
attacks on civilians, schools, hospitals and medical
facilities, we need collectively and individually to be
ready to say what we see and to say who is behind it. It
can be uncomfortable to do so. It can cut across political
priorities or international friendships. But, for the sake
of all, we must do it. After all, if we do not speak up for
other countries’ civilians when they are attacked, who
will speak up for our own?
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): On behalf of the African
members of the Security Council — Cote d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea and South Africa — I would like to
thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing today’s
important open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank you, Madam
President, for presiding over it, knowing how keen you
are and how much you care about the subject.
The African members of the Security Council
align themselves with the statement to be made later by
Ambassador Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations.
Africa is a major stakeholder in today’s debate. I
would also like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations, which undoubtedly underscore that
civilians not only continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties during conflict but also bear the brunt of
the short- and long-term impact of conflict — from the
denial of, and attacks on, humanitarian assistance to all
forms of violence and forced displacement.
Today’s debate is timely, as 2019 marks the
seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions
of 1949 — a cornerstone of international humanitarian
law — and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1270 (1999). Those
landmark components of international law have framed
the approach of the United Nations to the protection
of civilians in the contemporary age. However,
the implementation of those legal frameworks is
still lacking.
While we have seen a significant improvement in
the compliance by State actors with such provisions,
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the changing nature of modern conflict — shifting
from inter-State conflict to civil wars, transnational
conflicts and instability — has meant that the protection
of civilians has become more and more challenging.
Nevertheless, while recalling respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and recognizing the
leadership role of States in protecting, nurturing and
advancing the protection of civilians agenda, we would
like to acknowledge the important role played by the
International Committee of the Red Cross as custodian
of international humanitarian law and in attempting
to regulate the conduct of armed conflict in order to
protect the most vulnerable caught in the middle of
such conflicts. We would also like to acknowledge the
significant role that the Center for Civilians in Conflict
plays by working with armed actors and civilians in
conflict to develop and implement solutions to mitigate
and respond to civilian harm.
The role of the Security Council in pursuit of
international humanitarian law should lead it to take
decisive action to facilitate the necessary environment,
including by establishing humanitarian corridors
and ceasefires and deploying peacekeepers with a
robust protection-of-civilians mandate. Such actions
are necessary to create the conditions for sustained
action on peace and security and ensure that the
humanitarian-development nexus thrives. Furthermore,
greater coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, such as the
African Union, are necessary to create an environment
that would enable the protection of civilians. The
comparative advantage of regional organizations can
enable closer collaboration and coordination with local
communities, including by creating an environment
conducive to the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons on a voluntary basis, in accordance
with the principle of non-refoulement.
The protection of civilians requires not only
physical protection, but also liaising and engagement
with communities to ensure that the necessary
environment is created to facilitate long-term protection
mechanisms. The African members of the Security
Council believe in that regard that the strength of the
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping missions
is paramount in creating proactive approaches to
protecting civilians through military engagements, and
also in consolidating the gains made in permanently
eliminating threats to innocent populations.

S/PV. 8534

Nevertheless, we wish to underline that, while it
remains the primary responsibility of States to protect
civilians, including humanitarian personnel and health
workers, within their borders, all parties — including
armed opposition groups — must also bear the
responsibility of ensuring that civilians and health
workers are protected. All parties to a conflict should
fully comply with their obligations under international
law, as stated in resolution 2286 (2016).
It is also important to highlight the fact that the
protection of civilians is a multidisciplinary agenda. It
includes contributing activities of the United Nations,
regional organizations such as the African Union,
international organizations such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, non-governmental
organizations, the military component, the civilian
component, and the host Government and its security
forces. Efforts to address the protection of civilians
agenda, therefore, need to involve close coordination
by all role-players.
It is also important to note that, among the civilian
population, vulnerable groups such as women and
children are affected the most. Therefore, we call for
the full implementation of the provisions of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2427 (2018), as well as subsequent
resolutions, particularly with regard to the protection
of women and children in armed conflict. That also
requires the strengthening and mainstreaming of special
provisions and personnel within peacekeeping missions
to ensure that those groups are adequately protected.
In order to deter the threats to civilians and foster
greater compliance with international law, the African
members of the Council believe that the necessary
accountability mechanisms and the policy space and
technical support to develop them are essential. Those
include local, national and regional accountability
mechanisms. Broader international mechanisms should
continue to support accountability mechanisms, based
on complementarity and subsidiarity. However, the
most effective ways to protect civilians are to prevent
armed conflict through investments in sustainable
development, promote the peaceful resolution of armed
conflicts, and consolidate peace by focusing on the
post-conflict environment and peacebuilding, which is
a responsibility charged to all of us in the Council.
The Council often finds itself hamstrung from
acting based on competing geopolitical interests that
we are deeply concerned about. Nothing should prevent

19-1500413/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Council from acting decisively when it comes to
protecting those caught in the middle of armed conflicts.
The protection of civilians should remain a priority and
requires the commitment of all Council members.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I commend the convening of this
important meeting and thank the speakers for their
valuable briefings. I should also like to thank, in
particular, Minister Annen and you, Madam, for your
presence today.
Seventy years after the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions and 20 years after the Council placed the
protection of civilians at the centre of its agenda, it is
still relevant — perhaps more than ever — to address
the impact of armed conflicts on the civilian population,
as well as the serious human consequences that derive
from violations of international humanitarian law. It is
still relevant also because in too many existing contexts,
defenceless populations are caught in the middle of
confrontations between non-State armed groups or
under the yoke of terrorist groups that respond to no
rule other than the use of those populations to further
their nefarious aspirations.
Also, and all too frequently, the affected States
violate their obligations under international law and
undertake military offensives that obviate their priority
role of protecting and safeguarding the human rights
of all persons within their territory and jurisdiction.
That has resulted in the fact that the majority of
those killed in today’s conflicts are civilians and that
vulnerable groups such as women, children and people
with disabilities become objects of aberrant war tactics
such as starvation, trafficking and sexual violence. For
example, at this very moment in Yemen, impediments
to humanitarian access are putting more than 12 million
people at risk of famine, mostly children. That must stop.
We emphasize that the absence of solutions
and policies and the inability of the international
community at all levels to effectively address the root
causes of conflicts remain determining factors in the
rise of insecurity, social instability and the proliferation
of violence. All of that indicates that much remains to
be done.
We wish to highlight the important progress
made by the Security Council in adopting protection
mandates for peacekeeping missions that are adapted
to the civilian populations they serve. We also believe
that the Council has managed to make progress towards
14/96

23/05/2019

a better coordination of the United Nations protection
system, and we stress that the protection of civilians
concerns not only the humanitarian sphere but also
the areas of peacekeeping and human rights, the rule
of law, security, disarmament and development. We
also recognize that the protection of civilians also
requires the reduction of the prevalence and risk of
war. In this regard, we emphasize the importance of
high-quality education and the role of young people in
the construction of a culture of peace, tolerance and
social cohesion.
We cannot fail to recognize as a significant step
the Council’s establishment of monitoring mechanisms
in compliance with the protection mandates of
peacekeeping missions. That step is both a recognition
of the need for mandates to be adapted to the oftenchanging reality on the ground and a means of
strengthening the preventive approach by which many
lives can be saved.
The particular needs of women and girls in armed
conflict must remain systematically at the centre of
humanitarian action and of the decisions and mandates
of the Security Council. That is why the deployment
in missions of advisers for the protection of women
and children is fundamental, as are the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms I mentioned.
People with disabilities are among the least
accessible and most needy members of a community,
with restricted mobility and communication and
informational barriers. Ensuring the adequate protection
of persons with disabilities in armed conflicts requires
a well-integrated and implemented policy approach that
produces solutions based on the realities on the ground.
We also believe it is vital to collect population data on
disabilities and other information that can better inform
humanitarian responses and protection activities.
Young people in conflict are exposed to numerous
risks and violence in many forms, especially considering
that there is no legal mechanism or framework that
ensures the rights and specific needs of young people.
The Security Council could fill that gap. Young people
tend to be the first targets of armed or extremist
groups as well as being victims of social exclusion
and injustice. Protecting their lives and human rights
must therefore be a priority, and that includes the lives
and human rights of young peacemakers, human rights
defenders and members of youth organizations, who
are liable to face reprisals for their work. We therefore
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

hope that all of the Secretary-General’s reports on the
protection of civilians and on specific countries will
include provisions relating to the situation of young
people on the ground.
In the face of a global humanitarian context of
growing and varied needs, many humanitarian actors
must provide assistance in conditions of extreme
insecurity, which limits their access to the affected
populations. Many have lost their lives in the service
of the most vulnerable. We therefore reiterate that it
is essential to guarantee their protection, security and
free movement as they carry out their functions. We
specifically want to highlight the importance of taking
every possible measure to protect medical personnel
and infrastructure in armed conflict and ensure that
those who carry out indiscriminate attacks on them are
duly brought to justice. In that context, we underscore
that the scourge of impunity and lack of accountability
significantly undermines the protection-of-civilians
agenda. We must be firm in ensuring that the
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian
law, and human rights and refugee law, are prosecuted
and pay for their acts.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic believes
that any action aimed at protecting civilian populations
in armed conflict should be undertaken in full respect
of human dignity and on a basis of impartiality,
inclusion and the specific needs of the populations they
serve, and thereby contribute to the welfare of the most
vulnerable in order to facilitate their recovery and give
them a better future.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): The headlines remind us of the urgency of the
protection of civilians. Recently in Idlib in Syria, more
than 160 people have been killed and 180,000 displaced,
including 80,000 children, while 83,000 people are
trapped in a confined area with no shelter but trees.
Twenty years of the protection of civilians in the
Council has brought significant progress on this issue,
and yet thousands of civilians on the ground are still
dying as a result of wars that too often are in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. According
to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/373), in 2018
there were 28,000 victims in only six theatres on the
Council’s agenda.
We therefore thank you, Madam President, for
your commitment to improving the effectiveness of
protection on the ground, in the framework of the

S/PV. 8534

Council presidency. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Mauer and Mr. Federico
Borello for their contribution. Today we must move
from principles to action. As Mr. Borello said, to do
that we must define concrete ways in which the Council
can be united in its work.
Belgium aligns itself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians. For my part I
would like to discuss three concrete approaches — first,
what peace operations can learn from the other actors’
practices on the ground; secondly, the importance
of concrete data for protection and thirdly, the
responsibility of each State to ensure that the most
serious crimes do not go unpunished.
First, owing to the complexity of current conflicts,
peace operations constantly face new challenges in
their efforts to protect civilians. We must find better
ways to overcome them. For example, could peace
operations collaborate more effectively with civilsociety organizations and learn from their experiences
in community engagement? In that context, it is a
positive that the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan recognizes the importance of exploring
techniques for the non-armed protection of civilians,
including through community engagement. That could
serve as an inspiration for other mandates. We should
not forget that a lasting peace is built not between States
but between peoples and communities.
As the Secretary-General emphasizes, children
require special protection measures. Failure to assume
our responsibility to better protect children not only
harms girls and boys living in insecurity, it also
exacerbates the grievances between warring parties
and diminishes their ability to resolve their conflicts
peacefully. Peace operations have a key role to play in
deploying child protection advisers, integrating child
protection into missions and negotiating action plans
with armed groups.
Secondly, the Council must be better informed
about cases of serious violations of international law
and should make better use of the instruments available
to it for documenting and investigating such violations.
As the Secretary-General indicated in his report,
civilian casualty tracking deserves more attention, as
it is critical to supporting evidence-based advocacy,
identifying the factors behind attacks that result in

19-1500415/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilian casualties and preventing the recurrence of
violations. In the interests of improving prevention,
Belgium also supports the integration of the Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, published by the United
Nations in 2014, into predeployment training for peace
operations, in order to enhance troops’ early-warning
and atrocity-risk-assessment capacities.
Finally, we note that respect for international law
is first and foremost the responsibility of each State.
With regard to the most serious crimes, that means the
obligation to prosecute their perpetrators so that they
cannot escape justice wherever they are.
That is why we call on States to join the initiative to
develop a multilateral treaty on mutual legal assistance
and extradition for prosecuting perpetrators of the most
serious crimes in national courts. However, if progress
at the national level is too slow or even non-existent,
the Security Council must play its part and be more
proactive in holding perpetrators to account, including
by referring situations where the most serious crimes
may have been committed to the International
Criminal Court.
The Council also has a responsibility to respond
to the serious threat posed to civilians by explosive
devices, that is, landmines, explosive remnants of
war and improvised explosive devices. In the next
few months Belgium will start working on concrete
initiatives in this area.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Madam President, we are once again pleased
to see you presiding over the Security Council, and
we are grateful to our Indonesian colleagues for
proposing that we address the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. My thanks also go to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict, for their contributions to
today’s discussion.
Over the past 20 years, the subject of the protection
of civilians has occupied a special place in the work
of the Security Council. The Council has adopted a
number of important resolutions that define the work of
the United Nations and set universal standards in this
area. Without question, the work of the Security Council
over these years has helped to strengthen the protection
of civilians, thereby saving lives. Nevertheless, the
number of victims in armed conflict, a significant
16/96

23/05/2019

proportion of whom are women and children, is
unacceptably high. The change in the character of
armed confrontations has brought new challenges with
it, and the answers to those challenges must be sought
through continued dialogue and by uniting efforts to
prevent conflicts and settle them peacefully. Only this
type of approach, founded on international law in its
classic sense, without invented artificial concepts, can
produce positive results.
Today we are seeing a particular threat from
terrorist groups involved in armed conflict. For these
groups, mass executions, the use of civilian facilities as
cover and civilians as human shields, and the creation of
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance are
the norm. The sobering statistics for civilian victims of
terrorism confirm the importance of ramping up efforts
to mobilize States, the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations to strengthen mechanisms for combating
the global terrorist threat. There is no question that
terrorist activity should be put down, but it should
be with intelligent and proportional force. We are
concerned about the spreading practice of using combat
drones, for example. The difficulty of controlling such
devices can lead to civilian casualties, which we are
seeing in the situation in Afghanistan in particular. We
are also concerned about the psychological stress that
civilians are exposed to when living under the constant
threat of destructive missile strikes as well as about
civilian deaths.
The humanitarian component is an important factor
in the protection of civilians. The work of humanitarian
actors should be based on the Charter of the United
Nations and fundamental humanitarian principles.
We firmly reject the use of humanitarian pretexts for
criminal purposes, or to support terrorists or spread
disinformation. The activities of the notorious White
Helmets in Syria — and this is mainly about that
organization — have not only done severe damage to
the Syrian peace process, they have also significantly
compromised
the
international
humanitarian
movement. The unprecedented politicization of the
humanitarian arena in international relations that we
are seeing today certainly does nothing to help us
achieve the noble goal of preventing and minimizing
the suffering of civilians. It is crucial to always ensure
that aid to people in need, rather than political aims, is
at the core of humanitarian efforts. That also applies
to assessments of humanitarian needs, which should be
carried out in close coordination with the authorities of
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

host countries, in accordance with fundamental General
Assembly resolutions. Unfortunately, the Office within
the Secretariat responsible for those assessments does
not always succeed in complying with that rule. We
urge it to pay greater attention to the issue in future.
Lastly, within specialized international organizations,
civil society and academic circles, we have recently
seen a kind of sports competition emerge based on who
can think up the most interesting novelty for discussion
within the framework of the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The Security Council has
also been infected, unfortunately. There is no need to
develop new international legal concepts that allegedly
fill so-called gaps in the protection regime in the Geneva
Conventions. We should not be distracted by the endless
identification of new categories of persons who need
special protection under international law. In practice,
such ideas can only weaken the protection we give
civilians. The Council’s job should be to concentrate on
practical work for ensuring the protection of civilians
within the framework of existing international legal
standards and prevailing mandates.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
today’s meeting. I would also like to express Poland’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and
Mr. Borello for their comprehensive briefings, which
demonstrated how relevant today’s open debate is and
show that violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law continue to have an
enormous negative impact on people’s everyday lives.
From this perspective, we particularly welcome the
community-level-based approach highlighted in the
concept note circulated by the Indonesian presidency
(S/2019/385, annex).
Poland welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2019/373), particularly its well-founded
and accurate recommendations, which come as we are
celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions and marking the twentieth anniversary of
the first-ever Security Council presidential statement
on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/1999/6). Since
then the Security Council has made huge progress in
strengthening the protection-of-civilians framework,
yet the reality on the ground remains as worrisome as
ever, which makes it imperative for the international
community and the Security Council to step up their
efforts in the field.

S/PV. 8534

Almost a year ago, when Poland held the presidency
of the Security Council in May 2018, and convened a
similar open debate (see S/PV.8264), Poland’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs said that we should focus on three
main areas to ensure effective protection in conflict
situations — prevention, protection and accountability.
Those words remain valid today. Prevention is the
only way to end the pain and suffering afflicting the
millions of women, children and men all over the world
who have been victims of deliberate or indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflicts, including those who are
particularly vulnerable in such situations — women,
children, persons with disabilities, detainees and
missing persons. To that end, it is crucial for the parties
to conflicts to develop and promote good practices
that can prevent and mitigate harm to civilians. Risk
assessment, dialogue and inclusive processes that put
people at risk of a lack of protection at the centre of any
response are essential. That is also true because local
communities possess the best knowledge about the
threats to which they might be exposed. To secure better
protection, on the other hand, respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law must be enhanced. It is important that all States
and non-State parties to a conflict comply with their
legal obligations.
An ongoing analysis of the humanitarian domain
allows us to identify the most worrisome humanitarian
challenges to the protection of civilians around the
world, among which are the progressive urbanization
of conflicts; the human impact of improvised explosive
devices; unlawful denial of humanitarian access; attacks
on humanitarian and medical personnel, hospitals and
other facilities; the destruction of civilian infrastructure;
counter-terrorism measures that impede humanitarian
action; and sexual and gender-based violence. Attacks
on journalists are yet another example of a flagrant
violation of the existing normative framework.
Finally, the widespread impact of armed conflict
on the situation of persons with disabilities raises the
highest-level of concern and should be addressed and
mitigated in an effective manner. To that end, I am
pleased to announce that Poland has decided to join
the Charter on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities
in Humanitarian Action. We encourage others to do the
same. Furthermore, Poland, together with the United
Kingdom, has proposed a draft resolution on persons
with disabilities. We believe that document will
significantly contribute to protection of that group and

19-1500417/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

ensure that persons with disabilities are recognized as
agents of change in peace processes.
As the Secretary-General’s report states, 22,800
civilians were reported dead or injured in six countries:
Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and
Yemen. The figures are underestimated, and civilians
are suffering all over the world.
As far as European countries are concerned, Ukraine
has been witnessing continued military aggression and
the unlawful occupation of its territories by the Russian
Federation. Despite many efforts undertaken by the
international community, a ceasefire in Ukraine is far
from being achieved. Civilians continue to be killed and
injured by explosive remnants of war and landmines.
The number of internally displaced persons has
stabilized, reaching a peak of 1.5 million people. The
conflict continues to have a negative impact in other
domains, including the environment, which results in
further negative consequences for human health, as it
inflicts serious health problems and reduces access to
resources that are vital for survival.
As that example shows, the protection of civilians
is not an exclusively humanitarian task, but requires a
comprehensive approach with adequate actions to be
taken in peacekeeping, human rights, the rule of law and
the political, security, development and disarmament
spheres. As the challenge is global, we should promote
cooperation and partnership among States and
international and non-governmental organizations, as
well as other stakeholders. Those actions should be
supported by heightened diplomacy, awareness-raising
and the necessary training.
At the same time, activities carried out at the level
of the communities that are affected by armed conflict
cannot be considered a substitute for the protection
responsibilities of authorities. As Member States, we
must do our utmost to end impunity for any violation
of international humanitarian law. It is necessary to
ensure accountability, no matter who the perpetrator of
a given crime or abuse is. The International Criminal
Court should play the leading role in holding parties to
a conflict accountable and restoring a sense of justice
on the international stage. That would clearly improve
the protection of civilians and allow for visible progress
to be made.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Madam Foreign
Minister, to New York to preside over this open debate.
18/96

23/05/2019

I thank Secretary-General Guterres and the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Mauer, for their briefings. I also listened attentively
to the briefing delivered by Mr. Borello.
This year coincides with the seventieth anniversary
of the adoption of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
relative the protection of civilians in time of war, as well
as the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), which put the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the Council’s
agenda. As one of the core items on the Council’s
agenda, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
has been accorded great attention by the international
community, and the Council has made positive progress
in promoting the development of mechanisms and in
ensuring progress on its implementation to a certain
extent. Meanwhile, civilians still bear the brunt as
victims of war and armed conflicts, accounting for the
vast majority of casualties in conflicts.
The international security situation remains grave.
Armed conflicts persist in some regions, causing heavy
civilian casualties. Pragmatic and effective measures
should be taken to ensure the safety and security of
civilians in conflict. With that in mind, China offers
the following four proposals.
First, we should tackle both symptoms and root
causes, bolster prevention and address the protection
of civilians at its origin. Preventing, reducing and
resolving conflicts and settling disputes in a peaceful
manner are the most effective means to achieve the
protection of civilians.
As the core of the collective security mechanism,
the Security Council should earnestly fulfil its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security and resolving conflicts by promoting dialogue,
consultation and political negotiations, so that civilians
can be safe from the suffering caused by war. We must
oppose the use the force or the threat of force at every
turn and reject power politics and bullying.
The international community should establish
a concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security; build partnerships based
on dialogue, friendship, non-confrontation and
non-alignment; and create a world of lasting peace
and universal security. We should be aware of our
shared future for humankind; advocate for the global
governance concept of neutral consultation, joint
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

contribution and sharing; and strive to create a peaceful
and stable international environment.
Secondly, under international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, national Governments
and parties to the conflict in question must assume
their responsibility for the protection of civilians.
Without a doubt, all national Governments have
the primary responsibility of protecting their own
civilians, a role that is irreplaceable. The international
community should provide constructive assistance in
that regard, but must respect the sovereignty of the
country concerned.
The actions of the parties to a conflict are regulated
by international law and Security Council resolutions.
In situations where conflicts are unavoidable, the best
possible efforts must be made to avoid injuring innocent
civilians; prevent the abuse of force and actions taken in
disregard of humanitarian consequences; and avoid the
asymmetrical use of force and the use of high explosive
weapons in densely populated areas. Gaining military
advantages by attacking civilians must be strictly
forbidden. Violations of international humanitarian law
in armed conflict, such as threats or attacks against
civilians, should be investigated and punished in
accordance with law.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should effectively fulfil their responsibilities of
protecting civilians in strict accordance with the
mandates conferred upon them by the Council. The
Council should consider in an integrated manner
host countries’ situations and needs in relation to
peacekeeping missions’ capacities and conditions, in
order to establish clear, realistic and viable mandates.
All missions should develop clear plans based on a
limited number of conditions, strengthen their internal
coordination and ensure that they implement their
mandate effectively. We should bolster international
cooperation against terrorism and crack down
resolutely on terrorist acts that endanger civilians’
safety and security.
Humanitarian assistance to civilians affected by
armed conflict should be increased. Humanitarian
organizations should promote a spirit of humanity,
fraternity and dedication, uphold the fundamental
principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence,
enhance their humanitarian nature and professionalism
and avoid getting embroiled in conflicts. We should
strengthen the protection of humanitarian workers,

S/PV. 8534

health workers and facilities, as well as specific
vulnerable groups such as women, children, refugees
and displaced persons.
Fourthly, all United Nations agencies and the
various humanitarian organizations should demonstrate
their expertise and strengths and fully leverage the
unique role of regional and subregional organizations
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States. They should improve communication with
regard to information on policies and help host
countries strengthen their capacity to protect civilians.
Non-governmental organizations must respect the
Governments of host countries, consult the countries
concerned fully and play a constructive role. The
United Nations must maintain communication with
all the parties to a conflict, increase its guidance
on humanitarian relief operations and provide
comprehensive and dedicated protection for the
civilians affected.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, as well as
today’s briefers, and we are grateful to the Indonesian
presidency for organizing today’s debate on the
protection of civilians. We also welcome the Ministers
with us in the Council today.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council’s addition of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict to its agenda, we continue
to see conflict and violence endangering civilians. The
Secretary-General’s 2019 report on the protection of
civilians (S/2019/373) paints a dire picture. The United
States strongly believes that the full implementation
of international humanitarian law by all parties to
a conflict is essential to the protection of civilians,
but we also know that the laws of war are not always
universally observed, and that often has grave
consequences. We agree that Member States can and
should do more to protect civilians. And while it is
critical to acknowledge and focus on war’s tragic
impact on civilians, it is also vital to recognize when
harm has been successfully avoided and understand
how that is achieved. Many countries, including the
United States, have rigorous programmes in their armed
forces for implementing protections for civilians under
international humanitarian law. Recommendations that
we identified during a study of civilian casualties in
2018 are being used to improve existing policies and
practices. The United States has been sharing and
building on good practices, including bilaterally and

19-1500419/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

during coalition operations. We encourage others to do
the same.
Globally, mass displacement and attacks on civilians
have become all too common, and attacks on the very
medical and humanitarian personnel working tirelessly
to alleviate suffering and save lives are a hallmark of
many conflicts. In Syria, civilians have suffered during
the eight-year conflict at the hands of a Government
that blatantly disregards their lives, including through
the horrific use of chemical weapons and indiscriminate
weapons such as barrel bombs in urban settings. And
I must point out that the White Helmets, contrary to
Russia’s repeated attempts at vilification, continue to
heroically assist Syrian civilians attacked by their own
Government, attacks that we know Russia chooses
to ignore.
In Burma, more than 1.1 million civilians have
been driven from their homes by the military and
security services. Nearly 1 million languish in refugee
camps in Bangladesh. Ongoing fighting in Rakhine,
Shan and Kachin states continues to harm and displace
people, many of whom desperately need humanitarian
assistance. In South Sudan, the lack of safe, rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access means that people
starve and children suffer needlessly. More than
200,000 South Sudanese have fled to protection-ofcivilian sites knowing that they were not safe at home.
Their fears have been borne out in the blatant use of
sexual and gender-based violence against women going
about their daily lives. We must hold the perpetrators
accountable and ensure justice for the victims.
It is critically important that humanitarian actors
have unhindered access to populations in need, and they
should be commended for their work to protect civilians
in the most challenging of circumstances. We support
the centrality of protection and continue to support
humanitarian organizations in strengthening their
protection efforts, particularly to expand communitybased protection that draws on the capacities of local
populations and partners.
Peacekeeping has become central to the protection
of civilians in conflict. With more than 95 per cent
of United Nations peacekeepers now operating under
mandates to protect civilians, the protection of civilians
is at the heart of modern peacekeeping. Unfortunately,
we still see far too many instances of peacekeepers
failing to take necessary action to protect civilians. To
address these shortcomings, we support the Secretary20/96

23/05/2019

General’s efforts to institutionalize a culture of
performance in which only the highest-performing
troops and police are deployed. We look forward to the
continued implementation of the Secretary-General’s
performance policy framework and his commitment
to creating a system that ensures accountability. The
United States stands firmly behind the commitment to
enhancing performance in the protection of civilians
and encourages all Member States to do the same
by supporting the Kigali Principles, which were
designed to help peacekeepers effectively implement
their civilian-protection mandates. We also welcome
the forthcoming publication of the revised United
Nations policy on the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping, especially the integration of the
addendum on accountability. Significantly improving
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping requires
identifying standards, systematically evaluating
records and ensuring accountability for performance.
We also know that increasing women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peacekeeping improves
operational effectiveness and a mission’s ability to fulfil
protection-of-civilian mandates. We support efforts to
reduce barriers to women’s participation and promote
their safety in peace operations.
It is not enough to be outraged by the accounts
we hear of the horrors inflicted on civilians trapped
in conflicts that they did not create. We must commit
to protecting civilians by turning rhetoric into
tangible action. The international community should
consistently bring attention to the protection of civilians
and develop responses for it.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to warmly thank the Indonesian presidency
for organizing this vital debate on the occasion of the
twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the protection
of civilians on the Security Council’s agenda and to
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, who is presiding over our work.
The contributions of your country and troops to
peacekeeping and to the United Nations efforts to protect
civilians are invaluable, Madam President. This debate
is an excellent opportunity for all of us to take stock of
the Security Council’s action and the progress that is
still to be made in this area. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/373) and his ambitious recommendations
should serve as our guide in that endeavour. I would
also like to welcome the other Ministers present at this
meeting and to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mauer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive
Director of the Center for Civilians in Conflict, for
their informative briefings.
Let us be clear about the facts. Conflicts last longer
and are becoming more complex, and their impact on
civilians is as severe as it was during the era of major
global conflicts. In Syria, South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Libya, Yemen, Burma,
Afghanistan and Iraq, violence against civilians is being
perpetrated on a massive scale. To counter that trend,
the Security Council has adopted specific measures to
protect civilians over the past 20 years. I would like
to underscore two basic points, much of which my
colleagues have already discussed, and discussed well.
First, it is the mandates given to peacekeeping
operations that have the goal of protecting civilians
at their core. Thanks to the Secretary-General’s
efforts, the protection of civilians is implemented by
all of the missions’ components, military, police and
civilian, including their human rights divisions. Those
components are working in an increasingly integrated
way. With casualty tracking, the performance
measurement of peacekeeping operations takes the
protection of civilians fully into account. We should
build on that achievement by providing operations
with the means to act with robust mandates and
adequate resources.
My second point concerns the human rights due
diligence policy, which is aimed at ensuring that
peacekeeping actors are exemplars and encourages
the acceptance of United Nations forces by local
populations. That policy has taken on a new form in
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel). In a very innovative fashion, the Security
Council has made the protection of civilians an integral
part of the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. We welcome the technical assistance provided
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights enabling the G-5 Sahel countries
to fulfil their obligations, and the financial support
of the European Union. The necessary resources will
have to be mobilized over time to support that kind
of protection framework. The United Nations has an
increasingly important role to play in that regard where
regional peace operations are concerned. Accordingly,
and without presuming to be exhaustive, France

S/PV. 8534

believes that the Council must redouble its efforts in at
least five areas.
The first priority is ensuring compliance with
the relevant international conventions, foremost of
which are the Geneva Conventions, whose seventieth
anniversary we are celebrating. I am including human
rights conventions under the same rubric, in particular
the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the
various treaties on arms control. In that regard, France
remains fully committed to the universalization of the
Arms Trade Treaty, which has become a major pillar
in the protection of civilians. France urges major arms
exporters and importers to take a responsible approach
to supporting the Treaty, which is key to curbing
such weapons’ uncontrolled spread and their deadly
consequences for civilians.
The second priority is protecting humanitarian
and medical personnel and infrastructure. Just since
the beginning of this year, the Office of Mission
Support has reported more than 300 attacks on medical
infrastructure or personnel. In Syria, along with the
most recent strike on a health-care centre in Kafr Nabl
this past Sunday, a total of 19 hospitals were targeted
by a single offensive by the regime and its supporters in
Idlib. That is clearly unacceptable. In that regard, let me
recall what Jean-Yves Le Drian, France’s Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs, said at an Arria Formula
meeting on 1 April, in the context of the French and
German joint presidencies of the Security Council,
“Our responsibility is to find the operational means
to ensure the protection of the men and women who
embody the spirit of the 1949 Geneva Conventions
on a daily basis.”
At the national level, France is committed to ensuring
that the protection of humanitarian and health personnel
is integrated into military operations, starting at the
planning stage. The use of force can be authorized
to protect them from hostile acts. With regard to
humanitarian aid workers, our armed forces list healthcare facilities in theatres of operation in order to protect
them against targeted operations.
Learning the rules of the protection of humanitarian
and medical personnel is also a key part of our training
programmes, including in Africa, based on the training
currently conducted by the International Committee of
the Red Cross at the Libreville Staff School. In Mali, the
legal advisers of Operation Barkhane have conducted

19-1500421/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2019

awareness-raising exercises for the Malian forces as
part of regular training in the area of the law of armed
conflict for several years. In accordance with resolution
2462 (2019), on countering the financing of terrorist
acts, which was adopted during the French presidency
of the Council, we are exercising great care to ensure
that the measures implemented to combat terrorism
do not adversely affect the activities of humanitarian
personnel. In that regard, we will continue to be
especially careful to ensure that such personnel are not
unduly prosecuted for activities carried out in strict
compliance with the principles of humanitarian law.

therefore more important than ever. That is why Mr. Le
Drian and his German counterpart Heiko Maas decided
on 1 April (see S/PV.8499) to launch the international
initiative Humanitarian Call for Action, so that the
Council’s resolutions can be transformed into concrete
actions on the ground. As the German Minister said
earlier, France and Germany hope that the Humanitarian
Call for Action will lead to the adoption of a declaration
of commitment by States on the margins of the next
session of the General Assembly to ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law. We owe it to the
civilian populations whom it is our duty to protect.

The third priority is to make the protection of
children and women on the ground more effective. Much
remains to be done in that major area. It calls for the
deployment of child protection and women’s protection
advisers within peace operations. It also requires the
universal endorsement of the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, also known as the Paris Principles, the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Indonesian presidency for convening
this open debate on the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which is also a priority for
our country. We especially welcome your presence,
Madam President, as well as that of other high-level
participants. We are also grateful for the important
briefings by the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of
the Center for Civilians in Conflict.

The fourth priority that should guide us is ensuring
the effective protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict, in accordance with resolutions 1738
(2006) and 2222 (2015). In its multipronged efforts
in that regard, France sensitizes French and foreign
journalists to high-risk situations.

We would like to recall that we are marking the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption the Geneva
Conventions, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relative to the protection of civilians.

The fifth priority concerns the fight against
impunity and the necessary prosecution of violations.
First of all, civilians will be protected only if those
who target them are punished. The Council must make
more systematic use of individual sanctions against
those responsible for violations of humanitarian law
and human rights law, sexual violence and serious
violations against children. Secondly, justice must be
done for the victims. In that regard, we must strengthen
national capacities, ensure systematic, impartial and
independent investigations, and in cases where national
mechanisms are insufficient or inadequate, resolutely
support the use of international mechanisms. They
must be provided with the necessary resources, be able
to rely on the full cooperation of States and include the
involvement of local communities.
On the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the agenda
of the Security Council, clarity and determination are
22/96

Peru is a country committed to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We are party to the major international instruments in
both areas, and our national legislation has accordingly
incorporated, developed and implemented them within
our domestic legislation. We consider the Security
Council’s responsibility to protect civilians under
international humanitarian law a high priority. The
Council has a moral and legal obligation to act in
concert to end the suffering of millions of people in
countries such as Yemen, Syria, Libya and Palestine,
among others.
In that connection, we emphasize that 119
States, including Peru and nine other members of the
Council, have subscribed to the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group on
mass atrocity crimes, which commits us to acting in a
timely and decisive manner to prevent and end atrocity
crimes. We believe that the principle of the sovereignty
of every State implies their primary responsibility to
protect their peoples, and that in accordance with the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8534

Charter of the United Nations, when national authorities
fail to protect their populations the international
community must assume that responsibility under
international law.

to express our gratitude to His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, Mr. Peter Mauer and Mr. Federico Borello for
their valuable briefings and for their participation in
today’s meeting.

In that regard, Peru adheres to the concept of
responsibility to protect. We also highlight that
several peacekeeping operations deployed through a
Council resolution have mandates to protect civilians,
including against acts by the regular army of their
own Government.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
emphasizes the urgent need to address the harmful
impact caused by the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas, which have not only claimed millions
of lives but also caused damage to infrastructure and
essential services, giving rise to forced displacement
and the economic exclusion of victims. That means
improving compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights law in order to ensure the
protection of civilians, including in attacks on schools
and medical facilities during armed conflicts. In
addition, due care and rehabilitation of victims are
fundamental to any sustainable peacebuilding process,
in particular given the psychological impacts of
conflicts on civilians, especially the most vulnerable.
We believe in the importance of taking into account
the needs and concerns of affected communities in order
to improve their protection. We would like to highlight
the role that young people and women are called upon
to play in conflict prevention and resolution, justice
and reconciliation. Ensuring accountability for atrocity
crimes is equally critical. We therefore support the work
of international investigative mechanisms to address
atrocity crimes, such as that established in the case
of Da’esh. We also believe that the universalization of
international criminal jurisdiction will make it possible
to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflicts
more effectively.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
humanitarian agencies and workers, as well as the Blue
Helmets, involved in protecting civilians in conflict
areas under the most difficult conditions, risking their
lives to save others.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin, Madam President, by thanking your
Excellency and the Government of friendly Indonesia
for convening this important debate. I would also like

The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the twentieth
anniversary of Security Council resolution 1265 (1999)
as well as the inclusion of the protection of civilians
as a standing item on the Council’s agenda. However,
the challenges facing the protection of civilians are the
same as they were 20 years ago. The cycle of violence
will continue to harm millions of innocent civilians in
conflict areas for another 20 years if we do not adopt
serious and urgent measures that reflect the repeated
calls and appeals to Member States, United Nations
officials and international community to address this
phenomenon. We agree with the Secretary-General
when he expressed his deep concern about this issue in
his report on protecting civilians in armed conflict for
this year (S/2019/373).
I would like to focus in my statement on three main
issues: ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law and guaranteeing access to humanitarian
assistance, accountability and how to better implement
the protection of civilians.
First, the atrocities committed against innocent
civilians everywhere in the world are caused by
disregarding and deliberately violating international
humanitarian law. There are still parties to many
conflicts that completely ignore their obligations
under international humanitarian law. They deal with
international law as if it is just ink on paper. We all
see attacks against medical facilities, schools and
humanitarian workers. We also see the prevention
of access to humanitarian assistance and the use of
starvation and sexual violence as a method of warfare.
Therefore, we emphasize that all parties to an agreement
must comply with the obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. They must also implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, we reiterate our call
to refrain from using the veto when the issue concerns
delivering humanitarian assistance to besieged and
needy civilians during conflict.

19-1500423/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, another factor that perpetuates the
endless cycle of violence against civilians in conflict
is the phenomenon of impunity. Some parties to armed
conflicts continue to commit crimes against civilians
and violate international laws without being deterred
or subjected to accountability. In that regard, Kuwait
supports the use of Security Council tools to guarantee
accountability of the perpetrators of crimes committed
in armed conflicts and bring them to justice, including
through Council sanctions committees and factfinding missions.
Thirdly, it is important to know that the report of
the Secretary-General clearly outlines all the necessary
steps and measures that must be taken to improve the
implementation of the mandate related to the protection
of civilians and put an end to the crimes committed
against them. That would be done by ensuring urgent
and concrete progress in implementing the three
recommendations that he mentioned in his previous
report (S/2019/462), namely, developing national policy
frameworks for protection of civilians, enhancing
compliance and respect of the law by non-State armed
groups, and promoting compliance with international
law through accountability. We share Indonesia’s
view regarding the importance of focusing on the
involvement of societies and promoting their role in the
protection of civilians.
Lastly, concerning the topic of protecting civilians
in armed conflict, the State of Kuwait has sought to
strengthen the institutional and normative framework
for protecting civilians based on our bitter national
experience from which many of our people are still
suffering. Consequently, we have proposed a draft
resolution on the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict. We thank Mr. Peter Mauer, who highlighted
in his statement today the continued humanitarian
suffering and its negative effects. The Security
Council does not have a reference language pertaining
to the issue of missing persons, which, if addressed
according to clear measures at the beginning of a
conflict, would have a significant impact on the postconflict agreement and reconciliation phase as well as
on restoring relations among the parties and building
confidence. The draft resolution also aims to reiterate
the importance of the relevant rules of international
humanitarian law and human rights law on missing
persons in armed conflicts. During its presidency of the
Council next month the State of Kuwait will organize
24/96

23/05/2019

a meeting to brief members on this topic. We hope that
our draft resolution will be adopted during the meeting.
Even after 20 years have elapsed since the Security
Council adopted the mandate of protecting civilians,
this issue remains more important than ever. We, as
Council members, must intensify our efforts to ensure
that innocent civilians do not pay a price for the conflicts
of which they have unwillingly become a part. We must
shoulder our responsibility and commit ourselves to
seriously working to guarantee peace and reach lasting
political solutions to conflicts, particularly in Africa
and the Middle East. The peoples of the world deserve
more than mere words and continuing condemnations.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Romania.
Mr. Meleşcanu (Romania): I thank Indonesia for
organizing today’s debate on a topic that is extremely
relevant for us.
Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Our discussion is taking place at a very opportune
time and represents the tribute we can pay on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1265
(1999) — the first Security Council resolution addressing
the protection of civilians during armed conflict.
By adopting that resolution, the Security Council
recognized that civilians account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflicts and are increasingly
targeted by combatants and armed elements. This
year also marks the seventieth anniversary of the four
Geneva Conventions — a cornerstone of international
humanitarian law. Their adoption in the aftermath of
the Second World War firmly established that those who
are no longer taking part in hostilities — the wounded,
sick, prisoners of war and civilians, including those
living under occupation — must be protected and their
life and dignity upheld without adverse distinction. We
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

thank the Secretary-General for submitting today’s
report (S/2019/373) with all of our achievements and the
challenges we face. Allow me to share with the Council
some aspects of my country’s contribution to the efforts
of the United Nations system to protect civilians.
As a contributor to peacekeeping operations
for more than 28 years, Romania always organizes
prior to the deployment of the contingent under the
United Nations flag a rigorous three-month training
programme, in which the protection of civilians and
respect for human rights are cornerstone subjects.
Romania is currently engaged with the majority of
individual police officers and military personnel in
peacekeeping missions with a protection-of-civilians
mandate. I am referring to Haiti, Mali, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan. We appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which
was launched in September 2018. The Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations has been endorsed by more than 150 States
Members of the United Nations, including Romania,
which is a clear reflection of the importance we attach
to it.
Romania also endorsed, on 1 April, the political
declaration of the protection of medical personnel in
armed conflict, initiated by France in 2017. When we
address the various aspects of the issue of civilians in
armed conflict, we are also referring to the risks and
problems faced by children. We endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration, the Paris Commitments and Paris
Principles on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
For our point of view, women also require special
protection measures. One of the most important
measures is to deploy as many women as possible in
peacekeeping missions. I am proud to tell the Council
that in our contingent of military observers and staff
officers, 17 per cent are women. We strongly support the
Secretary-General’s proposal about developing national
policy frameworks for the protection of civilians.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate that
my country is committed to contributing effectively
to the implementation of the decisions and mandates
established by the Council, to which we are a candidate
for this year’s elections.

S/PV. 8534

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): I would like to commend
Indonesia’s initiative to convene today’s open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
is a timely agenda at the current critical juncture of
international security. I also wish to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his informative briefing.
Cambodia listened carefully to the passionate
plea for international law and humanitarian action by
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict. There is no doubt that the
present situation concerning international security
remains grim. With the evolving nature of armed
conflicts, civilians across the various regions of the
world continue to suffer heavy casualties. However, the
protection of civilians remains an arduous task for the
international community.
Over the past 20 years, the Security Council
adopted multiple resolutions and presidential statements
and developed a legal framework for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In addition,
the protection of civilians has become one of the key
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Cambodia’s contributions to international security
and peacekeeping are well documented. From being
a recipient State of peacekeeping forces in the early
1990s, Cambodia has since 2006 been an active State
in deploying staff to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, having sent nearly 6,000 troops to eight
countries in Africa and the Middle East. With regard
to sending female officers to United Nations missions,
in 2017 the United Nations ranked Cambodia first
among the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, and second in Asia overall. Based on
our practical experience, I would like to contribute five
points to today’s deliberations.
First, peacekeeping operations must work strictly
within the parameters of the Security Council’s
mandate in fulfilling their responsibility to protect
civilians. However, it cannot be a substitute for the
responsibilities and obligations of the Government of
the country concerned and of the parties to the conflict.
In addition, lines of communication and a bond of
sincere friendship among the peacekeepers, local
authorities and the people must be further enhanced on
the basis of winning their confidence and support. This

19-1500425/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

week, United Nations News published an article entitled
Cambodia: Giving Back to the UN Peacekeeping,
which features Cambodian peacekeepers inspecting
a water purification plant. It is not the responsibility
of the Cambodian contingent to process water for
United Nations colleagues, but it is an indication of a
cooperative and collegial approach to peacekeeping,
which is born of a recent historical link.
Secondly, it is crucial that regular and close
collaboration between local authorities and multilateral
forces be established, with a view to gathering timely
information prior to the eruption of conflict and to
carrying out a safe and early evacuation of civilians
from regions with armed conflict. Further efforts
must be made with regard to the timely provision of
protection and medical care to refugees during armed
conflict. In certain dangerous situations, our troops
have participated in jointly coordinated responses
through regular patrols and control of the movement
of internally displaced persons and of refugee camps
to protect civilians from armed attacks. Moreover,
the entry-exit point of refugee camps must be tightly
controlled in order to prevent the importation of
weapons and other prospective harmful substances that
could potentially endanger the safety and security of
civilians living in the affected areas.
Thirdly, education is an essential factor. Local
authorities and multilateral forces need to work hand
in hand to disseminate the relevant laws and culture
of the country of operation and pertinent international
law in vulnerable areas, as well as information on
the role and responsibilities of the United Nations
in areas of operation. In addition, the awareness of
the local authorities and people must be raised with
regard to the risks, incidents and impact of landmines
and unexploded ordinance. It is also imperative to
strengthen professional skills prior to the deployment,
based on the new United Nations reform as well as
engagement in the protection of civilians and the fight
against violence and sexual trafficking. At the request
of the United Nations , Cambodia is now in the process
of reviewing amendments to the legal framework on the
policy on accountability for conduct and discipline in
field missions.
Fourthly, the lessons learned have taught us that
predeployment and in-mission training for our troops
have proven to be an effective and contributing
factor of successful peacekeeping operations. The
troops should be provided with reliable field support,
26/96

23/05/2019

adequate equipment and modern technologies. In
that connection, my Government made its modest
contribution last March by providing armoured vehicles
to our Cambodian United Nations peacekeeping forces
in Mali.
Fifthly, as protection-of-civilians mandates are
fully integrated into each peacekeeping operation,
troop- and police-contributing countries must be
consulted in the formulation of mission-specific
objectives so as to ensure the greater effectiveness of
United Nations forces, and in this way improve the
protection of civilians.
Peacekeeping has faced unprecedented challenges
since the non-State actors have waged rebellion wars
against our peacekeeping forces, which have claimed
many lives and caused disabilities. We are sincerely
indebted to the sacrifice of these United Nations heroes.
Before I conclude, I would like to reaffirm that
regardless of the hurdles, Cambodia remains committed
to further contributing to the cause of this great mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Blok (Netherlands): It should be self-evident
that a Government’s first duty is to protect its citizens.
And the first duty for the Governments united in the
Council is to protect civilians under threat from war,
violence and suffering. After all, if we are not here to
protect people, what are we doing?
I would like to thank Indonesia for putting this
important theme at the centre of today’s discussion,
and you, Madam President, for inviting me here. I am
also grateful for the informative briefings provided by
Mr. Maurer, Mr. Borello and the Secretary-General, for
whom improving peacekeeping operations is rightly
a priority.
Twenty years ago, in this very Chamber, my
country joined those voting in favour of resolution
1265 (1999). Then, as now, it was our conviction that,
in conflict, civilians must be protected. The Council
made a promise. It expressed
“its willingness to respond to situations of armed
conflict where civilians are being targeted or
humanitarian assistance to civilians is obstructed”
(resolution 1265 (1999), para. 10).
Indeed, this shows that the Council is guided by
civilians as its rationale for action.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), a
lot has happened. We have seen a paradigm shift in
our thinking; a mission with civilian protection in its
mandate is now the norm. The 18 Kigali Principles were
established. They are aimed at improving the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. As endorser, we join the
Secretary-General in its call for more signatories.
Last year, with South Sudan and Yemen in mind, we
added the issue of conflict and hunger to outlaw the use
of starvation as a tool of war. Our aim is to root out the
crime of starving civilians by banning it and punishing
the perpetrators. The protection of women against
sexual violence also became an important theme.
Yet, as we are gathered here to commemorate
20 years of our efforts to protect civilians, we have to be
frank enough to ask ourselves inconvenient questions.
Is there a real reason to celebrate? Translating lofty
words and good intentions into day-to-day realities in
highly complex conflict environments is not easy. If
civilians expect to be protected by incoming missions,
and they are not, this may lead to frustration and a
loss of credibility. It undermines the legitimacy of
peacekeeping missions, of the United Nations and the
Council and, in the end, their ability to prevent human
suffering. And that is the last thing we want.
Civilian protection is not some last-minute addon to peacekeeping. It should be a core goal of each
mandate. It has to be funded and part of the standard
operating procedures of the force. We should support it
also in our discussions in the Fifth Committee.
In 1999, the Council emphasized the responsibility
of States to end impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for genocides, crimes against humanity
and serious violations of international humanitarian
law. That brings me to the following vital point — the
importance of accountability. As I have said before in
this Chamber, violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law should not go unchallenged.
Humanitarian law is not optional. It is not a luxury.
It is the bedrock of what defines our humanity.
Upholding humanitarian law is crucial to our very
credibility. Violations should be subject to independent
investigations, mandated by the international
community. And yes, perpetrators should be afraid,
aware that they will be called to account. They should
be lying awake at night in the knowledge that one day
they will face justice.

S/PV. 8534

Today, I want to focus on the sheer number and
gravity of the horrible crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). We all know the
facts and have seen the images. We should all work to
ensure that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes are
brought to justice and to enable the Security Council to
state this fact clearly: ISIS committed genocide against
the Yazidis.
After fact-finding, evidence gathering, investigation
and attribution, prosecution is the final and most
important link in the accountability chain. Without that
final link, justice is not served. ISIS perpetrators of
mass atrocity crimes should be prosecuted, preferably
in the region, and if feasible, under the jurisdiction of
an ad hoc or hybrid international criminal tribunal. I
am fully aware of the complex obstacles on the road
towards that goal, but we have to keep in mind that
justice is a prerequisite of lasting peace and security.
We must join forces and take it step by step.
The Netherlands will do all in its power to help
bring us closer to and reach that goal. At the opening of
the next session of the General Assembly in September,
the Netherlands will initiate a ministerial meeting
on the prosecution of ISIS fighters. Today, I invite
Security Council members and others to join us on that
road towards justice. We owe it to the victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. Goldsmith-Jones (Canada): Twenty years
ago, when the protection of civilians agenda was
first introduced in the Security Council, Mr. Lloyd
Axworthy, then Canadian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
said that the ultimate aim of the Council’s work was
to safeguard the security of the world’s people, not
just the States in which they live. That continues to be
true today. Canada is proud to have played a pivotal
role in establishing the protection of civilians agenda
as a core tenet of the Council’s work. It was a paradigm
shift in how the Council saw international peace and
security, and important progress has been made over
those 20 years.
We commend the Council’s efforts on children and
armed conflict; women and peace and security; conflict
prevention and accountability; and the mainstreaming
of the protection of civilians agenda throughout
peacekeeping mandates and training, as well as in the
context of sanctions regimes. Those developments have
saved lives and brought hope to people in their darkest

19-1500427/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

hours. However, I think we all know that significant
gaps persist.
Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict, including in Yemen,
Syria, Myanmar, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and the Lake Chad Basin countries. Unlawful
attacks against civilians are a clear violation of
international humanitarian law and an assault on the
rules-based international order.
Canada is alarmed that, despite resolution 2286
(2016), violence directed against humanitarian
personnel has increased, including the targeting of
medical personnel and facilities, as well as schools.
Recent weeks have seen a shocking number of attacks
on hospitals and health facilities in Idlib, Syria. Canada
condemns these attacks and calls on those responsible
to ensure fundamental protection to civilians caught in
that conflict.
Canada is outraged by the use of sexual and genderbased violence as a tactic of war. As we noted in the
Council last month, we have to ensure that robust legal
and institutional arrangements are in place to address
sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict
and that steps are taken to investigate and prosecute
perpetrators. Canada is participating in that kind
of activity.
In this Chamber and in the field, Canada has a
proven track record of advancing the protection of
civilians. During our presidency of the Group of Seven,
we championed the implementation of international
humanitarian law through partner organizations. We
believe that the protection of all civilians requires
gender-responsive
approaches.
This
includes
humanitarian action, which now responds to the
increased insecurity and threats that women and girls
and other groups — including lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons — often face during
armed conflict. Improved access to comprehensive
sexual and reproductive health services remains a
non-negotiable component of an effective response.
This also includes the meaningful participation
of women and girls in decision-making processes,
including access for local women’s organizations,
which know best.
Canada is also advancing the protection of
civilians agenda through our renewed approach to
peacekeeping. Following the launch of the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
28/96

23/05/2019

Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, we are leading a
multi-stakeholder process to help translate that political
commitment into meaningful action. Continuing our
long-standing support for mine action, Canada remains
firmly committed to advancing the goals of the Ottawa
Convention and to achieving a world free of landmines
by 2025.
Canada urges the Council to advocate, unequivocally,
for compliance with international humanitarian law
and to condemn violations when they occur. We need
to continue to pursue accountability measures. The
Council must also advance the gendered dimensions
of the protection of civilians agenda, not only sexual
violence in conflict, but also the differential impacts
of armed conflict on women and girls and other groups
that face gender-based discrimination and violence. We
must hear their voices; we must meet their needs.
(spoke in French)
As the lead of the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies, Canada
urges the Council to ensure greater accountability
for the perpetrators of gender-based violence and
support efforts at the international level and in
the field. As local communities are the first to be
affected by conflict, the Council should encourage the
establishment of local-level alert networks, conflictresolution, mediation and reconciliation. Canada urges
the Council to preserve humanitarian space in counterterrorism contexts, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law.
The protection of civilians agenda must also be
consistently applied to peacekeeping. This means
adequate resourcing for peacekeeping missions,
including for advisers for the protection of civilians,
child protection, women’s protection and gender. It also
means promoting best practices in performance and
accountability in the implementation of protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations.
The next 20 years will test the international
community’s commitment to the protection of civilians
agenda. We thank Indonesia for convening today’s
debate and providing the protection of civilians agenda
the attention it merits. The Council can count on Canada
to continue to be a steadfast advocate for respect for
international humanitarian law, with civilians at the
centre of our protection efforts.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Kováčik (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing
this important debate. I would also like to extend our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2019/373) covering the global state of the protection
of civilians, and a big thank you also goes to the
International Committee of the Red Cross and to the
Center for Civilians in Conflict.
While fully aligning myself with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered later this afternoon,
I would like to offer a few additional reflections in
national capacity.
As mentioned by many speakers before me, this
year marks two important milestones: the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1265 (1999), by which the Council added the
protection of civilians as an item to its agenda. The
former was motivated by the aftermath of the Second
World War, while the latter was a reaction to the reports
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Africa and the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Civilians accounted for the vast majority of casualties
in armed conflicts and were increasingly targeted by
combatants and armed elements. Women, children
and other vulnerable groups, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, were especially targeted
by acts of violence.
Today, 20 years later, we read in the report of the
Secretary-General that “the state of the protection of
civilians today is tragically similar to that of 20 years
ago” (S/2019/393, para. 4). Civilians still account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts,
and women, children and other vulnerable groups
remain targets.
The protection of civilians, although sounding like
one task, goes beyond a number of areas that affect
their protection, from clear and enforceable mandates,
effective training, the deployment of peacemakers and
respect for human rights to creating a safe environment
for return and further development of States.
Slovakia will continue to support the security
sector reform agenda, whereby parties are responsible
for the protection of civilians, respect for human rights,
political dialogue and arms control. Civilians and
citizens are #NotATarget; they are the foundation of
any State. Without our protection and respect for their
rights, and the creation of a habitable environment, we

S/PV. 8534

fail in our fundamental role of ensuring peace. Slovakia
is also a strong supporter of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its role in the fight against impunity
and in bringing perpetrators to justice. Achieving
universal jurisdiction of the ICC would be a major step
in this regard.
We have come a long way in the past 20 years, but
we are not there yet. Sadly, it seems that we are not
even half-way there. A lot has been done to strengthen
the framework for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, but owing to the nature of contemporary
warfare, the bar keeps rising and therefore more needs
to be done — on the regional level, by enhancing the
compliance of non-State armed groups; on the national
level, by developing national policy frameworks on
the protection of civilians; and on the international
level, by promoting compliance through advocacy and
accountability and by continuous joint engagement and
dialogue on this topic among Member States, United
Nations actors and civil society.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency for organizing this timely
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their insightful statements.
Armed conflicts take a massive toll on people’s
lives. Trapped in wars, millions of civilians are forced
to flee. They are tortured, abducted, forcibly displaced
and denied access to basic rights and services. Attacks
on schools and hospitals further exacerbate the already
dire conditions in armed conflicts. The situation of
civilians in Syria, the occupied Palestinian territory,
Yemen, Libya and many other parts of the world is
becoming increasingly precarious.
Last month marked the eighth anniversary of
the start of the Syrian crisis. Over 5.6 million people
have fled Syria, seeking safety in Turkey and other
neighbouring countries. There has been an increase in
the regime’s violations of humanitarian law over the
past few weeks. Syrians have been targeted, which will
have humanitarian and security repercussions for the
region and beyond.
Turkey continues to be the main corridor for the
United Nations cross-border humanitarian operations
into northern Syria, with 80 per cent of all cross-border
operations being conducted via the Turkish border,
which amounts to the movement of 31 per cent of all
international humanitarian assistance into Syria. Safe,

19-1500429/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2019

timely and unimpeded access to recipients of that
humanitarian assistance is crucial.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

International humanitarian law is an important
backdrop for protection. Since the signing of the Geneva
Conventions, 70 years ago, joint efforts to maintain
compliance with international humanitarian law are
required as the nature of warfare has been ceaselessly
changing, including the need for neutral and impartial
humanitarian action.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has read the concept note for
this meeting (S/2019/385, annex). We appreciate the
efforts made by the permanent delegation of Indonesia
in preparing it.

Over the last 20 years, the Security Council has
established a sound normative framework for the
protection of civilians by adopting various resolutions
and presidential statements. The Council should
maintain that practice and act to stop serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Preventing and
addressing the root causes of conflict should also be
at the top of our agenda. On the other hand, Member
States have their own experiences and best practices,
and that should be duly reflected in the work of the
United Nations.
The Security Council should be mindful of the
increasing number of international humanitarian
law violations and make sure that resolutions in this
area, in particular resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2417
(2018), are fully implemented. That includes United
Nations peacekeeping missions implementing their
protection mandates. The task of protecting civilians
is indispensable, as armed conflicts are becoming
increasingly brutal.
It has been estimated that 40 million people have
been internally displaced in their own countries as a
result of armed conflict and violence, while the number
of refugees and asylum seekers has reached 28.5 million.
We hope that the 2018 Global Compact on Refugees
will make a real difference in the lives of refugees and
improve responsibility-sharing among States.
This week marks the third anniversary of the
first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, which put
strong emphasis on protection. If we are sincere about
living up to the commitments made at the Summit, we
should devote more energy and resources to protection.
Protecting civilians, saving lives and restoring dignity
should remain at the centre of our efforts. That is our
duty as we seek to help the millions who are suffering
deeply from aggression, oppression and discrimination,
in their own lands and beyond.
30/96

My delegation has also read the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Protection of civilians
in armed conflict” (S/2019/373). I would like to
express my Government’s absolute reservation about
describing its war, along with its allies, against the
terrorist groups Al-Qaida, Da’esh and the Al-Nusra
Front, as well as armed groups associated with them,
as an armed conflict. We also have many comments
and national Syrian reservations with respect to the
erroneous assessments and incomplete information
and conclusions contained in the report, which we will
transmit to the Secretariat in an official letter.
The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the States concerned and their sovereign
institutions, given that they alone are responsible for
preserving security and stability on their territories.
They are responsible for fighting terrorism, violence
and crime, and for putting an end to all forms of armed
presence or illegal weapons. The Indonesian Minister
spoke of this matter in her opening statement, for which
we thank her.
On the basis established by national constitutions
and recognized by the Charter of the United Nations,
the Syrian Arab Republic will pursue its cooperation
with its allies and respect its obligations and right to
protect its citizens from terrorist armed groups that
continue to harbour in their ranks tens of thousands of
foreign terrorist fighters who have come to Syria from
more than 100 States Members of this Organization.
This assessment is documented in reports of
committees and teams associated with the Security
Council and specialized in fighting terrorism. This talk
is not Government propaganda. It is documented in
the reports of the various counter-terrorism subsidiary
committees of the Security Council.
The Syrian people have suffered from a terrorist
war for more than eight years that is supported, funded
and interfered in by certain Governments of States that
are well known as sponsors of trans-border international
terrorism. However, thanks to its genuine allies that
respect the purposes and principles of the Charter, the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Syrian State has been able to preserve the work of its
various national institutions. We have fought terrorism
steadfastly and without hesitation. In parallel, the
Syrian Government, in cooperation with the Russian
Government and other friends, has been able to take
important measures that contributed to putting an
end to bloodshed, protecting civilians and restoring
security. Some of those measures are as follows.
First, the wide range national reconciliation
processes has made it possible for thousands of
fighters to lay down their illegal weapons in exchange
for amnesty.
Secondly, through Astana agreement, we were
able to establish de-escalation zones that contributed
to halting most of the fighting and restoring the
presence and control of the Syrian State over most of
the territories previously under the control of terrorists
who belonged to Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front and the
armed terrorist groups associated with them.
Thirdly, there is full involvement in the political
process in cooperation with Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in Syria, based on
resolution 2254 (2015), which states that a political
process should be facilitated under Syrian leadership
and without foreign interference. That criterion is not
respected by many States, however, which are preventing
the process from moving forward by interfering in a
negative and destructive way in the decision-making
process, which is supposed to be a Syrian-led process.
We are still facing a moral and legal crisis as
well as a crisis of trust, all of which is hindering the
collective international efforts in the framework of the
United Nations. Some Governments have destroyed the
capabilities of entire countries, such as Libya, under the
pretext of protecting civilians. Some Governments are
erroneously interpreting the principles of the Charter
and international law to justify military aggression and
occupation under the pretext of protecting civilians.
Some Governments are imposing unilateral economic
measures on populations of countries such as Syria,
Cuba, Venezuela, Iran and North Korea. Those
Governments consider their policies of illegal economic
terrorism to be a part of preventive diplomacy. Some
Governments still strongly and unflinchingly defend
Israel’s continued occupation of Palestine and the
Syrian Golan while seeking unsustainable deals that
are doomed to fail.

S/PV. 8534

Protecting civilians and peoples across the world
without exception or discrimination begins with respect
for the Charter, without manipulating it or distorting
its principles to justify military aggression and
interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
We all agree that the key mandate of the Security
Council is to maintain international peace and security,
prevent conflicts and address the deep-rooted causes
of armed conflict. On that basis, we now have a real
opportunity to address the issue seriously and examine
its root causes. This opportunity begins by getting
answers to direct questions. What were the pretexts for
occupying Iraq and destroying all of its potential? That
was 17 years ago. Yet we have not heard an apology
from those who invaded Iraq, or a justification for what
they did, or the taking of responsibility for that.
What is the justification for the aggression against
Libya and destroying the country? The same pretext.
With all arrogance and insolence, Libya was invaded
under the pretext of protecting civilians. Libya was
partitioned and there is currently an armed conflict
there, which everyone knows about. Libya’s resources
are plundered, amounting to hundreds of billions
of dollars in value. The Libyan people were driven
to disagree among themselves about the Libyan
Constitution under the pretext of protecting civilians
in Libya. Why is it that well-known Governments of
certain countries — some of them are permanent
members of the Security Council — participated in the
dirty terrorist war against my country, Syria?
Today we put those questions to the Security
Council. And we want answers. We must have the
courage to recognize that there are Governments of
certain countries with political, military and economic
influence working openly and covertly to make
Member States of this Organization laboratories for
their bloody experiments, in defiance of the Charter.
Those countries are the cause of tensions and conflicts,
igniting fires the world over and then playing the role
of firemen or corrupt policemen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Indonesian presidency for
holding this important open debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for presenting his report
(S/2019/373) on the issue before us.

19-1500431/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
Unfortunately, little has changed since the first
Security Council open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, 20 years ago (see
S/PV.4046). We have 14 reports of the SecretaryGeneral, with more than 200 recommendations on the
issue, but we still cannot ensure the protection of the
most vulnerable strata of the population.
The development of new technologies in recent years
should have improved the ability of the international
community to protect humankind from the devastating
consequences of war. Yet those technologies are
building a world that pays little heed to the demands
of reality. And the reality is that global and human
security have deteriorated markedly in the past decade.
Peace and security indicators continue to regress,
bringing to new heights the number of deliberate acts
of violence against those protected under international
humanitarian law.
It is therefore imperative that the cornerstones
of international humanitarian law adopted and
recognized by the international community be fully
respected and protected from any attempts to demolish
them. Accountability for war crimes, violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights should become the new normal.
Regrettably, Ukraine has become an example of the
consequences of a violation by one of the permanent
members of the Security Council of the norms and
principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we value the fact that
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians reflects the dire situation of the civilians
affected by the Russian military aggression in Donbas
in Ukraine. We are also grateful to the Polish delegation
for raising that issue so eloquently in its statement
earlier.
The Russian-led war in Donbas has plunged
the lives of the civilian population into a vortex of
destruction and death. As of now, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the civilian death toll stands at more
than 3,300. Every third civilian killed is a woman or
child. Just in February, a bus carrying civilians was
blown up near the village of Olenivka, in the Donetsk
region. Two civilians died on the spot as the result of an
anti-tank mine explosion.
32/96

23/05/2019

The hostilities also threaten the population with
unprecedented environmental catastrophe, not only for
Ukraine but the whole of Europe. In the Donbas region,
an ever-present risk from groundwater pollution and
subsidence, due to improper closures and subsequent
flooding of coal mines, highlight the need to take
the necessary measures to prevent an environmental
disaster. The decision by the Russian occupation
authorities to cease groundwater pumping at the
Yunkom mine, used in Soviet times for nuclear testing,
endangers groundwater, rivers and, ultimately, the Sea
of Azov with radioactive contamination.
Moreover, the Donetsk filtration station, a facility
that holds huge stocks of chlorine, remains under
constant shelling by the Russian occupation forces.
An accident at that station could be of a scale like
the Chernobyl disaster. They also continue to plant
landmines. The unexploded remnants of war continue
multiplying in the temporarily occupied territories of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, especially in densely
populated areas. That has already made Ukraine one
of the most landmine-contaminated countries in the
world, with almost half of civilian deaths being caused
by landmines.
As a party to the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
and its Protocols Additional, Ukraine attaches great
importance to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The recently adopted mine-action law
establishes the framework for humanitarian demining
in Ukraine, which enables the minimization of risks for
people living in mine-contaminated areas.
Ukraine and many members of the Council recently
expressed their deep concern about the provocative
and unlawful decision to issue Russian passports
to Ukrainian citizens in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine. That step could further curtail
the human rights of the local civilian population and
provoke a dangerous escalation of the situation. We
must recall that imposing citizenship on the residents
of an occupied territory can be equated to compelling
them to swear allegiance to a Power that they may
consider hostile, which is forbidden under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. In view of what I have stated here,
this dangerous development must be duly reflected
on and assessed in the next report of the SecretaryGeneral. Time and again, we continue to urge Russia to
uphold all its obligations under applicable international
law as an occupying Power.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In conclusion, I would like to underline Ukraine’s
strong commitment to the protection of civilians
and ensuring accountability for all violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
on its territory.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to start by
thanking the Indonesian presidency for convening this
meeting.
The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions on international humanitarian
law. It also marks the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has long
been one of the core issues in the Security Council, and
a number of related resolutions have been adopted.
Resolution 2286 (2016), adopted in May 2016,
on which Japan was a co-penholder, expresses the
strong and unanimous commitment of the Council to
protect health care in armed conflict. However, it is
regrettable to learn, according to the World Health
Organization, that the number of the attacks on health
care has been increasing, even after the resolution was
adopted. Noting that most of those attacks have been
perpetrated in Syria, Japan must once again insist that
all parties to the conflict, State and non-State actors
alike, especially those in Syria, fully observe the
resolution and international humanitarian law. The
Council needs to take further action in order to see
tangible improvements.
Let me refer to women and peace and security,
another priority of Japan’s linked to today’s debate. The
Council has made great effort to address the issue by
adopting a series of resolutions since resolution 1325
(2000), including resolution 2467 (2019), which was
adopted in April and which Japan co-sponsored. All
Member States, including Security Council members,
need to act on those resolutions. As a leading donor,
Japan has contributed to their implementation, in
cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, UNWomen and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), in the following three areas.
First, with regard to accountability, since 2014,
Japan has supported the work of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict — in the

S/PV. 8534

Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, Somalia and Iraq — in order to improve their
capabilities in the areas of legislation, investigation
and prosecution. Through those efforts, cases of sexual
violence have been brought into domestic judicial
bodies, resulting in judgments and sentences.
Secondly, with regard to survivors, following the
human security approach, Japan has supported projects
of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict to care for children born of rape and their
mothers in Iraq and improve access to justice for
survivors of sexual violence in Jordan.
Thirdly, with regard to prevention, in cooperation
with UN-Women and the ICRC, Japan has supported
women’s empowerment at the community level through
training and cash-for-work programmes in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Nigeria,
Palestine, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen.
The Secretary-General has stressed the importance
of assisting national-level initiatives to ensure
compliance and accountability. Japan continues to
provide such assistance, in cooperation with the United
Nations system and civil society. Japan will also
continue to actively engage in future discussions on
this issue at the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the Republic of Indonesia, in
particular Minister Marsudi for convening this open
debate, for circulating the concept note (S/2019/385,
annex) that serves as the basis for our deliberations.
Guatemala reaffirms that the protection of civilians
and all other peacekeeping tasks must be implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the guiding principles
governing peacekeeping operations.
Armed conflicts are increasingly taking place in
urban centres. We all know that explosive weapons
in populated areas cause serious injuries to civilians
and affect services that are essential to their survival.
We therefore strongly condemn the use of those
weapons in populated areas, not only because of their
grave consequences but also because they violate the
1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols
Additional, as the Secretary-General reminded us
this morning. In that regard, we address an urgent

19-1500433/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

appeal to the international community to adopt all the
measures necessary to provide a protection and security
framework for those who suffer from the consequences
of the indiscriminate use of those deadly weapons,
and at the same time offer them protection and relief,
especially for the most vulnerable.
It is important to stress that the Latin American
and Caribbean region expressed its unwavering
commitment to the protection of civilians in the
Santiago communiqué, in which 23 States, including
Guatemala, together with international organizations,
agreed on additional actions to address this problem at
the national, regional and international levels.
To a large extent, threats to international peace
and security remain the cause of the proliferation and
possession of weapons of mass destruction, which pose
a threat to human safety and innocent populations.
With regard to the civilian protection component of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, my delegation
recognizes that the implementation of those mandates
should be considered part of an integral peace process,
bolstered by national ownership and involving relevant
stakeholders, and should be decisively supported by the
international community.
Guatemala stresses that the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations must be carried out in
accordance with missions’ mandates and be applied
to all prevention activities and responses to acts of
violence against civilians, including the use of force as
a last resort when necessary, as well as to clear rules
of engagement in order to provide security to civilians
under threat of physical violence and within the areas
of operations.
As a country that contributes troops to peacekeeping
operations, in particular our special forces in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we note the launch
of the pilot protection-through-projection model, which
stipulates that both military and civilian personnel
should be highly mobile and, at the first sign of
deterioration in the security situation, be able to deploy
temporarily to prevent conflict and avoid violence. My
delegation requests that the Secretariat provide detailed
information on compliance on the ground and the
impact and implementation of each of those mandates.
For my delegation, it is also important that a clear,
objective and timely assessment of the human and
34/96

23/05/2019

material resources be carried out, together with the
available capacities, in each peacekeeping operation.
The implementation of mandates depends up on a
number of critical factors, including, among others,
that they be well defined, realistic and achievable; that
there be political will and leadership of the mission’s
performance and accountability at all levels; as well
as planning and operational guidelines. Guatemala
therefore takes this opportunity to reiterate that
peacekeeping operations should receive sufficient
resources and training to execute their tasks, including
personnel, mobility assets and capabilities to gather
timely, reliable and actionable information on
threats to civilians, including analytical tools to use
that information.
Any type of attack against civilians, hospitals,
schools, cultural goods or churches, as well as the
recruitment of children and the hindering of humanitarian
access, is a flagrant violation of international law,
international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions. It is therefore necessary for the Security
Council to remain committed to protecting civilians in
armed conflict and foster full respect for international
law in order to put an end to impunity for serious
violations committed against civilians.
Against that backdrop, and in order to support the
protection of civilians, Guatemala is honoured to be a
country that contributes to maintaining and sustaining
peace. From our national perspective, the responsibility
to protect is a standard that coincides with our own
constitutional principles, as the State is organized to
protect individuals and families, with the overarching
goal of achieving shared well-being.
Lastly, my country reiterates its commitment to the
responsibility to protect. We call for all States Members
to strictly abide by that commitment and put aside
indifference to the commission of serious crimes and
human suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Kakanur (India): We thank the delegation
of Indonesia for organizing this open debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their remarks.
It is our impression that there is no dearth of
intent to better the protection of civilians in armed
conflict situations. However, it is obvious that the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

implementation of this concept does not match the
expectations. We need to translate the concept into
feasible actions and operational responses.
The well-established norms to limit the effects of
conflict include respecting international humanitarian
law and other relevant human rights laws by all parties
to a conflict and ensuring safe and unhindered access
for medical and humanitarian agencies to assist
people. Today’s challenges are not the result of the
absence of norms, but of the inability to abide by the
established norms.
The protection of civilians is a vast subject. In
view of the time constraints, I would like to limit my
remarks to the application of this concept in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping missions mandated by
the Security Council.
It is our experience that peacekeepers often rise to
the occasion when required. Let me recall the example
of Captain Salaria, who led an Indian infantry brigade
group as part of United Nations Operation in the Congo
in November 1961. That mission, whose objective was
to restore peace and unity in the Congo and protect the
lives of the civilian population in Elizabethville, resulted
in the highest number of casualties suffered by India
in any United Nations operation — 39 personnel laid
down their lives. That was at a time when the protection
of civilians was not part of peacekeeping mandates.
The protection of civilians in the context of United
Nations peacekeeping operations has been a complex
undertaking because of the vastly different nature
of armed conflicts, possible contradictions with the
long-standing agreed principles of United Nations
peacekeeping, limitations of the mandates, and the
serious inadequacy of the resources made available for
peacekeeping missions. While the issue continues to
be debated in the Security Council, which has already
adopted several resolutions and other documents
focused on the concept, those efforts have, however, not
really helped in addressing the main challenges.
The difficulties involved in achieving the aims of
the protection of civilians are well known. The general
tendency is to assume — wrongly — that the protection
of civilians is the responsibility of the parties to
the conflict, or of peacekeepers and humanitarian
organizations. However, the responsibility primarily
rests with the national Governments. Yet very little
is done in terms of strengthening national or societal
capacities for protection. Outside agencies can only

S/PV. 8534

supplement, and not supplant, the responsibility of
national Governments.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2019/373)
clearly identifies that mandating certain peacekeeping
missions to participate in, or conduct, military operations
against armed groups, or otherwise conduct joint
operations with non-United Nations forces in specific
contexts, has generated important challenges for the
performance of other mandated activities, including
the protection of civilians. That also jeopardizes the
credibility and the image of the United Nations neutral
presence in armed conflict situations. While eight of
the current 14 United Nations peacekeeping missions
include the protection of civilians as one of their
mandates, that aspect is only one of the many other
mandated components, which number at least 10 on
average, that each of those missions is individually
expected to fulfil. It is clear that the expectations that
United Nations peacekeepers can effectively ensure the
protection of civilians in the absence of clear mandates
are not realistic.
Conflicts where peacekeeping operations are
deployed are inherently messy, complex and difficult.
However, those factors should not be taken as an
excuse to accept the devastating impact of conflict on
civilians. A number of courses of action, mechanisms
and processes are available to address the operational
issues. It is up to the Council to harness them in a
collaborative effort. The commitments under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative provide a foundation
to tackle some of the challenges and further strengthen
the protective role of peacekeepers. That requires a
collective endeavour, including Member States and the
Secretariat, to adapt to changing environments.
It is also useful to consider developing a normative
architecture for the protection of civilians as part
of a broader endeavour within a framework that is
politically attuned, but not politicized or seen as being
instrumentalized. It is only then will we be able to
move forward with cohesion to address issues that have
exacted a heavy price in civilian lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Kafle (Nepal): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on this
important issue, which is a true tribute to marking the
seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the

19-1500435/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilians in armed conflict on the Security
Council’s agenda. I also thank the Secretary-General,
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict for their respective briefings.
I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/373) on this issue.
Durable peace can be secured only through
dialogue and engagement, not through ravaging war or
military actions. The loss of lives and human dignity
in wars and violent conflicts is irreparable. Injury and
pain inflicted upon innocent civilians is deplorable.
We must act to protect civilians during conflicts. The
primacy of politics, and particularly inclusive politics
and constant dialogue, should be upheld to address the
root cause of conflicts. While a State has the primary
responsibility to protect its civilians, it is the shared duty
of the international community, including the relevant
United Nations bodies, to prevent violence against them
should the State fail to do so. As recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report, national capacities to
develop policy frameworks on the protection of civilians
should be strengthened. The sharing of experiences and
good practices will be helpful in that regard.
Nepal expresses its support for the international
normative framework for the protection of civilians
and underscores the need for reinforcing existing
standards and their effective implementation. Children,
women, the wounded and other vulnerable groups
should be provided special attention, as they suffer
disproportionately in armed conflicts.
The provisions of the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional should be observed
in letter and spirit by all parties in conflict. Human
rights law and international humanitarian law are
inviolable even in the worst-case scenarios. Those who
promote indiscriminate and disproportional attacks
on civilian populations and civilian objects should be
held accountable.
Nepal’s own experience in its nationally led peace
process has shown the significance of the promotion
of social harmony, tolerance and understanding for
ensuring the protection of civilians during conflicts
and peace processes. Local communities should be
informed and involved, as they are directly or indirectly
affected by conflicts and their aftermath. Local leaders
and youth and women organizations have a crucial role
to play in strengthening the social fabric and increasing
36/96

23/05/2019

the opportunity costs of relapse into conflict. Likewise,
investment in education and generating awareness and
employment can make a difference in the long run.
As one of the major contributors of United Nations
peacekeepers, Nepal takes every possible measure to
train its peacekeepers in the protection of civilians.
We have put in place a thorough vetting process and
predeployment and in-theatre awareness training on
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as robust punitive measures for those convicted
in cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance of
providing adequate resources to peacekeeping missions
to carry out their mandate of the protection of civilians,
as it is a challenging mandate in the face dwindling
resources. To enable peacekeepers to fully shoulder that
responsibility, we must ensure the safety and security
of peacekeepers themselves so that we can boost their
morale to achieve enhanced performance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): Please
allow me to begin by commending your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene today’s open debate on this
critical issue. It is all the more meaningful as this year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, as well as the twentieth anniversary of
the Security Council’s inclusion of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an important item on
its agenda.
Since its adoption, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict has established itself as one of the
core issues on the Security Council’s agenda, and the
Council’s efforts to that end have yielded practical
actions and successes. However, despite 20 years of
progress, civilians still remain disproportionately the
victims of armed conflict. The Secretary-General
reports that, throughout 2018, tens of thousands of
civilians were killed, injured or maimed due to armed
conflicts around the world. The serious impacts of
conflict on civilians, including sexual and gender-based
violence, forced displacement and the unlawful denial
of humanitarian access, continue to persist. Against
that backdrop, I would like to stress the following
three points.
First, to protect civilians in armed conflict, we
need to focus on prevention. As the Secretary-General
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8534

has highlighted, prevention is the paradigm-shifting
approach that closes the gap between commitment and
reality. That supports the trend commonly underscored
by the reviews on peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture, and the women and peace and security
agenda. In that sense, the Republic of Korea has been
a champion of United Nations reform efforts so that
the United Nations system can effectively support
the peacebuilding priorities of Member States in
addressing the challenges on the ground in a holistic
manner. Prevention and sustaining peace were at the
heart of our efforts as Chair and Vice-Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2017 and 2018. We are
consistently increasing our financial contributions
to the Peacebuilding Fund, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the United
Nations Development Programme. That is geared
towards strengthening the international community’s
ongoing efforts in the promotion of prevention and
sustaining peace.

should be expressly produced for this purpose. Korean
peacekeepers have long been guided by the conviction
that genuine peace takes root in people’s minds, and
they have worked hard to win the hearts and minds of
local populations. Such efforts have helped them to
deliver on mandates while enhancing their own safety
and security. Many of today’s conflicts begin with
local disputes over land, resources or authority over a
district and then escalate, and community engagement
can help to address such local conflict dynamics. In
that regard, mission personnel should be encouraged
to improve their in-depth knowledge of host societies,
cultures and institutions, as well as their command of
local languages.

Secondly, we must elevate our level of effort in
protecting vulnerable groups of civilians such as
women and children. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/373) highlights the fact that conflict-related
sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts, often
as part of a broader strategy. In addition, armed conflict
continued to have a destabilizing impact on children
throughout the past year. One tragic example was in
Afghanistan, where a record high of 927 children were
killed due to conflict in 2018 alone.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

In June 2018 the Government of the Republic of
Korea launched the Action with Women and Peace
Initiative, with a particular focus on protecting women
from sexual violence in armed conflict. In Seoul in July
we will be proud to host the first international conference
under this important initiative to strengthen global
partnership in combating sexual violence in conflict.
Furthermore, as a member of the Steering Committee
of the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former
Child Soldiers, the Republic of Korea is stepping up
its efforts to support the reintegration of former child
soldiers, who are also victims of armed conflict. We
believe that a more comprehensive and well-funded
reintegration programme will help to fundamentally
break the vicious cycle of violence.
Thirdly, in order to improve the implementation
of protection-of-civilian mandates in peacekeeping
operations, peacekeepers should be better trained to
engage with local communities, and training guidelines

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the Republic of Korea’s commitment to
working with the United Nations and all Member States
with a view to improving the protection of vulnerable
populations in armed conflict.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Indonesia for convening today’s open debate.
As we all know, 2019 marks the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council’s decision to put the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on its agenda.
It is therefore an important time to review and reflect.
The rules for the conduct of hostilities in armed
conflicts are clearly codified in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols Additional. They
constitute the bedrock of international humanitarian
law governing the protection of civilians and victims of
armed conflict. Yet we would all agree that we continue
to witness the flouting of international humanitarian
law whenever and wherever hostilities break out, with
women often bearing the brunt of these atrocities. The
cardinal principles of distinction and discrimination
between civilians and combatants, military necessity
and proportionality continue to be violated, and warring
parties continue to operate with impunity. Whether one
believes it is plausible deniability or abuse, the grim
reality is that when the beast of conflict roars, legal
regimes fall silent.
The violation of international humanitarian law
triggers cycles of endless violence. It ostracizes and

19-1500437/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

divides. Today targeted attacks, sexual violence, forced
conscription, torture, indiscriminate killings and gross
human rights violations are used cynically as tools
of war in conflicts. In Indian-occupied Jammu and
Kashmir, the occupying forces continue to show utter
disregard for human life by systematically violating
the fundamental norms of international humanitarian
law and using civilians as human shields. Worse, the
perpetrators of such crimes are not only protected under
black laws but are honoured by the military command.
Reports of the use of torture as an instrument of
repression in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir have
been verified by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions and torture, and by prominent rights groups
in India. For example, a recent evidence-based report
once again draws attention to the culture of impunity
and lists multiple cases involving chilling methods
used to torture civilians.
Civilians, who should be the primary subject of
protection, have become the principal objectives of
attack. Last year alone, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the protection of civilians
(S/2019/373), more than 22,000 civilians were killed,
injured or maimed as a result of direct or indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflicts, while 1.4 million people
were made refugees and a further 5.2 million displaced
internally. I would quickly like to underscore five
specific points in that regard.
First, the protection of civilians is a systemwide undertaking, but host countries bear the
primary responsibility for protecting all civilians,
without discrimination.
Secondly, the protection of civilians, wherever
mandated by the Council, should be a priority for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As one
of the world’s leading troop contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping, Pakistan sends well-trained
and professional peacekeepers who have protected
civilians, provided them with much-needed medical
care and rebuilt communities.
Thirdly, violations are neither inevitable nor
insurmountable. They can be mitigated by consistent
use of the entire range of national and international
judicial and non-judicial means for promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law and
ensuring accountability.
Fourthly, a lack of the political will needed to fully
respect humanitarian law and other applicable rules
38/96

23/05/2019

is the primary impediment to protecting civilians in
armed conflict. Sustained pressure from those with
influence over parties to conflicts can obviously rectify
that wrong.
Fifth, the Security Council, as the primary body
tasked with maintaining international peace and
security, should focus on the root causes of emerging
and long-standing conflicts, including those in
Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir, and find just
solutions. Inaction by the Council in cases of foreign
aggression or occupation comes at a high human cost,
but unfortunately we continue to see legal and moral
values sacrificed at the altar of political expediency.
I would like to conclude by saying that we should
be mindful that the spirit of the Geneva Conventions
is about upholding human dignity even in the midst of
war, and it is as important today as it was 70 years ago.
After all, conventions are law, and the law must always
be upheld. The goal of the protection of civilians can
best be achieved by preventing the outbreak of armed
conflict in the first place. Anything short of that would
be to treat only the symptoms and not the disease.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Petkus (Lithuania): I would like to begin by
commending Indonesia, as President of the Security
Council for the month of May, for convening this
exceptionally important open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in
Conflict for their contributions to our discussion.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/373) devoted to the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions,
which form the universally accepted cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. Today, 70 years later,
it is still relevant that the Conventions’ guarantees are
provided for all protected persons, and particularly
civilians who do not take a direct part in hostilities, as
well as civilians living under occupation. I would like
to focus on the protection of populations in the hands
of an occupying Power. That is the general subject of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which requires the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

humanitarian treatment of civilians throughout a period
of occupation.
Lithuania, as a country once illegally annexed
and occupied by the Soviet Union, has a particular
understanding of the crimes and horrors that can be
committed without regard to the law of occupation.
One does not even have to refer to the pages of history
to find relevant case studies, as Georgia, Ukraine and
other countries are suffering from the same illegal
conduct in today’s world. We therefore call on all States
Members of the United Nations to uphold international
humanitarian law in occupied territories.
The duties of the occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention are numerous. The lack of ongoing
hostilities should not prevent us from making sure that
the rights of the civilian population are respected, as
the established protection guarantees are applicable for
the whole duration of occupation. One example stands
out in particular in that regard. This year, on 24 April,
a decree was issued to facilitate the acquisition of
Russian nationality by residents from various districts
of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk regions, notably
without taking up residency in Russia. That ongoing
mass extraterritorial naturalization — the so-called
passportization policy — by the Russian Federation in
the occupied territories of Ukraine is a clear violation
of the law of occupation and must be condemned
immediately by the Members of the United Nations.
The granting of nationality is a manifestation of the
conferring State’s sovereignty. Historical experience in
Georgia shows that it may be employed as a rhetorical
justification for the use of force.
Let me turn to peacekeeping. Last year, Lithuania
adhered to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians — a best-practices initiative for protecting
civilians in peacekeeping operations. Since then,
nearly 200 Lithuanian peacekeepers have been
comprehensively trained on their legal commitments in
respect of the civilian population on the ground. The
protection of civilians requires the commitment of the
members of the Security Council to find consensus
around the language and implications of peacekeeping
tasks, including by providing clarity on the expectations
of peacekeepers and the recognition of situations that
may be outside of their capacity to respond. We are
nevertheless convinced that the mandated protection
of civilians must become a task of every United
Nations peacekeeping mission. In that respect, the
commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping

S/PV. 8534

initiative also provide a foundation to tackle some of
those challenges and further strengthen the protective
role of peacekeepers.
The Security Council’s efforts to give practical
meaning to the protection of civilians agenda would
be fruitless without enhancing accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Irrespective of
the challenges faced by the International Criminal
Court, we must continue to support its mandate. We
call on States to adhere to the commitments established
by the Rome Statute and to cooperate fully with the
investigative bodies of the Court.
In addition, the Council has promoted and
encouraged support for accountability at the national
level, while emphasizing the responsibility of States
to investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators
of serious violations. The commissions, mechanisms
and other investigative bodies established by the
United Nations are also important tools that must
be encouraged in order to ensure the preservation of
evidence for future investigations. Enhancing and
ensuring respect for the law and accountability for its
violation are two of the greatest challenges we face in
strengthening the protection of civilians. Yet efforts to
ensure accountability remain insufficient and do not
meet the bar set by binding international treaties, as we
observe growing resistance from different States and
non-State actors in implementing their commitments to
that end.
The international community must collectively
turn this worrisome tide. We urge Security Council
members, the Secretary-General and all Member States
to take determined action to strengthen the protection
of civilians and stand up for the norms and laws that are
essential to safeguarding civilians in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate, as well as the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/373) and the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.

19-1500439/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Twenty years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999). As we celebrate that milestone,
we should recognize our progress in mainstreaming the
protection of civilians in the Security Council’s work.
At the same time, we should reflect on the reasons
for which the state of the protection of civilians today
is tragically similar to that of 20 years ago, as the
Secretary-General indicates in his report.
No one disputes the evolution of the Council’s
treatment of the protection of civilians agenda, from
providing broad guidance to increasingly detailed
and prescriptive language. About 95 per cent of
peacekeeping operations today include a protection
of civilians mandate, and considerations related to the
protection of civilians form part of sanctions regimes.
Yet this robust protection of civilians architecture has
not been sufficient to reduce the heavy civilian toll of
armed conflict. But that should not be seen as a failure
of our efforts. It should rather be understood as a stark
reminder of the human devastation that any armed
conflict causes as well as a clear call to prevent them.
Force should be used only as a last resort. We were
therefore pleased to see that the Indonesian presidency
had chosen prevention as one of the main topics for this
debate. We also agree with the assessment contained
in the concept note (S/2019/385, annex) that the
engagement of local and affected communities plays
an instrumental role in increasing national capacity to
prevent conflict escalation. Local ownership is linked
to a broad understanding of conflict prevention. It
ranges from addressing exclusion, intolerance and other
grievances at the root of conflict, to placing genuine
emphasis on the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Understanding local concerns and sensitivities helps to
build trust between affected communities and United
Nations peacekeepers, thereby contributing to their
preventive work in protecting civilians. Finally, when
everything else fails and civilians are not spared, local
community engagement is essential in promoting
accountability and fighting impunity.
This year we are also celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. We are
appalled to see that, in many instances, civilian deaths
do not represent minor casualties of military action.
Brazil strongly condemns the blatant violations of
international humanitarian law. When violations
occur, they must be investigated impartially and their
perpetrators must be held accountable. In that regard,
Brazil reiterates the central role of the International
40/96

23/05/2019

Criminal Court, and remains a steadfast supporter of
the universality of the Rome Statute.
In order to effectively protect civilians, peacekeeping
operations must have realistic mandates with feasible
tasks from military, political and legal perspectives.
They must also be provided with adequate capabilities
and resources. In addition, we need to acknowledge the
proven benefits that an increased presence of women in
peacekeeping brings to areas including, but not limited
to, the protection of civilians, especially in the light of
the continued use of conflict-related sexual violence,
often as part of a broader strategy. Brazil welcomes
the recent adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) and
encourages further related efforts by the Council as we
approach the twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Finally, protection mandates must also factor in the
specifics of each situation. Brazil understands the need
for greater consistency on the protection of civilians
agenda as a call for unbiased and responsible action,
and not as a defence of one-size-fits-all approaches.
Let me express our hope that, 20 years from now,
we will be witnesses to a better scenario — one in
which respect for international humanitarian law will
have become the norm and, most importantly, one in
which we will have achieved the first objective of the
Organization, which is to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. For that, we need to do more in
preventing armed conflict, including through the active
engagement of local and affected communities in the
implementation of protection of civilian measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/373) and Mr. Mauer and Mr. Borello for
their briefings.
Pursuant to the excellent concept note (S/2019/385,
annex) submitted by the Indonesian presidency, this
open debate takes place in the context of a number
of important anniversaries this year, as has already
been mentioned in many of today’s statements, with
the aim of reflecting on the work carried out for the
protection of civilians. In that regard, in the case of
Spain, I should like to mention the annual retreat on
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international humanitarian law, which the Spanish
Mission organizes with the support of the delegation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
to which we invite members of the Security Council,
other Member States, agencies, programmes and the
Secretariat of the Organization, and representatives of
civil society and the academic world.
At this year’s retreat, held in March, the focus
was on the protection provided for under international
humanitarian law to civilian infrastructure, especially
hospitals and schools, given that the two priority
issues for Spain on this agenda are the protection of
health care in conflict and the protection of access to
education. The protection of all health and humanitarian
personnel dedicated exclusively to medical missions is
a very clear, direct obligation under international law,
as recalled and demanded in resolution 2286 (2016), of
which Spain was a co-penholder and which was adopted
by the Security Council during the open debate in May
2016 (see S/PV.7685).
However, according to the latest Safeguarding
Health in Conflict Coalition report, in 2018 there
were at least 973 attacks in 23 countries, representing
an increase of 38 per cent from 2017. As a result of
those attacks, at least 167 health workers died and 710
were injured. Here, I should like to acknowledge their
dedication and sacrifice. Those 167 deaths should not
have happened and must not go unpunished. In the light
of those attacks, we wish to emphasize that resolution
2286 (2016) remains fully applicable. Spain is working
for its full development because we believe that part of
its content has yet to be put into practice, particularly
with regard to the investigation and fact-finding
mechanisms. Its development would allow us to make
progress in verifying the correctness of the facts and
in ensuring both political and criminal accountability
and prevention.
Given the data before us, it cannot be denied
that there is a real and concrete need for a permanent
instrument responsible for clarifying data collection
mechanisms; analysing that data; identifying trends,
best practices and lessons; identifying ways to repair
the damages caused, restore services and recover
humanitarian space; as well as preparing reports
and, where appropriate, investigating allegations of
violations of the obligations to protect health care
in conflict.

S/PV. 8534

Next Tuesday and Wednesday, 28 and 29 May,
Spain will host the third International Conference on
Safe Schools, in Palma de Mallorca, where we expect
to see a broad participation of representatives from the
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Education Ministries of
the 86 countries that endorsed the 2015 Safe Schools
Declaration, as well as other countries that, without
having yet done so, are also committed to protecting
access to education.
Our goal is for the Conference to serve as an impetus
for new progress, and we therefore hope that all States
will participate. Based on the excellent foundations laid
down at the two previous Conferences — Oslo in 2015
and Buenos Aires in 2017 — the Conference in Palma de
Mallorca will serve as an exchange forum, particularly
on cooperation opportunities for the implementation
of the Safe Schools Declaration and Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict, as well as a forum for a focused
discussion on: first, the gender-based impact of attacks
against access to education; secondly, the military and
militarized use of educational centres; and thirdly, the
development of mechanisms to investigate and follow
up on attacks against access to education.
Based on what I have said, it is clear that Spain
is working for concrete mechanisms and actions to
strengthen the protection of civilians, particularly
in relation to health care in conflict and access to
education, as I have detailed. We are also working on
other issues, such as, first, fostering knowledge on the
situation of civilian interpreters and translators who
work in a context of conflict, which is why the Spanish
Mission is collaborating with the non-governmental
organization Red T; secondly, on situations of violence
below the threshold of armed conflict, which have
similar consequences for civilians; and thirdly, on
the protection of civilians caught up in low-visibility
conflicts or crises, especially those related to the media
and donor decisions.
In December this year, the thirty-third International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent will be
held under the theme “The power of humanity”. Spain
is currently preparing for that event, drawing up the
commitments that it will assume, which will follow
the provisions I have outlined: respect for and the full
implementation of international humanitarian law and
promoting the universality and integrity of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and its work.
We call on States that are attending the Conference to

19-1500441/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

do so in a constructive spirit, which will allow us to
continue to make progress on those issues.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians is a
universal, legal and moral obligation that derives from
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and, in equal measure,
from the historical trauma of the terrible wars of the
twentieth century. As the Secretary-General recalls
in the report underpinning today’s debate, since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) the protection of
civilians has become one of the central issues on the
Security Council’s agenda, permeating all its work.
However, the situation today regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is very similar to that
of 20 years ago. The majority of the victims of armed
conflict remain civilians. In order to change that, the
international community must act urgently to strengthen
and guarantee respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, particularly in
the conduct of hostilities, in order to effectively protect
civilians in situations of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Marani (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Twenty years after the incorporation of this agenda
item into our programme of work, it is crucial that the
Security Council remain committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by promoting international
law, particularly humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, as well as the fight against impunity.
In the context of the seventieth anniversary of the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949, it is imperative to
recall the obligations arising from those instruments,
including the Protocols Additional of 1977, the
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and customary
international law.
Argentina believes it essential that the protection
of civilians during peacekeeping operations take
place within a framework of respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is necessary to strengthen protection activities
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and to
ensure that they have the resources necessary for
their implementation. The use of force in response to
threats of physical violence against civilians must also
be authorized in accordance with the applicable legal
obligations, the mandate established by the Council
and the specific rules of confrontation and engagement
of each mission. We believe that unarmed strategies
42/96

23/05/2019

to protect civilians in peacekeeping operations are
valuable instruments that can help promote the pursuit
of peaceful solutions.
The Republic of Argentina also supports the
vision centred on prevention and early warning for the
mandates promoted by the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians, as well as the connection with
the second pillar of the responsibility to protect — a
concept that we have helped to consolidate. We believe
that the protection of civilians in peace missions
requires the cooperation of their military, police and
civilian components. For that reason, the peacekeeping
forces deployed by Argentina receive training on
human rights, gender and humanitarian issues. We also
have an active policy of international cooperation on
prevention, and we believe it is essential to advance the
mainstreaming of the women and peace and security
agenda across the entire United Nations system.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, the parties
to a conflict must make every effort to guarantee
effective and timely access to humanitarian assistance,
including shipments and materials, which enjoys special
protection under international humanitarian law.
In 2018, Argentina signed the Santiago de Chile
communiqué supporting the process designed to lead
to the negotiation and adoption of an international
political declaration on the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, which results in deaths, injuries and
trauma to civilians, destroys essential infrastructure,
creates involuntary displacement and leaves behind
explosive remnants that represent a long-term threat.
Argentina therefore welcomes the Secretary-General’s
approach to tackling this threat in his Agenda
for Disarmament.
In recognizing that young people constitute a large
proportion of the civilians affected by armed conflicts
and that the interruption of access to education and
economic opportunities has decisive consequences
for peace, Argentina reiterates its call to States that
have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. In that regard, next week in Palma de
Mallorca we wish Spain a successful third International
Conference on Safe Schools, in which we will be proud
to participate. The Council must continue to consider
specific situations, as it has done in the case of women,
children, journalists and medical personnel. We want
to emphasize the importance of the role of the system
for the protection of children in armed conflicts,
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

which must receive the support it needs to fulfil its
mandate. We also support the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
Argentina reaffirms the effective and preventive
effect of accountability mechanisms. In that regard, I
would like to highlight the work of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission and the
central role of the International Criminal Court. We
want to point out that in accordance with its Rome
Statute, the Court has jurisdiction over many attacks
on civilian populations. Lastly, it is worrying that some
measures in the fight against terrorism continue to
affect humanitarian activities. We reiterate the General
Assembly’s call to States to ensure that legislation
and measures against terrorism do not impede
such activities.
The existing normative framework on the protection
of civilians must be translated into concrete results on
the ground. We hope that the Council will redouble its
efforts to find the best ways to make that happen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to be
speaking on behalf of the members of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict — Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Côte d’Ivoire, France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. The Group of Friends thanks the
Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate, and we also thank
today’s briefers for their statements.
This year we are celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
which have been universally ratified and are the most
important treaties governing the protection of victims
of armed conflict. This year also marks the twentieth
anniversary of seminal developments in the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which the Council has recalled today and which
established the protection of civilians as a key aspect of
the maintenance of peace and security.
The Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict welcomes the active role played by

S/PV. 8534

the Council in that process. That has been reflected,
for instance, in landmark resolutions on the protection
of civilians and peacekeeping mandates, the inclusion
of the protection of civilians in situation-specific
resolutions, and the use of other Council tools to
support the implementation of the protection-ofcivilians agenda in concrete ways. The Group of Friends
urges the Council to build on that progress by being
systematic, comprehensive and consistent, both within
and across situations, in prioritizing the protection of
civilians in its deliberations and decisions, including by
taking timely decisions aimed at preventing and ending
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
while taking into account the importance of refraining
from causing further harm to civilian populations. The
Council must maintain a comprehensive approach to
the protection of all civilians, which includes focusing
on all persons in vulnerable situations impartially.
A gender-based approach is also a key component of
effective protection.
It is now more necessary than ever to step up our
efforts, in view of the acute challenges highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/373).
Indiscriminate attacks occur with appalling frequency
in many contemporary conflicts. The trend in the
urbanization of armed conflicts continues to develop,
with its particularly severe impact on civilians and
civilian facilities, especially due to the indiscriminate
use of weapons in densely populated areas. Conflictrelated sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts,
often as part of a broader strategy. Constraints on
humanitarian access are increasing. All too often, the
wounded and sick, as well as medical and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, are
intentionally attacked, along with their facilities. That
is why we must redouble our efforts to implement
resolution 2286 (2016), taking note in that regard of the
Secretary-General’s recommendations as well as the
political declaration of 31 October 2017.
Children often suffer the most from the devastating
effects of conflicts, and that is why we should
condemn unlawful attacks on schools in the strongest
terms, taking note in that regard of the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Paris Principles on the recruitment
of children. Armed conflict has a disproportionate
impact on persons with disabilities. Journalists and
media workers are also particularly targeted and should
be protected, in line with resolutions 1738 (2006) and
2222 (2015). The starvation of civilian populations is

19-1500443/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

being increasingly used as a method of warfare, which
is a violation of international humanitarian law, as
reiterated in resolution 2417 (2018). In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing discussions among States parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court regarding a proposal to amend the current legal
accountability framework.
Negative trends and the heavy civilian toll of today’s
conflicts should not prevent us from highlighting
progress and identifying avenues for action. Let us
stress the benefits of compliance with norms and
positive examples. Let us build an ambitious protection
agenda for the 20 years to come and beyond. It is in that
spirit that the Group of Friends would like to stress the
following four priorities.
First, enhancing respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
is absolutely crucial. We are all obliged to respect
and ensure respect for international humanitarian
law under the Geneva Conventions. Armed conflicts
are regulated by specific rules, which include those
governing the conduct of hostilities, protecting the
wounded and sick, as well as civilians, and providing for
humanitarian access. In view of the ongoing widespread
violations, we call on Member States to uphold their
responsibilities and urge all States that have not already
done so to consider ratifying the 1977 Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions. The Security
Council must systematically demand that Member
States, as well as parties to armed conflict, respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law in
all circumstances, including allowing and facilitating
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need. We
also recall the possibility for States to make use of the
good offices of the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission to facilitate the restoration of an
attitude of respect for international humanitarian law.
Secondly and consequently, ensuring accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law is
of paramount importance to demonstrate to actual
or potential perpetrators that violations do not go
unpunished and to deliver justice to victims. We welcome
national-level investigations and prosecutions, and call
on the Council to promote and encourage support for
accountability at this level. In line with the principle
of complementarity to national jurisdictions, when
such national systems are unable or unwilling to act,
accountability should be ensured through international
investigative and judicial mechanisms.
44/96

23/05/2019

In such contexts, the Council should, in a
non-selective manner, use more systematically the
tools at its disposal to establish facts and promote
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law, as well as violations and abuses
of human rights law amounting to crimes under
international law, including by making use of existing
fact-finding bodies or establishing ad hoc commissions
of inquiry and, when appropriate, ensuring referrals to
the International Criminal Court. We call on all States
to consider ratifying the Rome Statute and to fully
cooperate with the Court.
Thirdly, the Security Council must ensure that
relevant peacekeeping operations have a clear mandate
and adequate support, including training and equipment,
to carry out key protection of civilians activities. The
Council should ensure that the anchoring of protection
of civilians mandates in relevant peacekeeping
operations forms an integral part of comprehensive
peace processes, in coordination with the Secretariat,
troop- and police-contributing countries and the host
State. It should also systematically call for performance
and accountability in the implementation of protection
of civilians mandates, consistent with resolution 2436
(2018), and encourage engagement with local and
affected communities.
The recommendations of the 2018 report (A/72/19)
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative provide a foundation to tackle some of the
challenges related to the implementation of protection
of civilians mandates. As we approach the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we recall the
proven benefits that an increased presence of women in
peacekeeping brings to areas including, but of course
not limited to, the protection of civilians.
Fourthly and finally, we call on States to ensure
that counter-terrorism legislation and measures do not
impede impartial humanitarian and medical activities
or engagement with all relevant actors, as foreseen by
international humanitarian law. We welcome, in that
regard, the emphasis put on this issue in resolution
2462 (2019) and urge the Security Council to follow up
consistently on its demand that all measures taken by
States to counter terrorism comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law, international human rights law
and international refugee law. We support the call of
the Secretary-General for the systematic inclusion of
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

safeguards for impartial humanitarian activities in a
manner consistent with international humanitarian law
when deciding on counter-terrorism measures.
Seventy years on, the Geneva Conventions
continue to show what is possible when States have
the courage to uphold norms and take responsible
action. Twenty years on, the protection agenda is as
relevant and pressing as ever. More consistency is
needed in the global effort to enhance the protection
of civilians and the implementation of the law and
political commitments, both on the part of Member
States and parties to conflicts and at the level of the
Security Council. There is a need for ongoing and
sustained Member State engagement and dialogue that
go beyond the yearly open debate on the protection
of civilians. We must build on the practical measures
and best practices that we are discussing today. The
Group of Friends is committed to doing its part and to
contributing to global-level advocacy to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I thank you the Indonesia
presidency for convening today’s ministerial-level open
debate on a very timely and critically important topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Today’s debate marks the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), adding
the protection of civilians as an item on the Security
Council’s agenda. After 20 years of efforts to increase
the level of protection, it is highly concerning to read
the assessment in the Secretary-General’s annual
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2019/373) that, despite some progress, increased
awareness and strengthened framework on this topic,
the state of the protection of civilians today is tragically
similar to that of 20 years ago. In that light, we need to
ask ourselves if there is anything that the international
community can do differently to ensure more tangible
results on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
From the Estonian side, we would like to highlight
three areas where further progress needs to be made.
First, I would like to emphasize the paramount
importance of conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
More needs to be done in addressing the root causes of
conflict, finding avenues to promote political dialogue

S/PV. 8534

and creating truly inclusive societies. That entails
addressing the root causes of conflict in a holistic
manner and paying attention to possible shortcomings
in good governance, the rule of law and sustainable
development as possible contributors to tensions in
societies. It is important to repeat that it is the primary
responsibility of States to ensure the protection of
their people.
Secondly, let me emphasize the importance of
accountability. Perpetrators must be brought to justice
and States must ensure that those responsible do not
operate with impunity. In that regard, let me also
underline the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in cases where investigations or prosecutions at
the national level are not possible. We encourage States
to cooperate with the ICC and the Security Council to
refer matters to the ICC. In cases already referred to the
ICC, the further support of the Security Council is of
paramount importance. In general, greater political and
financial investment is needed to ensure more tangible
results in the fight against impunity.
Thirdly, in terms of preparing peacekeepers and
other United Nations staff for deployment in missions,
education and training in international humanitarian
law have an important role to play. Such education
clearly supports efforts to halt and prevent acts of
violence, attacks and threats against the wounded and
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel, as
well as medical facilities. We see the value in references
to mission-specific legal issues prior to deployment,
and believe that they could lead to better application
of international law, complement the overall training
procedure of troops and raise awareness.
For our part, in Estonia we have ratified the
main instruments of international humanitarian law
with regard to the protection of civilians and have
introduced the necessary domestic regulations for
their enforcement. Every measure has been taken
to ensure that our military personnel do not violate
international law when carrying out their duties and
that they are trained to comply with the obligations
to protect civilians, as agreed by the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians and stated in the
Declaration of Shared Commitments of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Estonia stands ready to work with all its partners to
enhance capacities and work on solutions for conflict
prevention and the protection of civilians, especially

19-1500445/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

women and children, who often have to endure
disproportionate hardship due to armed conflict. That
is also something that we are prioritizing in our effort
to become an elected non-permanent member of the
Security Council in 2020-2021.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf
of the 120 States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
I would ask you, Mr. President, to extend our
greetings to Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia,
a fellow country of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The hardships suffered by innocent civilians
trapped in armed conflict tend to be compounded by
deliberate, indiscriminate and, in some cases, systematic
attacks that clearly violate the norms of international
humanitarian law. Peacekeeping operations are of
key importance to the protection of civilians, in cases
where such a mandate exists, and can support national
efforts, as the principle responsibility rests with the
host country. That protection, however, should not be
used as a pretext for United Nations military intervention
in conflicts. To be effective, protection-of-civilians
mandates must be clear, achievable and supported by
sufficient financial, human and equipment resources.
Without those conditions, the ability of operations to
protect civilians is unrealistic.
The protection of civilians is one of the core issues
on the agenda of the Security Council, as a result of
the challenges faced by civilians in countries affected
by conflict, which range from threats or attacks
against them to forced displacement, food insecurity
and the need for humanitarian assistance. For that
reason, the Council must ensure that the norms of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, are upheld
and respected. The Movement calls on all parties
to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
principles of precautions in attack, proportionality
and distinction, by prohibiting the targeting of civilian
populations and property during conflicts. The parties
to any conflict are obliged to ensure that civilian
facilities, schools, hospitals, means of transportation
46/96

23/05/2019

and emergency aid, as well as other vital infrastructure,
are generally protected against dangers arising from
military operations.
We stress that humanitarian agencies and their
personnel must respect international humanitarian
law and the laws of the countries where they do
their work, along with the Guiding Principles of
Humanitarian Assistance, as set forth in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 46/182, among which
are humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as well as
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of the host countries and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, national unity and independence
of States.
We would like to point out that 88 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel deployed in the field come
from non-aligned countries and are implementing
protection-of-civilians mandates. Their success
depends on whether personnel are trained to operate
under the highest standards at all times. Every measure
must therefore be taken to ensure their safety. Basing
efforts on the tripartite coordination between the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, much more can be done
to involve local communities and those affected by
conflict in designing and implementing measures to
ensure the protection of civilians.
Lastly, the 120 States members of the Non-Aligned
Movement categorically condemn all acts of violence,
attacks and threats against civilian populations, which
in certain instances may amount to war crimes. They
also stress the importance of ensuring that those
responsible are held accountable before the law, in order
to break cycles of impunity and send a clear and united
message of zero tolerance for such despicable acts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, and the Indonesian
presidency for convening this open debate. We also
welcome the briefings, and take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2019/373).
As we are all aware, this debate is taking place in the
context of the seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva
Conventions, which form the cornerstone of international
humanitarian law, and the twentieth anniversary
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of resolution 1265 (1999), which incorporated this
important issue into the Security Council’s debates for
the first time. El Salvador emphasizes the relevance of
the spirit of that resolution and other related resolutions,
which, in recognition of the international community’s
deep concern about the failure of guarantees in times
of crisis, guide us in ensuring that international human
rights and humanitarian law are upheld and respected,
especially with regard to civilian populations in times
of armed conflict.
My country remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian damage resulting from hostilities in
populated areas. Despite all the efforts to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians is still in jeopardy. It is civilians who constitute
the majority of casualties in conflict situations and their
aftermath, and it is civilian children, women and men
who continue to suffer from forced displacement and
starvation as methods of war, who are denied access
to humanitarian aid and endure sexual and genderbased violence. At the same time, we continue to see
attacks on humanitarian personnel, medical facilities,
civil infrastructure and the assets and livelihoods of
civilian populations. As we all know, international
humanitarian law lacks the instruments necessary to
make its provisions binding in practice. Ultimately,
the Security Council must rise to the challenge, and all
its members, permanent or not, should set an example
through their respect for international humanitarian
law. Against that backdrop, we want to highlight the
following points.
Given the unfortunate selectivity that we see in the
practice of respecting international humanitarian law,
as evidenced by intensifying hostilities and increasing
complaints of violations with serious, credible and
documented evidence, there is an urgent need for
more effective and robust approaches through national
policies on the protection of civilians in all Member
States, which should establish harm-mitigation teams
and develop risk and impact assessments for all actions
in populated areas, and incorporate the principles of
international law into all defence policies.
One of the greatest failures in that regard is
accountability. It is therefore important to enhance
the capacities of judicial institutions, both nationally
and internationally, and provide them with adequate
resources. Accountability should respond to the
need to offer reparations to survivors of violations of
international humanitarian law, and Council members

S/PV. 8534

have an obligation to lead the way, collectively
and individually.
There is overwhelming evidence that the use
of weapons can have a long-term impact on the
recovery and development of affected communities.
It is therefore essential to identify the obvious links
between violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and the export and indiscriminate
use of weapons. Without compromising their right to
ensure their national defence, States should refrain
from exporting conventional arms and ammunition
to places where they are likely to be used to commit
or facilitate serious violations of international
humanitarian law. In other words, the implementation
of international humanitarian law goes hand in hand
with respect for and the universalization of the Arms
Trade Treaty, the Ottawa Convention, the Convention
on Cluster Munitions, the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons and all its Protocols, the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
In that regard, we welcome the high priority that
the Secretary-General accords the issue of explosive
weapons in populated areas in his new Agenda for
Disarmament, and we are grateful for his call for
all States to support the development of measures to
address the humanitarian impact of such weapons. We
firmly believe that that can be achieved with adequate
political will and through the development of shared
operational policies and standards and the exchange of
good practices. We hope that the Security Council will
take the initiative to draft a political declaration in those
terms so as to progress from words to concrete action.
In conclusion, we want to acknowledge the
praiseworthy efforts of humanitarian workers, including
medical personnel, in areas of conflict. We condemn
all attacks on them, which are unacceptable and may
constitute war crimes. We also want to acknowledge
the efforts of civil society in empowering and giving a
voice to those affected by armed violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in French):
I would like to commend you for convening this open
debate, Mr. President.
Portugal attaches particular importance to the
protection of civilians and aligns itself with the

19-1500447/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

statement to be delivered shortly by the observer of
the European Union. We would also like to make some
additional remarks in our national capacity.
The celebration of the seventieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions and the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), on the
protection of civilians, reminds us of the urgent need
to strengthen the protection of populations affected by
armed conflict, in strict compliance with international
humanitarian law. In that regard, Portugal subscribes
to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
which provide a committed and guiding framework for
our collective action, and we encourage other Member
States to accede to them.
Our first priority should be the application and
execution of existing directives and commitments. The
Security Council should enhance its activities for the
protection of civilians. As a member of the Group of
Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict,
we call on the Security Council to systematically
and consistently demand that Member States and
parties to armed conflicts fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law. In that regard,
it is deplorable that starvation is increasingly being
used as a weapon of war, in violation of international
humanitarian law. We therefore welcome the ongoing
debate among the States parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court on altering the
current legal framework with regard to accountability,
as proposed by Switzerland.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
stresses the importance of prevention. As we are
aware, violence against civilians is often a predictor of
conflict. It is therefore all the more important for the
United Nations and Member States to further invest in
early-warning and early-action mechanisms to ensure
the protection of civilians. I would also like to express
particular support for the work of Adama Dieng, the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, and
Karen Smith, the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect.
Portugal’s commitment to the principles of the
protection of civilians can be seen in its participation
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
in which the Portuguese contingent plays a particularly
active role in protecting the population. Portugal ensures
48/96

23/05/2019

that all its forces and national divisions are trained in
international humanitarian law and human rights so
that they can fully execute their tasks, including the
protection of civilians, when that is at stake.
Since protracted conflicts and extreme violence
usually result in mass displacement, it is also essential
to ensure the protection of internally displaced
persons and refugees, without neglecting the issue of
missing persons.
In conclusion, and looking to the future, we
must build on the successes of the past 20 years and
strengthen our commitment to making the protection of
civilians a priority of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I would first like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Indonesia’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to thank you for organizing this
important debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We also want to thank the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their very informative briefings
this morning. As a top troop- and police-contributing
country (TCC/PCC), Rwanda considers this topic
to be critically important to our collective effort to
support the implementation of the Security Council’s
mandates on the protection of civilians. I assure you,
Mr. President, of our delegation’s full commitment to
this important topic.
Today’s open debate comes at a significant time,
as we mark the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict as an
item on the Security Council’s agenda. The protection
of civilians remains an important element in the
Council’s mandates and is included in the mandates
of eight of 14 peacekeeping missions. This is therefore
a fitting moment for us to reflect on and recommit to
the protection of civilian children, women and men in
every conflict. As the Secretary-General’s 2018 report
on this subject (S/2018/462) states, in the absence of any
possibility of preventing armed conflict, strengthening
the protection of civilians becomes an imperative.
Saving the lives of innocent civilians should be a
primary obligation of the peacekeeping missions that
have protection-of-civilian mandates.
While we are also marking the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, we must
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

reckon with the fact that they have not been able to
provide the desired protection to civilians in armed
conflict, as armed groups have consistently violated
the Conventions and their Protocols Additional. In that
context, the role that troops and police have in enhancing
the physical protection of civilian populations, while
also contributing to a secure environment conducive
to the provision of humanitarian assistance and to
ensuring political settlements, has become of central
importance for all peacekeeping missions.
In May 2015, exactly seven years ago, the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians were adopted
by a group of Member States, including several TCCs
and PCCs. The Principles are practical and specific
guidelines for all peacekeeping stakeholders on the
effective and efficient delivery of the protection of
civilians. They specifically address the performance,
accountability and capabilities required for the
effective protection of civilians. Having said that,
we acknowledge that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies with host nations. However,
we cannot close our eyes to the limited capabilities
of nations hosting United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The role of United Nations peacekeeping
in the protection of civilians should therefore aim to
bridge the capability gap in the effective protection of
civilians, while building the capacity of host countries
and facilitating solutions to conflicts.
Peacekeeping’s ability to deliver the protection
of civilians effectively calls for clear mandates. The
protection of civilians in all peacekeeping missions
is also greatly influenced by the quality of missions’
command and leadership as well as of their training and
appropriate equipment. Between 2013 and 2018, more
peacekeepers were killed in acts of armed violence
than in any other period in the past 70 years of the
United Nations. That fact vividly reflects the threats
that peacekeepers are facing today. It also suggests the
importance of well-designed training, equipment and
sophisticated situational-awareness mechanisms that
are tailored to specific mission challenges and threats.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of
women at all levels of peacekeeping. The evidence
shows that having women in meaningful roles increases
the effectiveness of peacekeeping and improves
missions’ ability to protect civilians. Rwanda is proud
to be a top contributor of female police to peacekeeping
missions. Recruiting women in peacekeeping helps to
reduce the chances of conflict and of confrontations in

S/PV. 8534

communities. It provides a greater sense of security to
local populations, including women and children. In that
regard, we are giving practical support to the ambition
of the United Nations to increase the percentage of
deployed female peacekeepers.
In conclusion, we believe that we now fully
appreciate the central role and value of peacekeeping
missions with protection-of-civilians mandates.
We know what is at stake when we fall short of our
expectations and responsibilities and what it will take
to make peacekeeping effective now and in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I would like to thank
Indonesia for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the protection of civilians agenda.
Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians and
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like,
in all brevity, to highlight three points.
First, I would like to make the important connection
between the twentieth anniversary of the protection of
civilians agenda this year and the twentieth anniversary
of the women and peace and security agenda next year.
Both of these issues highlight the crucial importance of
placing human security at the centre of our collective
actions. Only by identifying and addressing actions
that endanger the security of every individual, as well
as involving all of society, can we take steps towards
sustainable peace. Among many worrisome current
trends, we continue to see unlawful attacks and threat
of attacks against educational institutions. Austria is a
proud supporter of the Safe Schools Declaration, and we
will participate in the third International Conference on
Safe Schools. We hope that, on that occasion, we will
be able to welcome many more States as supporters of
the Declaration.
Secondly, as in previous years, we thank the
Secretary-General for his excellent report (S/2019/373).
We note with particular concern that the report continues
to highlight the grave consequences of urban warfare,
including from the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. For that reason, Austria will host an
international conference on protecting civilians in

19-1500449/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

urban warfare, which will take place on 1 and 2 October
in Vienna. We look forward to broad participation
at the conference and hope that it will contribute to
raising awareness and strengthening the debate centred
on finding concrete solutions. We will also host a side
event on the margins of today’s open debate tomorrow,
Friday, 24 May, on protecting civilians from the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas, which will take
place in Conference Room D.
Thirdly, as the protection of civilians has become
an integral part of many United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we need to make sure that peacekeepers are
well-prepared to fulfil their protection of civilians
mandates, including through adequate training to
implement those mandates. In that light, Austria offers
two United Nations-certified courses annually aimed at
creating better awareness of the protection of civilians
at the operational level. The recent renewal of the
certification of those courses for another four years
serves to underline their continuous importance and
high quality.
Lastly, let me repeat our call for full compliance
with international humanitarian law. Austria continues
to be a strong supporter of strengthening compliance
with international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
remain steadfast in our support for the International
Criminal Court as a central means of combating
impunity for atrocity crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Viet Nam later this evening on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Let me also offer our thanks to Indonesia for
the comprehensive concept note prepared for this
open debate (S/2019/385, annex). We also thank the
Secretary-General for his substantive report released
on 7 May (S/2019/373) and his perceptive briefing
today. Allow me to highlight a few elements drawn
from our own experience that we feel are also relevant
to the discussion today.
First, it is essential to build and sustain a
protective environment for civilians and to reduce
threats to sustainable peace and development. The
50/96

23/05/2019

most effective way to protect civilians is through a
long-term process and a comprehensive approach that
covers the periods before, during and after a conflict.
In our view, the concept of sustaining peace urges us
to view peacebuilding more holistically, as part of a
peace continuum that spans from conflict prevention
and resolution to laying the foundation for sustainable
peace and development.
Secondly, stronger partnerships are key to
strengthening protection of civilian mandates. Member
States and the United Nations must work closely to
ensure that all principles and elements related to the
protection of civilians are implemented by all those
involved in such missions. We also have to explore
innovative practical tools and approaches to enhance
the implementation of protection mandates. This
requires an integrated approach among military,
police and civilian components, in coordination with
national authorities, local communities and relevant
humanitarian organizations.
Thirdly, the issue of training is an area that
Thailand has always viewed with a discerning eye. All
peacekeepers have to be properly prepared, trained and
equipped to meet the challenges they will face in the
field. It must be underlined time and again that intensive
predeployment and periodic in-mission training, both on
operational tasks and other protection-related elements,
is vital. As an active troop- and police-contributing
country, Thai peacekeepers are trained as a standard
procedure to assist the local population in their efforts
to prevent the relapse of armed conflict and ensure
sustainable development. Thailand continues to support
the delivery of consistent and coherent training, in
collaboration with relevant agencies, for all mandated
tasks, to our peacekeeping personnel. Those elements
include international law, gender-based issues, the
protection of civilians, child protection, conflict-related
sexual violence and cultural sensitivity.
We recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. We also have our sights set
on becoming a regional centre of excellence on the issue
of children and armed conflict, and have been working
closely with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. There is more we can and want to do.
But allow me to conclude with a parting thought: in
Thailand’s view, durable peace is not tenable if civilians
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

lack security and are not safe. We need to continue to
evolve our discussions on enhancing and reinvigorating
the protection of civilians agenda in order to meet the
new challenges of protecting civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Motufaga (Fiji): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the important topic of protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
states that:
“We the peoples of the United Nations, determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of ware ... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person ...”
Therefore people, and the protection of people all over
the world, irrespective of creed, ethnicity or affiliation,
are at the heart of the United Nations and of the Council.
A ceremony was held in the General Assembly
Hall last month to commemorate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda, which is a stark and painful reminder of
the failure to protect civilians in armed conflict. This
year, as mentioned by previous speakers, it will be 20
years since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1265 (1999), which placed the protection of civilians
in armed conflict on the Council’s agenda. However,
statistics show that civilians continue to be hugely
and disproportionately as victims of conflicts. That
was also reflected in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/373).
As we meet today in this Chamber, thousands and
thousands of civilians around the world are suffering
as a result of conflicts. They have suffered directly
from deliberate and indiscriminate attacks, loss of
livelihoods, being forced to flee their homes and sexual
abuse, and they have been denied access to humanitarian
aid and proper medical care. In some cases, these
acts have done by those who are also responsible for
their protection.
Fiji supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to
reform and strengthen the Security Council and the
peacebuilding architecture through peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The United Nations and its Security

S/PV. 8534

Council remain the most uniquely placed multilateral
entities for resolving conflicts and building and
sustaining peace in this integrated world. We need to
remind ourselves of the enormous responsibility that
the Charter of the United Nations places on the Council
to maintain international peace and security.
The Council has the platform to minimize the effect
of conflicts, end impunity and ensure accountability
for genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law and related
conventions. The past 70 years have shown that, when
the Council agrees, the chances of conflicts occurring
are reduced and thousands of lives are saved. But when
the Council fails to agree, conflicts are prolonged and
civilians ultimately become the victims.
Respect for international conventions, awareness
and accountability should be the foundation for
protecting civilians in armed conflicts. Member States
and others should be constantly made aware of their
obligations under international conventions. Member
States should always respect their obligations under
international conventions relating to the protection of
civilians during armed conflict. Ultimately, Member
States are responsible for protecting their civilian
populations, irrespective of affiliation, ethnicity and
creed. The Council and the international community
should compel Member States, groups and individuals
to be accountable for their actions. We must send
a message that violations of these international
conventions will not be condoned.
We urge the Council to use all tools at its disposal
to protect civilians in armed conflicts. In the past,
the United Nations and the Council have established
mechanisms to address violations in the form of
tribunals, sanctions, embargoes, commissions of inquiry
and investigations. The Council should not be selective
in its actions. All major violations of international
conventions relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts should be addressed equally by the
Council. The Council’s response should equally fit the
act. If no drastic action is taken, civilians will continue
to be victims of conflict at a disproportionate level.
Fiji welcomes the United Nations Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which aims to strengthen
the role of peacekeepers in protecting civilians in
armed conflicts. Peacekeepers are being asked to do
more and more. To address this huge challenge, high

19-1500451/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

performance and standards, inter alia, are expected
from peacekeepers.
United Nations peacekeepers protect United
Nations and international staff involved in development
and humanitarian work. They keep armed groups away
from communities. They operate in communities,
giving them comfort and protection. They protect
humanitarian missions and allow medicine, food and
warmth to reach communities and families, especially
women and girls. Crucially, peacekeeping is about
the soft skills that men and women bring to United
Nations missions. These soft skills are about the
ability to understand cultures and values; the ability to
see how women and children become extraordinarily
disadvantaged in conflict; and the ability to interpret
signs of individual and group stress early on.
When the United Nations does peacekeeping
well, we save lives. When we do peacekeeping poorly,
civilian lives are lost. Better performance and standards
by peacekeepers mean better protection of civilians.
Fiji would like to thank and pay tribute to all
those peacekeepers and others involved in all areas
of protecting civilians in armed conflicts around
the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Indonesia for convening this
debate on a fundamental issue for the Security Council.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/373).
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), commendable progress has been made in relation
to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. But it
is clear, as we have heard throughout this debate, that
such progress is insufficient and this issue deserves a
rigorous review. Unfortunately, civilians are the main
victims and continue to be the targets of indiscriminate
attacks that are clear violations of international and
humanitarian law. In situations where we see an increase
in the number of civilians being killed or injured, it is
natural that the number of refugees and asylum-seekers
due to armed conflict also increases.
Moreover, restrictions on access to humanitarian
assistance are still all too frequent. We consider this
unacceptable. All parties to conflicts must adopt
measures to ensure the uninterrupted, safe and timely
52/96

23/05/2019

access delivery of humanitarian aid. Humanitarian
assistance cannot be held hostage to political
considerations. We condemn any attack on medical
and humanitarian personnel. Such attacks constitute a
war crime and for that reason, together with over 30
countries, we signed the French-led declaration on the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in
armed conflict.
We are also concerned that examples of
accountability in this area, as provided in international
criminal law, have been few and far between. Reports
of serious crimes must be investigated and addressed.
In this regard, the work of the International Criminal
Court is critical to combatting impunity, but the Court
needs the support and cooperation of Member States to
fulfil its mandate.
The impact of conflict on the availability of
food is also cause for alarm. The practice of starving
civilians continues to be used as a method of war.
Armed conflicts have also had a grave impact on the
environment and cultural heritage. Finally, we must
emphasize that people with disabilities continue to
be disproportionately affected in armed conflicts. We
agree with the Secretary-General that it is necessary
to pay particular attention to this vulnerable group,
and we also support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative to protect civilian personnel participating in
peace operations.
The problem of arms flows to conflict zones
requires our urgent attention. As a State party to the
Arms Trade Treaty, Mexico reaffirms our binding
obligation to conduct only responsible transfers of
arms. The export of arms to places where they are used
to commit violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law must be prevented. We urge weapons
exporters and those who import those weapons to
consolidate this norm and become States parties to the
Treaty. I must also recall that the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean have recognized the urgent
need to avoid the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. At the regional conference on the matter held
in Santiago, Chile, last December, we adopted a clear
political position in this regard.
The Security Council has a fundamental role to
play in the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
throughout the world. However, the Council’s repeated
paralysis due to use of the veto has prevented it from
acting in the face of crises involving atrocity crimes such
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
It is therefore inadmissible for a procedural tool to
prevent the Council from fulfilling its obligations,
especially when the lives of individuals and even entire
peoples are at stake. In keeping with the spirit of our
times, greater accountability is necessary. We must
fully assume the responsibility that attends the veto and
the costs generated by any paralysis of the Council.
We will continue to insist on the need for all States
Members of the United Nations, and in particular
the permanent members of the Council, to join the
Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint in the use of
the veto in the event of mass atrocities. This project is
already supported by over 100 States and we hope that
many more will soon be joining us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mrs. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let
me express our sincere gratitude to the Indonesian
presidency for convening today’s open debate.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Let
me add a few remarks in my national capacity.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council’s first open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.4046) and adopted
the landmark resolution 1265 (1999). Yet, 20 years
later, civilian populations continue to fall victim to the
devastating impact of armed conflicts, which include
attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel and
the destruction of civilian infrastructure, hospitals and
schools, as well as sexual and gender-based violence.
Especially vulnerable are women, children, refugees
and internally displaced persons.
While we recognize the action taken by the
United Nations over the past 20 years, we believe that
more remains to be done to strengthen the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, in line with the
recommendations provided in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/373). Allow me to briefly
outline our national efforts.
First, let me highlight the recent decision of the
Government of Georgia to endorse the French-led
declaration on the protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel in armed conflict. This is particularly
important in view of the more than 700 attacks against
medical facilities and workers that took place in 2018,

S/PV. 8534

as recorded by the World Health Organization. Our
Government attaches utmost importance to ensuring
accountability, particularly when it comes to war
crimes. Georgia therefore fully cooperates with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and facilitated
the opening of the ICC office in Georgia in order to
conduct investigations into the crimes committed
during the 2008 Russia-Georgia war. However, the
non-cooperation and refusal to allow access to the
occupied regions by the occupying Power further
hinders progress to address the question of impunity.
The four 1949 Geneva Conventions are part
of Georgian legislation. Georgia’s Inter-Agency
Commission
of
International
Humanitarian
Law — a standing governmental body — leads efforts
and coordinates the work of relevant entities aimed
at ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law. Among the Commission’s main priorities is the
implementation of international humanitarian law
programmes and educational activities, in cooperation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC). Most of the educational training programmes
provided to Georgian military personnel incorporate
special courses on international humanitarian law,
including the key aspects of strengthening the protection
of civilians during armed conflict. Importantly, the
ICRC provides assistance to Georgia in locating
the whereabouts of missing persons, as well as in
identifying and handing over human remains to their
families. Since 2013, with the help of the Committee,
the human remains of nearly 200 people have been
identified and handed over to their families.
Following Russia’s full-scale military aggression
in August 2008, we have been continuously prevented
from extending protection to the population residing
in Georgia’s occupied regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali, which are deprived of minimal safeguards
for their safety and are stripped of their fundamental
rights and freedoms. The loss of life among Georgian
internally displaced persons (IDPs) on the other side
of the occupation line is one of the most alarming
developments in recent years and, unfortunately, this
year is no exception. Recently, a Georgian IDP named
Irakli Kvaratskhelia died in custody at the illegally
stationed Russian military base in the occupied
Abkhazia region after having been unlawfully detained.
Taking into account the effective control of the
Russian Federation over the two Georgian regions, it is
particularly necessary that international organizations

19-1500453/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

be firm and vocal on Russia’s responsibility in terms
of both human rights violations and of the denial of
access to international human rights mechanisms on
the ground.
Last but not least, over 10 per cent of Georgia’s
population who have been expelled from the occupied
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali as a result of ethnic
cleansing continue to be deprived of their fundamental
right to return to their homes in safety and dignity.
They require firm and lasting international support to
exercise their rights.
We reiterate our full support to the SecretaryGeneral in his endeavour to mobilize the United
Nations and its Member States to strengthen the
protection of human rights of civilian populations in
armed conflicts. We also call for the implementation of
his recommendations to this end. Georgia stands ready
to contribute to these efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians.
The year 2019 marks the twentieth anniversary of
the Security Council’s protection of civilians in armed
conflict agenda. This year also marks the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, which are the
cornerstone of contemporary international humanitarian
law. This crucial body of law is the primary framework
to regulate situations of armed conflict, designed first
and foremost to protect civilians.
In his report (S/2019/373), the Secretary-General
underscores the importance of enhancing and ensuring
compliance with the law and accountability for
violations with respect to the protection of civilians.
A key responsibility for ensuring such compliance
rests with the Security Council. It has several tools at
its disposal, ranging from support for national efforts
to ensuring accountability through to referrals to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The Council’s
overall record, however, is unfortunately mixed at best.
The people of Syria, for example, have been at the
receiving end of the failure of the Council to act, several
times due to a veto cast by one or more permanent
members of the Council. This failure to act prompted
the General Assembly to play a more active role in the
54/96

23/05/2019

area of accountability by creating the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. This decision was a major step forward in
ensuring that violations of international humanitarian
law in Syria would not go unpunished and also a
landmark decision for the accountability work of the
United Nations. We look forward to the financing of
the Mechanism from the regular budget of the United
Nations later this year.
The Council’s work in this area must be forwardlooking, as well as comprehensive and consistent
in its implementation of initiatives that can help
to protect civilians trapped in conflict situations.
One such initiative is the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes put forward by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group and
currently supported by 119 States, including two-thirds
of the current Security Council members. The code
of conduct is a political commitment to taking timely
and decisive action aimed at preventing or ending
atrocity crimes and not to vote against credible draft
resolutions put forward to this end. It foresees a very
important role for the Secretary-General in submitting
relevant information to the Security Council and is
thus complementary to and reinforces the SecretaryGeneral’s prevention agenda.
The most effective way to protect civilians is to
avoid armed conflict in the first place, and indeed the
goal to prevent armed conflict was the driving idea
behind the creation of the United Nations. Preventive
diplomacy, mediation and other tools can play a key role
in this respect, but the Charter of the United Nations
also makes it clear that armed conflict is, in fact, illegal
except in narrowly defined, exceptional cases.
We view the criminalization of illegal war-making
as an essential part of the conflict prevention agenda.
The activation of the jurisdiction of the ICC over the
crime of aggression on 17 July 2018 was therefore an
important step forward. We encourage all States to
ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute
on the crime of aggression and we remind Council
members that the possibility of referring aggression
situations to the ICC is a powerful new deterrent at
its disposal.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency for organizing this
annual open debate and all the briefers for their
important presentations.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
shortly by the observer of the European Union and
with that delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection
of Civilians.
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of
the adoption of the four Geneva Conventions, it is
essential to reaffirm the importance of international
humanitarian law and to strengthen our efforts to
guarantee its respect, implementation and promotion.
The role of non-State actors in armed conflicts, the new
tactics of warfare, the absence of clear battlefields and
the increasing number of parties to conflicts are posing
new threats to international humanitarian law, the
principle of humanity and the dignity of every human
being in a situation of conflict, especially the most
vulnerable. We must reaffirm in the most urgent terms
the need to ensure the protection of civilians under all
circumstances and in full compliance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
Italy is firmly committed to protecting and
promoting international humanitarian law and to
implementing the principle of accountability for
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in situations of armed conflict. My country
attaches particular importance to the protection of the
most vulnerable categories among civilians.
With regard to children, we strongly condemn all
attacks against schools, as well as any military use
of educational facilities, in accordance with the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, which we hope will be subscribed to
by a growing number of Member States.
As it relates to persons with disabilities, we call for
the full implementation of the Charter on Inclusion of
Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action.
With regard to women, as we stated during the
important recent Council debate on sexual violence
in conflict (see S/PV.8514), we strongly condemn the
fact that sexual and gender-based violence continues to

S/PV. 8534

be widely employed as a tactic of war, and we support
a gender-oriented approach to emergency situations
and to the protection of civilians, recalling our strong
commitment to the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies, all the relevant
United Nations acquis on this subject, as well as the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
most recent report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2019/280).
United Nations peace operations are still a very
powerful instrument at the disposal of the international
community in the pursuit of sustainable peace and the
fulfilment of its responsibility to protect civilians.
Therefore, peacekeepers should be trained and
equipped to fully implement their protection of civilians
mandate. We should enhance our efforts and fulfil the
commitments we have undertaken in the framework of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which provide a
comprehensive and whole-of-mission approach to the
protection of civilians.
Furthermore, we welcome the recommendations
formulated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2019/373), and in particular his call to develop national
policy frameworks for the protection of civilians; step
up advocacy efforts to ensure their protection; promote
stronger accountability, which in our view must also
be achieved through targeted measures; establish or
renew fact-finding bodies and commissions of inquiry;
and promote the use of referrals to the International
Criminal Court.
In conclusion, as we look back and reflect on 20
years of the protection of civilians, we must, on the one
hand, build on what has been already achieved since
the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) in terms of the
implementation of all resolutions and international
norms adopted thus far. On the other hand, we have to
look ahead in order to keep the protection of civilians
high on the agenda as a cornerstone of the Council’s
activity and a fundamental duty and responsibility of
the international community as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for
organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict — a subject of enormous
importance that is a matter of high priority and concern

19-1500455/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for my country, Algeria. I would also like to thank in
particular the Permanent Representative of Indonesia
for his concept note (S/2019/385, annex). We fully share
his views on the priority areas he identified.
Algeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Let me be clear — humanitarian law is a sensitive
issue and no compromise can be tolerated. It must
be respected in all circumstances so as to ensure the
survival of the values of humanity and, very often,
simply to protect human lives, which is an obligation,
not an option.
The changing nature of contemporary armed
conflict and of the means and methods of warfare
highlights the constantly shifting challenges that civilian
populations are facing around the globe. That change
raises multiple questions regarding the applicability
of international humanitarian law and its efficiency
as we celebrate this year the seventieth anniversary of
the cornerstone of international humanitarian law, the
Geneva Conventions, and the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), relating to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Despite the efforts made during the past two
decades to protect civilians in armed conflict through
the strengthening of peacekeeping mandates and their
implementation, and the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation process, following
the issuance of the Secretary-General’s first report
on the issue (S/1999/957), the situation with regard
to the protection of civilians has, unfortunately, not
changed. At that time much remained to be done,
and the report cited the displacement of civilians and
refugees, serious human rights abuses, the use of sexual
violence and starvation of populations as a weapon of
war, the recruitment of child soldiers, the proliferation
of small arms, cross-border movements, the difficulty
of delivering emergency humanitarian aid and attacks
against humanitarian personnel — all of which are still
characteristics of the many conflicts that are shaking
the planet.
The protection of civilians must be the core of any
mediation and conflict resolution effort, and mediators
must attach special importance to that aspect. In that
regard, I would like to share with the Council our vision
of the way forward and, in particular, how the Security
56/96

23/05/2019

Council and the United Nations and its Member States
could act.
First, there is an imperative need to establish a
comprehensive, coherent and concrete approach to the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Second, we need to adopt an inclusive strategy that
attacks the root causes of conflict and ensures the longterm protection of civilians.
Third, we must strengthen the international and
domestic legal frameworks in post-conflict settings.
States must, inter alia, adopt legislation that punishes
the most serious violations of the Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional.
Fourth, the protection of civilians has to obey the
principles of universality and non-selectivity. In that
regard, we deplore the fact that, in many situations,
the international community is doing little or nothing,
especially with regard to populations under foreign or
colonial occupation.
Fifth, no one is above the law. To that end, it is
important to prevent all violations defined as such in
the various legal instruments.
Sixth, more needs to be done to ensure that
humanitarian personnel have access to the most
vulnerable and that they be treated with respect
and dignity. Action should be taken against
humanitarian personnel who violate the principles of
humanitarian action.
Seventh, it is important to ensure more effective
coordination between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and to
further involve regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, which has made great
progress in that regard.
Eighth, the Security Council should consider the
systematic inclusion of the monitoring of human rights
in all peacekeeping mandates so that violations of
human rights and humanitarian rights are reported and
necessary measures can be taken. This meeting must be
seen as a reaffirmation of our collective commitment
to protecting civilians in situations of conflict and
be the first step towards a transition to a policy of
non-indifference.
Lastly, when all States and all parties engaged in
armed conflict respect international humanitarian law,
it will be easier to create a more humane world.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Indonesia
presidency for focusing the spotlight on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
On the twentieth anniversary of the protection
of civilians agenda, civilians continue to make up
the majority of casualties in conflict, and this issue
remains as critical as ever. My delegation supports
the Secretary-General’s call for urgent and concrete
progress on three actions, as reflected in his previous
report (see S/2018/462), and would like to make the
following observations.
First, strengthening the protection of civilians
demands that international humanitarian law be
respected and strictly complied with. The United
Nations, the Council, Member States and other
stakeholders should actively advocate enhancing
respect for international humanitarian law by all parties,
including non-State actors. All serious violations of
international humanitarian law must be investigated
and perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Secondly, we need to address the special needs
of each of the disproportionately affected vulnerable
groups: women, children, internally displaced persons
and persons with disabilities. Victims of the indirect
effects of armed conflict, such as disease and famine,
also need special medical care and specialized
services. Therefore, functioning medical facilities and
ensuring access to humanitarian aid are critical to the
protection of the civil population. Hence, Kazakhstan
co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016) and signed the
French-led declaration of October 2017 on the protection
of humanitarian and medical personnel in conflict.

S/PV. 8534

among all components and by forging relationships
with local populations. Mandates to protect civilians
need to be linked to a comprehensive political strategy
for durable and sustained peace. We must also actively
use innovative practical tools, including unarmed
civilian protection.
Many precious lives of civilians, peacekeepers and
other United Nations and humanitarian personnel can
be saved by introducing new technologies to upgrade
our force capabilities. In that regard, next week in NurSultan, Kazakhstan will host the fifth International
Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping
Symposium, which is a platform for capacity-building
and improving the effectiveness of peace operations.
Finally, as the Secretary-General has prioritized,
the international community should focus on preventive
measures, including through overcoming the root
causes and promoting peacebuilding and economic
development. Kazakhstan is committed to promoting
regional stability by using a three-pronged strategy to
resolve conflicts, namely, strengthening the securitydevelopment nexus and utilizing a revamped regional
approach and the One United Nations initiative to ensure
greater efficiency, transparency and accountability.
In conclusion, my delegation stands ready to work
with the United Nations on the security of civilians and
upholding international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to congratulate
both the Security Council and the Secretary-General
on the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of
the protection of-civilians in armed conflict agenda by
the Council.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians is primarily a
responsibility of the host country. To that end, Member
States need to develop national policy frameworks,
which should include capacity-building, strengthening
the rule of law, comprehensive security sector reforms
and good governance, as well as the adoption of
legislation that regulates the export of arms. Kazakhstan
acceded to the Arms Trade Treaty in December 2017
and calls on others to do the same

As a nation whose civilians have faced decades
of threats from hostile forces, Israel supports this
critical issue. If we seek to protect civilians, we must
identify, target and act swiftly against those who
choose civilians as their primary targets — namely,
terrorists. Terrorism, by definition, refers to the
deliberate targeting of civilians through violent means.
Its purpose is to kill — for ideological, political or
religious reasons — and innocent people pay the price.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
enhanced through a clearly formulated and practical,
whole-of-system approach with close cooperation

Israeli civilians understand that price. For 12 years,
since 2007, Hamas has fired over 15,000 rockets and
mortars into Israeli towns. That is at least 1,000 rockets
and mortars per year, launched from civilian areas into

19-1500457/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilian areas. Rockets, sirens, screams and running for
shelter are, tragically, common occurrences for Israelis.
Just two weeks ago, Hamas and the Islamic Jihad fired
700 rockets and mortars into Israel over the span of
just two days. The rockets hit Israeli homes, hospitals,
schools and kindergartens in towns and major civilian
population centres, including Ashkelon, Ashdod and
Beit Shemesh. Israel’s Iron Dome air defence system
intercepted tens of rockets successfully, saving
countless lives, but some of the rockets managed to hit
civilian areas. Four Israeli civilians were killed in those
acts of terror, and more than 100 others were injured.
Hamas exploits the people of Gaza, its own
Palestinian brothers and sisters, as human shields — an
activity that is both illegal and deplorable. By blatantly
targeting Israeli civilians and hiding and operating from
within the Palestinian population, those Palestinian
terrorist organizations are committing a double
war crime.
In Lebanon, Hizbullah has transformed southern
Lebanon’s Shiite villages into terror outposts with
the goal of harming Israel. Rocket launchers sit
by schools and hospitals, and civilian homes store
missiles. Hizbullah has recruited a third of the civilian
population within those villages, strengthening its
terror network. By launching attacks on Israel from
Lebanese population centres, Hizbullah, like Hamas, is
committing a double war crime.
As the Secretary-General states in his report
(S/2019/373), the vast proliferation of non-State armed
groups has contributed to the increasingly asymmetric
nature of conflict. To those groups, international law
does not exist and civilians are to be exploited as human
shields in their efforts to harm civilians. For countries
like Israel that seek to protect their citizens, the result
is a never-ending battle against terrorists with little or
no respect for life.

23/05/2019

Ms. Núñez Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation joins others in congratulating Indonesia
for organizing this timely open debate.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.
The celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the
inclusion of the protection of civilians as a specific item
on the Council’s agenda and the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions is, as has already been
said, a timely moment to reflect on how far we have
come. In hindsight, this protection has made significant
progress, but despite that observation, there is a chasm
between what has been achieved and the real situation
that civilians on the ground continue to endure.
The discouraging data contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/373) irrefutably demonstrate
that, and indicate that we are facing enormous
challenges. We must therefore take advantage of this
opportunity to strengthen our collective determination
to move forward with the effective implementation of
this agenda.
Among the actions needed to be taken is reducing
the proliferation of weapons and the use of explosives in
densely populated areas, which cause civilian fatalities
and injuries and impact critical infrastructure, such as
hospitals and schools. Uruguay believes that, in addition
to global initiatives, it is imperative to encourage
regional ones. In that regard, I would highlight the
regional meeting on the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas to discuss the protection of civilians,
held in Chile in December 2018.

To make real change is to acknowledge the real
problem and act. Our words are meaningless if they
are not followed up by clear condemnations of terrorist
organizations. If we are here to protect civilians, the
Security Council should designate Hamas, Hizbullah
and Islamic Jihad as terrorist organizations, a
designation that is long overdue.

The Secretary-General’s report points out that,
in 2018, armed attacks continued to be carried on
hospitals and medical personnel, which urgently calls
for the implementation of the Geneva Conventions
and resolution 2286 (2016), on health care in armed
conflicts. Accordingly, Uruguay supports the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General
concerning its implementation. Attacks on and the
military use of schools should also be condemned.
My country is a party to the Safe Schools Declaration,
which was developed through State consultations
led by Norway and Argentina and will hold its third
international conference in Palma de Mallorca, Spain,
next week. Uruguay will be pleased to participate.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.

Furthermore, my delegation believes that
investigations into crimes perpetrated against civilians

58/96

19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and ensuring accountability play a key role in deterrence
and ending the culture of impunity. Member States must
therefore adopt and implement national legislation to
bring perpetrators to justice. In particular, Uruguay has
fully integrated the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court into its domestic legislation. We
are also of the view that the Security Council must
assume its responsibility to ensure accountability and
implement the instruments at its disposal, such as
sanctions regimes and its authority to refer cases to the
International Criminal Court.
My delegation believes that, in order to reduce
the vulnerability of civilians, all actors must share
good practices that have been applied successfully in
order to reproduce positive results in other contexts
and develop strategies that strengthen the effective
protection of the population. As a troop-contributing
country, Uruguay has valuable experience in that
area to share in the framework of peace operations.
In that regard, my country reaffirms its commitment
to the undertaking and to the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians.
For Uruguay, the protection of civilians by peace
contingents has multiple dimensions and must be subject
to constant review and improvement to enable them to
adapt to developing situations in time. In that regard,
several days ago, Uruguay co-hosted a workshop with
Australia and Senegal, together with the organization
Nonviolent Peaceforce, in which authorities from
the Secretariat and experts from various delegations
participated in order to analyse non-armed strategies
that could be highly beneficial in providing security to
defenceless populations.
Given our experience on the ground, we are able to
say with confidence that the ability of the Blue Helmets
to carry out protection activities depends largely on
their ability to forge bonds of trust and communicate
with the local population. In that regard, our contingent
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo carries out
community support, recreational and sports activities. It
also provides ongoing support for orphanages and other
charitable associations, and organizes videoconferences
between primary schools of the Congo and Uruguay,
in which children in the same grade and their teachers
communicate and exchange teaching experiences,
thereby fostering respect for diversity and familiarity
with diverse experiences and cultures.

S/PV. 8534

In order to improve the professionalization of
the protection of civilians, predeployment training is
provided by the National Peace Operations Training
Institute of Uruguay in the areas of both human rights
and the gender perspective, as well as areas specific to
the military, while always emphasizing the welfare of
the civilian population and encouraging the inclusion
of women troops.
As always, it is worth noting that if sufficient
financial resources are not provided for the overall
functioning of peace operations, whatever additional
efforts made will not produce the expected results. In
that regard, Uruguay expresses its concern about the
trend towards budget cuts that has been evident in
recent years and its negative environment effects on the
fulfilment of mandates, which could to lead to gaps in
critical mission tasks.
In conclusion, if the past 20 years have been
a period of reflection on establishing norms and
strengthening the agenda, the next 20 must involve
concrete action and effective implementation. There
will be no immediate or easy solutions, but we cannot
cast our gaze aside indifferently and continue to ignore
the suffering of millions of civilians — the innocent
victims of the scourge of war. Only the political will and
the joint work of all actors and the implementation of
traditional, as well as innovative, strategies, will make
it possible to achieve peaceful coexistence in which the
fundamental values of human dignity are respected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is truly
a pleasure, Sir, to see the delegation of your friendly
country preside over the work of the Security Council
for the month of May. I also thank you for taking
the initiative to organize this particularly important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict under the presidency of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, whose presence among us earlier we
wholeheartedly commend.
I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing on the current
status of the protection of civilians, while shedding
light on the challenges that the international community
must overcome in that regard. I also thank Mr. Peter
Mauer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello for their especially
important briefings.

19-1500459/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This year marks the commemoration of the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions — the
cornerstone of international humanitarian law — and
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999) by the Security Council that introduced
the protection of civilians on its agenda. Since then,
the protection of civilians has become a key item on
the agenda of the Security Council and has contributed
to building a culture of awareness-raising on the need
to prevent violations, other concerns involving the
protection of civilians and how to address them.
Without any doubt, over the past 20 years the
initiatives taken by the Council have strengthened the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and helped save
many lives. Nevertheless, an evaluation of the situation
concerning the protection of civilians demonstrates that
civilians continue to make up the staggering majority of
victims. Twenty years later, the protection of civilians
is as pertinent and urgent as it has ever been.
I shall underscore the following points.
First, we reiterate that the protection of civilians is
first and foremost incumbent on the States concerned.
It must be noted, however, that in periods of conflict
the capacities of some States are inadequate or even
non-existent. In such cases, the international community
shoulders the responsibility of supporting them by
strengthening their capacities and providing them with
the means necessary to fulfil their obligations.
In that regard, strengthening the rule of law is
essential to ensuring the effective implementation
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Member States should develop
national policies based on good practices and establish
specialized agencies working for the protection of
civilians. Addressing the problems related to political
will and the lack of capacities and resources at the
national level and pursuing the strengthening of
regional and global initiatives remain imperative.
Secondly, prioritizing the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations, in accordance with their
mandates, is well established and even more important
now that the relevant policies and guidelines have been
developed. The operational approach to the protection
of civilians has been made clear, and tools and systems
have been developed to make the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping contexts more effective, such as
through joint protection teams and community-alert
networks. The protection of civilians requires adequate
60/96

23/05/2019

human and funding resources, whether in terms of the
number of Blue Helmets deployed, their equipment
or training. We also need to be able to manage the
expectations of all the parties involved, whether it be
local populations, the authorities of the host country or
the members of the Security Council.
Thirdly, violence against humanitarian workers,
in particular national staff, as well as their detention
or abduction, continues to hamper humanitarian
operations. In that regard, immediate measures should
be taken to facilitate safe, prompt and unhindered
access for humanitarian workers to populations in need
and to ensure their access to assistance. In that context,
refugee populations are extremely vulnerable to
violations of their rights. The international community
must ensure that all their rights are respected and that
the assistance provided to them actually reaches them
and is not misappropriated or looted. Registration of the
refugee population is essential to upholding their rights,
as recognized under international law and in Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. In addition,
States must fulfil their obligation to fight against
impunity and to fully investigate and bring to justice
those responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity or grave human rights violations.
Lastly, we believe that it would be desirable to
promote a preventive approach in order to assess threats
and coordinate actions to prevent any deterioration.
The preventive dimension could be developed by
strengthening the capacities of the countries concerned,
promoting the rule of law, ensuring good governance,
entrenching a culture of human rights and establishing
early-warning mechanisms to identify potential
conflicts and prevent them from becoming overt and
deadly confrontations.
In conclusion, Morocco applauds all those who
work for the protection of populations in conflict areas
and would like to take this opportunity to pay them a
heartfelt tribute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/373) notes, it is a sad fact that
20 years since the Council’s adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), the state of the protection of civilians
is tragically similar to that time. Members speaking
today will no doubt express their outrage at this state of
affairs, yet we continue to see the erosion of respect for
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the basic principles of international humanitarian law.
As we reach the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1265 (1999), and of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, it is important that we reflect
on what is working and what is not.
New Zealand recognizes the importance of
monitoring, including of human rights, and calls for the
continued inclusion of monitoring within peacekeeping
and political mandates. Monitoring is crucial to
evidence gathering for two reasons.
The first reason is evidence gathering for
accountability. We reiterate our support for domestic
mechanisms as the primary method of accountability.
But where domestic mechanisms fail or countries are
unwilling to investigate, the international community
has a responsibility to act. We must be prepared
to call out breaches of international humanitarian
law by States and non-State actors where we see
them. We must be prepared to support international
mechanisms such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 in order
to reinforce that breaches of international humanitarian
law are not without consequence.
The second reason is evidence gathering for
improvements. We must collectively grapple with the
changing nature of conflicts. Urbanized, asymmetric
conflicts pose an increased risk to civilians. That must
be factored into the assessments required by the law of
armed conflict before engagement. Such assessments
must include the means and methods of attack and,
notably, must therefore review the choice of weapon to
be used in any conflict.
Specifically with regard to that issue, I note that the
Secretary-General’s report usefully draws attention to
the direct and indirect humanitarian harm that can be
caused by the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. Reflecting on our own strong concern about the
need to better protect civilians from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas, New Zealand warmly
welcomes the initiative taken by the Government of
Austria to host a conference in October this year to help
chart a way forward on that important topic.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the wide
range of causes of insecurity that can affect the safety
and well-being of civilians. Our international responses

S/PV. 8534

must consider the entire conflict cycle in a holistic way.
That includes the provision of humanitarian assistance.
We have heard today of the continued and pervasive
humanitarian access constraints, which we urge all
parties to address. Bureaucracy should never be an
impediment to saving lives. To ensure a holistic approach
to ending conflict, there is a need for greater focus on
the parts of the population that are disproportionately
impacted by armed conflict. That necessarily includes
women, children and persons with disabilities.
New Zealand also deplores the ongoing attacks
and violations being committed against healthcare facilities and health-care workers. All parties
to conflicts, States or otherwise, must abide by the
principles of international humanitarian law and their
obligations to protect civilians. We must do better.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries Albania, Montenegro, the Republic
of North Macedonia and Serbia; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
Let me start by thanking Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia,
Secretary-General António Guterres, Mr. Peter Mauer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of
the Center for Civilians in Conflict.
The protection of civilians remains of the
utmost concern to the EU and its member States.
We welcome the opportunity today to speak on this
important topic. We also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/373), along with the practical
recommendations therein.
Looking back at the state of protecting civilians
over the past 20 years, we can identify a number of
achievements. However, it is very clear that fundamental
challenges remain. I would like to address a number of
areas that are of particular concern to us, and where the
EU and its member States have taken steps to advance
protection efforts.

19-1500461/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, the recurrent failure of parties to an armed
conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law continues to be one
of the most critical challenges for the protection of
civilians. That is not merely a catchphrase here in the
Council but it impacts the lives of numerous civilians
worldwide on a daily basis. Indiscriminate attacks
against civilian populations, the recurrence of attacks
against medical facilities, schools and humanitarian
workers, and the arbitrary denial of humanitarian
access to people in need are all unacceptable, yet they
are reported on a nearly daily basis. We recognize
the challenges associated with the use of explosive
weapons in densely populated areas and their impact
on civilians. We call on all parties to armed conflict
to fully comply with the principles and rules of
international humanitarian law. Promoting compliance
with international humanitarian law and respect for
humanitarian principles has always been, and remains,
a top priority for the EU and its member States. The
EU is also especially supporting efforts to safeguard
principled humanitarian assistance with respect to
counter-terrorism measures and sanctions.
It is our collective responsibility to ensure
respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to hold
those who violate it accountable. Civilian victims
of unimaginable atrocities need and deserve justice.
That rings particularly true as we reflect on the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the 1949
Geneva Conventions. Within the EU, there has been
an increasing number of prosecutions under national
jurisdiction against those who commit grave breaches
of international humanitarian law. The EU also
maintains strong support for international justice and
accountability, including the work of the International
Criminal Court, and urges all States Members of
the United Nations to do the same. Let us bridge the
gap between what is being said in the Council and
everyday practice.
Secondly, as a leading humanitarian donor, the EU
specifically focuses on ensuring that our assistance
extends beyond the material needs of persons to the
broader issues of personal safety and dignity. Many of
the crises of today are indeed crises of protection. That
is why over the past five years, the EU has provided
more than €1 billion for protection activities.
Forced displacement is one of the most common
and severe consequences of armed conflict, causing
62/96

23/05/2019

multiple humanitarian needs and protection concerns.
Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are among the
most vulnerable and access to persons of concern
is a particular challenge, as IDPs often live in direct
proximity to armed conflicts. In addition, States often
lack the means and laws to protect and help them
rebuild their lives and help those left behind. Apart
from strengthening the protection of and assistance for
the forcibly displaced, increased efforts are needed to
prevent and resolve armed conflicts and other forms
of violence in order to address the root causes of
forced displacement.
Thirdly, as the report of the Secretary-General
highlights, persons with disabilities continue to be
disproportionately affected by humanitarian crises.
The European Union is a key proponent of the rights
of people with disabilities. In past years, we have taken
a number of measures, including the elaboration of a
dedicated guidance document to ensure that the specific
needs of persons with disabilities are adequately
addressed in EU-funded humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, sexual and gender-based violence
continues to be employed as a tactic of war, terrorism,
torture and repression. It is a common and alarming
trend across various, otherwise diverse crises. The
victims — women and girls, men and boys — are often
those already belonging to the most vulnerable groups.
We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 2467
(2019) as a step forward in the fight against conflictrelated sexual violence, in particular the strong
language on criminal accountability, the role of civil
society, as well as a survivor-centred approach. In that
regard, the European Union reaffirms the importance of
the provision of comprehensive sexual and reproductive
health services.
Between 2017 and 2018, the EU allocated
approximately €62 million to prevent and respond
to sexual and gender-based violence. It is absolutely
imperative that a gender perspective be incorporated
into protection efforts, including humanitarian action.
To that end, the EU remains committed, among other
initiatives, to the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies. Today a
specific conference is taking place on the topic in Oslo.
We commend the organizers for drawing attention to
that important topic and we hope that the outcomes
of the conference will improve the prevention and
protection from gender-based violence in emergencies.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The European Union is a leader in the promotion,
protection and fulfilment of the rights of the child,
including their right to education. In 2019, 10 per cent
of EU humanitarian aid will support children with safe
and quality education activities. The EU is strongly
committed to the protection of schools and education
in situations of conflict and welcomes initiatives, such
as the Safe Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict, in that regard.
Finally, we continue to underscore that the protection
of civilians must be at the core of peacekeeping mandates,
in line with the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians. Peacekeepers must protect civilians and
be able and prepared to use force when civilians are
under threat of physical violence, consistent with clear
mandates, while operations must be equipped with
the necessary tools in that regard. That includes but is
not limited to the necessary equipment, as well as the
necessary training.
Peacekeepers also play a critical role in protecting
children in armed conflict. Well-trained child protection
focal points and their cooperation with civilian child
protection advisers are essential to ensuring not
only the effective monitoring and reporting of grave
violations, but also that children associated with armed
forces and groups are treated with special consideration
for their status as children. In that context, we would
like to emphasize the importance of strengthening
the recording of casualties through United Nations
operations in order to support evidence-based advocacy
with parties to conflict and to identify factors that
contribute to civilian casualties.
Additionally, Member States should strive to
improve the gender balance in all components of
peacekeeping operations in order to achieve a more
equitable gender representation and to improve the
capacity of missions to reach all segments of the civilian
population. We therefore welcome all efforts in that
direction, in particular the United Nations system-wide
strategy on gender parity and the recently approved
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to thank the
Indonesian presidency of the Council for convening
today’s open debate, the Secretary-General for his

S/PV. 8534

annual report (S/2019/373) and briefing, and the briefers
for their presentations.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I wish to add some
remarks in my national capacity.
This year, we mark 20 years since the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) and 70 years since the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions. And yet, 70 years later,
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties. Worse yet, the scale and severity of human
suffering in armed conflicts worldwide continue to grow
at an alarming pace. Today, many parties to conflicts
show blatant disregard for the principles governing
the conduct of hostilities. Quite the opposite — they
deliberately target civilians.
The most affected are the most vulnerable groups:
women, children, refugees, internally displaced
persons and people with disabilities. New ways and
means of armed conflict, such as the proliferation and
fragmentation of non-State actors, increasingly urban
warfare and the indiscriminate use of explosives, are
putting even more civilians at risk of being killed,
injured or displaced.
Peacekeeping operations play a central role in
protecting civilians and it is essential that the Council
provide all peacekeeping missions with mandates in
which special emphasis is given to the protection of the
most vulnerable.
Slovenia has a history of assisting the victims of
armed conflict and it remains committed to alleviating
the pain of children affected by armed conflict,
including by providing psychological and physical
assistance and rehabilitation. In recent years, more
than 500 children have been rehabilitated in Slovenia.
Social rehabilitation training for pre-school and school
counsellors and a mine-risk education programme
are just two examples that have proven to be of great
importance for strengthening the overall well-being and
development of children affected by armed conflicts.
Slovenia also continuously advocates for respect
for treaty obligations and customary international
law protecting civilians. We fully support the use
preventive diplomacy and call for prevention and a
better response to large-scale violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We repeat our call
on the Security Council to strongly, systematically,
consistently and promptly respond to all violations of

19-1500463/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international humanitarian law, including by using
restrictive measures against State and non-State actors
in breach of international humanitarian law.
Ensuring accountability and fighting impunity,
which are key elements in the protection of civilians,
remain a major challenge. In that regard, the role
of international criminal justice, in particular the
International Criminal Court, has been recognized.
States must comply with their obligations under
international law to hold accountable perpetrators of
crimes committed against civilians.
Women have a very important role to play in
the protection of civilians, and their involvement is
crucial to finding the best ways to lessen the burden of
civilians in conflict situations. Exactly a month ago, we
called on all parts of the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, to continue prioritizing this issue, and
further urged the Council to strongly, systematically,
consistently and promptly respond to all violations in
situations of armed conflicts (see S/PV.8514). Today
we again ask the Council to do its utmost to prevent,
investigate and, when necessary, take appropriate
actions to ensure accountability. We must continue to
maintain the safeguarding of humanitarian access and
respect for humanitarian principles at the core of our
endeavours to protect civilians and provide assistance
to them in situations of armed conflict. Impunity for
violations of international humanitarian law can no
longer be tolerated.
I would like to conclude by stressing that effective
peacebuilding and peacekeeping must involve the
entire United Nations. Mandates must be robust but still
flexible enough to ensure that protecting and assisting
civilian populations remain at their core. That demands
the Council’s strong and continuing engagement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend the Indonesian
presidency for its initiative in convening this meeting,
which coincides with the seventieth anniversary of the
1949 Geneva Conventions on the protection of civilians
in conflict and war as well as the twentieth anniversary
of the inclusion of the protection of civilians on the
agenda of the Security Council. We also welcome Her
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia
and all the other Ministers present here today. We
64/96

23/05/2019

thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Federico Borello and
Mr. Peter Maurer for their valuable briefings.
The acts of violence being perpetrated around the
world, and the scourge of war in many of its regions,
accompanied by gross violations of international
humanitarian law, require concerted international
efforts to support the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. Over the past 20 years we have witnessed
positive developments on the Security Council’s agenda
in that regard. However, despite such developments,
civilians still constitute the vast majority of the victims
of armed conflict. Notwithstanding these challenges,
Jordan has always been an advocate for peace and an
effective mediator in establishing peace and security,
not just in our region but all over the world. I would
like to briefly mention the three fundamental pillars
of Jordan’s humanitarian role in providing protection,
security and safety for civilians in armed conflicts.
The first pillar is in regard to refugees. The crises
and wars that the Middle East continues to endure
have had repercussions for our country. In the past few
decades we have hosted waves of refugees who found
safe haven in Jordan for themselves, their families and
children until their voluntary, safe and dignified return
to their countries could be assured. The Government
has cooperated with international donors to improve
the infrastructure of refugee camps by providing roads,
crossings, sanitation networks and education, food,
medicine and health services, despite the scarcity of
resources and economic challenges in Jordan. We have
also cooperated with the United Nations in order to
bring essential humanitarian assistance to the needy
through our borders. We have implemented projects
aimed at building the capacities and resilience of local
communities hosting Syrian refugees by creating and
providing work opportunities for them and for the
refugees, with a view to strengthening their resistance
to crises. Jordan has also provided a wide range of
educational, health and legal services, as well as
mechanisms for protecting refugee women, girls and
children from physical and sexual violence in the
camps, because we fully believe in a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
The second pillar is our active participation in
peacekeeping operations. Jordan has been participating
in peacekeeping operations under the umbrella of
the United Nations all over the world for decades.
More than 100,000 male and female Jordanians have
participated in peacekeeping operations and have
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

provided protection to civilians amid difficult and
complicated circumstances. For example, Jordan
has run a number of field hospitals in Iraq, the West
Bank, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
Ethiopia and other countries. The Jordanian military
field hospital in Gaza has continued to help civilians
through the provision of treatment and medical services
and has provided services to more than 2.5 million
patients since its creation in 2009.
The third pillar is related to combating terrorism
and violent extremism. Obscurantist and extremist
ideologies have fuelled destructive conflicts all over
the world, particularly in the Middle East. Jordan has
therefore implemented a number of global initiatives
aimed at prevention, with the goal of confronting
erroneous ideologies promoted by terrorist groups
against the Islamic faith. We have also worked hard
to spread a culture of harmony and coexistence in the
region and internationally, as well as introducing the
youth, peace and security agenda in the Security Council
with a view to immunizing and empowering young
people. Jordan and New Zealand recently co-chaired a
meeting of the Christchurch Call to Action to Eliminate
Terrorist and Violent Extremist Content Online, with the
participation of major global technological and Internet
companies, to raise awareness of the threat created
by the spread through social media of obscurantist
ideologies in societies and countries.
At the same time, we are seeing the ongoing
violation of every fundamental human right in the
occupied Palestinian territories, accompanied by
Israeli violations of the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and norms of international
humanitarian law. That demands that we take urgent
and appropriate steps to ensure the safety, welfare,
protection and security of civilians and accountability
for all violations, in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions and international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, I would like to recall the wisdom
that says that evil prevails when good people cannot
function. If we work together we will be able to achieve
something essential — a future of harmony and peace.
That is what humankind desires and needs today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

S/PV. 8534

We thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing
this open debate and for the concept note (S/2019/385,
annex). We also thank the Secretary-General and our
other briefers for highlighting some of the important
aspects of the protection of civilians.
In September 1974, the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, in a statement
to the General Assembly, said,
“The very struggle of Bangladesh symbolized
the universal struggle for peace and justice. It was,
therefore, only natural that Bangladesh, from its
very inception, should stand firmly by the side of
the oppressed people of the world” (A/PV.2243,
para. 5).
Indeed, in the wake of what our people endured during
our liberation war in 1971, we attach great importance to
the issue of the protection of civilians during conflicts
within the ambit of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We endorsed the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians and have
incorporated a strong and comprehensive protection of
civilians component in our peacekeeping training and
recruitment guidelines.
The ongoing Rohingya humanitarian crisis once
again reveals to us the inability of the international
community to stand by a persecuted people when they
need them most. Ironically, the height of the crisis
coincided with our collective efforts at the United
Nations to build consensus around the concept of
sustaining peace. On paper, we have been successful
in shifting the focus of peacebuilding largely from
post-conflict situations to conflict prevention. But on
the ground, for the Rohingya people, for example, what
difference does it make? In effect, a crisis in recent
history, with many signs of escalation and relapse since
the 1970s, gave us enough early warning to prevent
it. Yet we seriously failed to save a whole ethnic
minority community from persecution, which the High
Commissioner for Human Rights called a “textbook
example of ethnic cleansing”.
As a peace-loving nation with an unwavering
commitment to promoting and sustaining global peace,
we are doing everything possible to safely and securely
host the Rohingya community fleeing persecution in
Rakhine state in our own territory. We are also making
sincere efforts to deter and contain the downstream
escalation of the crisis to the regional or international
level. During her address to the General Assembly at

19-1500465/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

its seventy-second session (see A/72/PV.14), Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina urged the creation of safe
zones in Myanmar’s Rakhine state for the protection
of civilians under the auspices of the United Nations
or relevant regional partners. Our Foreign Secretary,
in his statement to the Council in February (see
S/PV.8477), elaborated further on the idea of safe
zones, along with other concrete proposals for the
safe, dignified, voluntary and sustainable return of the
Rohingyas and their integration into Myanmar society.
We seek the support of the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, to take due
consideration of those proposals. Such initiatives would
also serve as a critical confidence-building measure for
the Rohingya to return, which is the only practical and
sustainable solution to the crisis.
Our own experiences with the protracted Rohingya
crisis have exposed us to various layers of challenges
regarding the protection of civilians, particularly when
the State concerned is unwilling to discharge its own
responsibility to protect all civilians in its territory. Also,
as one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries in the past three decades, we have experienced
first-hand the relevance of the protection of civilians
mandate as well as its implementation challenges.
Against that dual backdrop, we wish to take this
opportunity to stress six specific points.
First, States should assume the primary
responsibility of identifying fault lines for conflicts,
and driving and directing priorities, strategies and
activities for conflict prevention and sustaining peace,
thereby ensuring the harmonious coexistence of the
various religious and ethnic groups concerned, with
adequate opportunities for growth and prosperity for
all. The United Nations needs to invest more in the field
than in Headquarters in order to build capacities to
detect early warning signs and work more closely with
host Governments and other stakeholders to scale up
its upstream prevention activities to match its enhanced
role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace, as
mandated by the historic twin resolutions (Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262).
Secondly, the United Nations must build its capacity
to translate early warnings into early responses through
effective measures to prevent the escalation of violence
against civilians. In that regard, the Security Council’s
protection of civilians mandate must the pressed
into application in a timely manner. In doing so, it is
66/96

23/05/2019

critical to put greater emphasis on strategic analysis
and assessment of risks, including understanding the
core grievances and dehumanizing motives of parties,
if any. Accompanying efforts must be made to find
local solutions by targeting resilience factors and
bridge-builders among stakeholders and developing
nationally owned and focused strategies.
Thirdly, in the case of the escalation of violence, we
must ensure the unhindered, safe passage of the relevant
humanitarian personnel and supplies to minimize
civilian casualties and human suffering. We must
honour our shared commitment to allow the unfettered
access of humanitarian assistance and medical care
during times of natural disasters and conflicts.
Fourthly, Member States must respect their
disarmament commitments across the board, including
those relating to conventional weapons such landmines
and other explosive weapons. The use of such lethal
weapons with the capacity to kill indiscriminately in
the commission of atrocity crimes against civilians is
a serious violation of international humanitarian law,
and the State concerned must be held accountable for
such use.
Fifthly, Bangladesh has supported the women and
peace and security agenda of the United Nations ever
since it played a lead role in the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). We are committed to increasing the number
of female peacekeepers in order to achieve the target
set by the United Nations. We have received first-hand
accounts from Rohingya women fleeing from Myanmar
on how rape and other forms of sexual violence can be
used against women during conflicts. We are more
convinced than ever that women peacekeepers can play
a natural role in protecting their fellow women and
supporting them physically and mentally to overcome
traumatic experiences of sexual violence.
Sixthly, ensuring accountability and justice for
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law is of paramount importance. The
international community and the United Nations should
make appropriate use of the tools at their disposal to
that effect, particularly when it comes to the protection
of civilians agenda.
As a major troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh has vast experience in tackling protection
of civilians challenges in the field. We take a pragmatic
approach to the protection of civilians mandate, both
in practice and through preparedness. We realize that,
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

mandated or not, there is an inherent expectation of
peacekeepers in the field to protect civilians in danger.
Often, those expectations are unrealistic and are not
matched by adequate resources. Moreover, the situations
on the ground are becoming increasingly hostile and
complex. We therefore reiterate that protection of
civilians mandates need to be realistic and achievable,
and must be backed by viable political strategies and
adequate resources. We must also devise contingency
plans so that the protection of civilians capabilities in
the field are resilient enough to tackle sudden threats,
including asymmetrical ones.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1270 (1999), which gave
the first explicit mandate to protect civilians to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. This milestone year
can be used to reflect upon where we stand when it
comes to realizing the protection of civilians mandate,
with a special focus on the occasions where we could not
apply ourselves. Looking at the millions of persecuted
civilians around the world, looking at the faces of
hapless Rohingya women and children at the world’s
largest refugee camp, in Cox’s Bazar, we must resolve
to do something that makes sense for them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We are delighted that
the Indonesian presidency has convened this debate. As
we mark 20 years of the protection of civilians agenda
in the Security Council and 70 years since the signing
of the Geneva Conventions, my country, Ireland,
sincerely welcomes the culture of protection that has
been brought to the work of the Security Council.
We also welcome the strides that have been made in
increasing adherence to and, importantly, respect
for international humanitarian law. Drawing from
the Indonesian presidency’s very useful concept note
(S/2019/385, annex), I want to make four brief points.
First, let us recognize the threshold issue — we must
listen to the voices of civilians themselves. Enabling and
listening to local stakeholders ensures the development
of strategies that are actually responsive to local need
where they are. Put simply, such strategies stand the
greatest chance of success. We welcome the focus of the
Secretary General’s report (S/2019/373) on the ways in
which conflict affects people differently, with specific
focus on the protection needs of women, children,
persons with disabilities, internally displaced persons

S/PV. 8534

and refugees. I am reminded of the powerful words of
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha, when she spoke in this Chamber
just last month (see S/PV.8515), urging the Council to
make “no one left behind” more than a mere slogan.
That is our responsibility, both in language and in law.
Let us get on with that job.
How do we do that? That brings me to my
second point — we must work to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law. Importantly, we have to
strengthen accountability for all violations. Violations,
including attacks by both State and non-State actors on
schools, medical facilities and personnel, are utterly
unacceptable. The Security Council must step up
and step in to play its role in ensuring accountability
and referring violations to the International Criminal
Court. It must also work to ensure that any referral is
accompanied by support for the Court, particularly
with respect to the execution of arrest warrants
and the critical issue of the provision of adequate
financial support.
Thirdly, the humanitarian impact of urban conflict
and the effects of explosive weapons in populated
areas is increasingly worrying and addressing it is
increasingly urgent. We welcome the focus of the
Secretary-General has put on this in his Agenda for
Disarmament, and we are proud to champion Action
14 of the Agenda. We support the Explosive Weapons
in Populated Areas Talks initiative undertaken by
Germany last year, and Austria’s decision to host a
conference on this important topic in October.
Fourthly, with regard to the need to ensure that our
peacekeepers are equipped with the necessary skills
and capabilities to effectively carry out their mandates,
I agree that we have seen great strides in the normative
framework for the protection of civilians, but there
is a “but”. We consider that challenges remain in its
operationalization. Collectively, we have agreed to
a range of principles and codes, including the Kigali
Principles, but to be very frank, they are meaningless
if they are not implemented or delivered on the ground.
Mandates must match the realities of conflict on the
ground, while training and resources must in turn match
mandates. Concretely, in the past six months, Ireland
has provided two training sessions on the protection
of civilians, bringing together troops from more than
a dozen countries. Like your country, Mr. President,
Ireland is a peacekeeper nation. As a country with
more than 60 years of continuous participation in
peacekeeping, we are aware of our responsibility and

19-1500467/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

willing to play our part. We hope to continue to do so
if we are elected to sit at this table for the term from
2021 to 2022.
In conclusion, protecting civilians is a complex
task, requiring collaboration across the political,
development, humanitarian and civil-society spheres.
It demands the involvement of women and men, young
and old, and it demands collaboration at the local,
national and global levels. In the long term, the best
way to protect civilians is of course to address the root
causes of conflicts, promote human rights and build
sustainable peace. That is the ideal. But until then, the
Security Council simply must ensure that parties to
armed conflict respect rules that apply even in times
of war and seek accountability where they are not
respected. We must keep people accountable for their
violations. We surely owe that to the countless innocent
victims of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: I would like to start by
commending the presidency of Indonesia for convening
today’s open debate on the very important subject of
civilian protection in times of conflict. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
briefing today, as well as his report on the topic
(S/2019/373). and I thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict, for their insightful briefings
at the start of today’s debate.
The African Union (AU) is fully committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and continues
to strengthen its normative and legal frameworks for
enhancing such protection. Over the past decade, the
AU has responded to many situations in which civilians
were caught up in the middle of fighting or directly
targeted by the negative forces of terrorist groups. In
that regard, it should be recalled that the transformation
in 2002 of the Organization of African Unity into the
African Union was marked by the transition from a
doctrine of non-interference to one of non-indifference
to human suffering. As a result, AU peace support
operations in Africa have been increasingly tasked
with protecting civilians. To a greater or lesser degree,
almost all the peace operations authorized by the Peace
and Security Council since 2003 have faced protection
challenges throughout the course of their deployment
68/96

23/05/2019

and have used varying strategies to address them.
This is in response to the fact that in the context of
contemporary conflicts, civilians are victims of
atrocities and violations and have become clear targets
for attack by armed actors. At least 600,000 African
civilians, in 27 countries, have been killed during
conflicts in the past 20 years, with millions more
wounded and displaced.
In that regard, I want to highlight the experience
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which remains one of the best illustrations of the growing
AU commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In the more than a decade since its deployment
in 2007, AMISOM has achieved undeniable security
and political gains while ensuring the protection of
the Somali civilian population from the terrorist threat
through its active military operations in the country.
AMISOM continues to ensure that its operations are
conducted in compliance with the applicable provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In that regard, a series of training
and awareness-raising programmes were conducted to
familiarize personnel with appropriate measures for
protecting women and girls from sexual and genderbased violence, including sexual exploitation and abuse.
The importance of the protection of civilians for
the AU is further demonstrated by its zero-tolerance
position on sexual exploitation and abuse. In order
to maintain it, we have been working very closely
with the United Nations to enhance compliance with
international instruments in peace support operations,
which is in line with the joint African Union-United
Nations strategic framework documents, including
the 19 April 2017 Joint African Union-United Nations
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, as part of the ongoing efforts to secure
predictable and sustainable financing for AU peace
support operations.
We recognize that women are still the principal
victims of sexual and other forms of violence and
discrimination in times of conflict, and that they also
remain key partners as leaders at the community,
national and regional levels. We therefore have a
responsibility for ensuring the protection of women
and children in situations where they are threatened
or affected by violence, in line with the relevant AU
and international instruments. While the necessary
instruments for the protection of women and children
in conflict and for the promotion of their rights exist,
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the pace of their implementation, despite the progress
that has been made, remains slow, and we must call on
all concerned stakeholders to fully implement them in
the promotion of the protection of civilians, particularly
in conflict situations.
Before concluding, I would like to share a few
lessons learned from the AU’s experience in the field.
The African Union’s experience has highlighted the
importance of the protection of civilians for the overall
success of peace efforts on the ground. The gaps and
challenges confronting today’s multidimensional peace
support operations go far beyond the protection debate
as such. The protection of civilians is central to the
purpose and legitimacy of any peace operation. Any
failure in properly implementing the protection-ofcivilians mandate carries a high risk of turning
populations against an international military presence,
which is very detrimental, particularly in asymmetrical
threat environments. We recognize that peace processes
that do not bring a level of security to the civilian
population cannot succeed. Successful peace operations
must rely on both the local civilian population and
external partners to help to build peace and sustain the
political momentum behind peace processes.
Finally, our experience has highlighted the need to
devise effective systems of information-gathering and
analysis that detect patterns of atrocities and develop
strategies and operational approaches that would
enable militaries to effectively protect civilians from
physical violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Monsignor Grysa: I would like to thank Indonesia
for convening today’s open debate to consider the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As other speakers have already noted, this year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva
Conventions, which together form the cornerstone
of international humanitarian law, and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
which was adopted in a context precisely where respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
law was eroding.
Two decades later, the strong condemnation of the
deliberate targeting of civilians and the calls urging
all involved in armed conflicts to comply strictly with

S/PV. 8534

international humanitarian law are more relevant and
pressing than ever, considering that more and more
victims in armed conflicts are innocent civilians. While
in the early 1900s civilian fatalities in armed conflict
were around 5 per cent, in the 1990s non-combatant
fatalities were over 90 per cent. Civilian populations
clearly pay the highest price.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/373) notes
that since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and
the other protection-focused resolutions that have
followed, the attention and action of the Security
Council have strengthened the framework for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and saved
countless lives. The same report, however, as well
as other sources of information, show us that much
remains to be done to ensure the protection of civilians
and humanitarian actors.
As a response to that need, recent peacekeeping
mandates have explicitly included the protection of
civilians, the prevention of sexual violence in conflict
and strict compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Moreover, increased
attention to predeployment formation and contextspecific training has improved the operational capacity
and performance of the Blue Helmets.
A major part of the problem, although not the entire
problem, is that today’s conflicts are more drawn out
and fragmented. They increasingly also involve the
engagement of non-State armed groups, which, more
often than not, act either in total ignorance of or in
absolute disrespect for humanitarian law and principles.
Places where civilians should feel safe are instead
targeted; schools come under fire; hospitals, medical
staff and patients are attacked; places of worship, which
should be havens of peace, become places of death
and devastation; systematic attacks against cultural
heritage turn into weapons of war; homes are destroyed
and entire villages are burned to the ground; women
and girls are raped; children are abducted and forced to
join armed groups; and in far too many places, whole
generations are deprived of education and other basic
services, thereby increasing the danger of perpetuating
that vicious cycle of violence and underdevelopment.
Protracted crises, the restricted movement of
goods and the denial of humanitarian access all have
devastating effects on civilian populations. They are
ensnared in conflicts not of their choosing, forced to flee
their homes and live in camps where they are vulnerable

19-1500469/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to diseases and exposed to abuses of all sorts. Even
humanitarian workers and volunteers increasingly find
themselves targets of direct, intentional attacks, often
made possible by the illegal sale and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.
How ironic it is that food and medical supplies are
often impeded while guns and ammunition circulate
freely. That widespread and growing culture of
impunity impedes warring parties from respecting
the rules of war. If more robust legal mechanisms and
sanctions were put firmly in place, a shift of mentality
and culture would be, at least, given a chance to grow
and flourish.
As we fail to spare too many from the scourge of
war, we must focus our efforts on protecting the most
vulnerable, particularly women, children, the elderly
and the disabled, as well as on ensuring that all those
engaged in armed conflict, State actors and non-State
actors alike, must adhere to the principles enshrined
in the Geneva Conventions and the provisions of the
Council’s resolutions. Today’s open debate must serve
as proof of the Council’s commitment to translating
resolutions into effective action to better protect
civilians in conflict. We owe them that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica thanks Indonesia for convening this important
debate. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Peter Mauer and Mr. Federico Borello for their
valuable contributions to this discussion.
Although it has been 20 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1265 (1999), leading to the
inclusion of the issue of the protection of civilians on
its agenda and to its being considered a core issue, little
has changed in those two decades. To date, according
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/373),
there have been tens of thousands of cases of civilians
killed, maimed or injured in conflicts. It is a frustrating
situation, which has been expressed today in the Council.
The conflict also has indirect effects, such as forced
displacement, the destruction of civilian infrastructure
and, consequently, the deprivation of populations
of the satisfaction of their most basic needs, such as
access to health care and education. Those effects
grow exponentially when the conflict spreads to urban
areas, which, unfortunately, happens with increasing
70/96

23/05/2019

frequency. The Secretary-General reports that there
are more than 50 million people affected by conflict in
urban areas.
Costa Rica reiterates its call on the parties to conflicts
to eliminate the use of explosive weapons, particularly
those of long range, in cities and densely populated
areas. Attacks with such weapons not only result in
a high number of victims but also in the large-scale
destruction of homes, essential infrastructure and
much basic services; forced displacement; refugees;
difficulty in gaining humanitarian access; hunger and
environmental impact, which all further aggravate the
humanitarian situation. That is why Costa Rica joined
22 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean
in condemning acts that contravene international
humanitarian law by adopting the Santiago communiqué
in Chile.
Costa Rica also recognizes the crucial role of
humanitarian aid in the protection and relief of civilian
populations. We condemn the arbitrary denial of relief
operations and advocate for the transit of humanitarian
aid operations to be guaranteed, both by States and by
non-State armed groups.
Attacks on civilians are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, as are deliberate
attacks on medical personnel, medical facilities, places
of refuge for the sick and wounded and schools. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable,
and States must take greater action to eliminate
impunity in such cases. In that regard, Costa Rica
recognizes the Security Council’s efforts to establish
ad hoc tribunals and investigative mechanisms, such as
that created in the case of the chemical weapons attacks
in Syria, and we urge that they be re-established and
updated so that, we hope, they will never have to be
used again. Early and effective action by the Council,
especially preventive actions, is also indispensable. We
therefore urge its members to implement the code of
conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group and urge those with the right of
the veto to refrain from using it in situations involving,
inter alia, war crimes.
Costa Rica believes that, until greater control has
been established over the international arms trade, the
situation will continue to deteriorate. Legislation on
arms exports must be in accordance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and must translate into regulations that prevent the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

uncontrolled circulation of weapons from continuing to
fuel conflicts. We therefore join the Secretary-General
in calling on States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty as a means of protecting civilians in
times of conflict.
We also recognize the importance of accountability,
and we therefore attach great importance to the periodic
submission of reports on the protection of civilians to the
Security Council. In line with the Secretary-General’s
disarmament agenda, we agree that the recording of
data in that regard should be systematic. We therefore
recommend the implementation of a common United
Nations system for registering civilian casualties.
We agree with the Secretary-General that, in order
to guarantee the protection of civilians, the priority must
always be to prevent conflict and lay the foundations
for building sustainable peace. We believe that
national policy frameworks that establish institutional
responsibilities in this area must be formulated and that
those normative actions should be extended to local and
community authorities, so that empowered members
of communities have the necessary tools to face the
challenges posed by conflicts and young people and
women can build local resilience, thereby facilitating
reconstruction and peacekeeping processes.
Costa Rica supports the recommendations outlined
by the Secretary-General in his report and reiterates
the importance of continuing to use the tools provided
by the Charter of the United Nations, while remaining
vigilant, reporting regularly to the Council and making
direct recommendations with regard to protection,
but above all preventing attacks and violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): First of all, allow me
to express my heartfelt congratulations to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting of the Security Council. As a fellow member of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Myanmar
takes pride in the very successful and commendable
Indonesian presidency for the month of May.
It is most fitting to hold this open debate marking the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999) and in the context of the seventieth anniversary
of the adoption of the 1949 Geneva Conventions. We

S/PV. 8534

welcome all the steps taken by the Council to address
the challenges pertaining to the protection of civilians.
Armed conflicts have wrought civilian casualties,
suffering and insecurity. Armed conflicts leave lasting
negative impacts on the political stability, peace and
security, rule of law and sustainable economic and
social development of a country. Therefore, focusing
on conflict prevention and resolution and building
sustainable peace are the most fundamental and crucial
steps necessary for ending the suffering of innocent
civilian populations during armed conflicts. We must
promote dialogue and engagement and facilitate the
settlement of conflict through political means in
good faith.
Myanmar is a country born with internal armed
conflicts. We know too well about the cost of armed
conflict and the value of peace and stability. Therefore,
we place peace at the heart of our democratic
nation-building endeavour. Myanmar believes that
sustainable peace is the only way to end the plight of
all societies affected by armed conflicts. Peace is also
essential to sustainable development and the perpetuity
of democracy and human rights.
Therefore, the Government has pushed forward a
peace process with ethnic armed organizations through
the signing of the nationwide ceasefire agreement and
the holding of the Union Peace Conference to end
internal armed conflicts. Building a lasting peace
requires political will, courage and determination. It
cannot be achieved overnight. But peace is the ultimate
solution to conflicts and the collateral damage affecting
civilian populations.
We recognize that taking preventive measures is
the most effective way to protect the most vulnerable
people in armed conflicts, especially women and
children. In that regard, the Government of Myanmar is
actively cooperating with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict. The Government
established an interministerial committee to implement
national action plans to prevent and address conflictrelated violations against women and children.
Training workshops have been held in collaboration
with the respective Special Representative of the
Secretary-General offices and with the United Nations
agencies to impart awareness and knowledge among
security personnel on violations against women and

19-1500471/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

children. We are encouraged by the ongoing constructive
engagement and cooperation with the two Offices of
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
to prevent and eliminate violations against women and
children in armed conflict.
My delegation believes that domestic, legal
and judicial systems must be the primary recourse
for prosecuting human rights violations. In that
connection, States need to strengthen their own legal
and judicial institutions to establish effective rule of
law and promote a safer environment for their citizens.
Myanmar has undertaken important legal reforms,
particularly revising the child rights law and the law
on preventing and protecting against violence against
women, so as to be in conformity with international
norms and standards. The international community
can play an important role by providing necessary legal
and technical support to States in their institutional
capacity-building efforts.
The Government of Myanmar has adopted a strong
policy of not condoning any human rights abuse. In line
with that commitment, the Government has established
an Independent Commission of Enquiry to investigate
all allegations of human rights violations following
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks in
August 2017 in northern Rakhine. The mandate of the
Commission is to seek accountability and reconciliation.
The Commission is carrying out its mandate with
independence, impartiality and objectivity. Anyone
found guilty of committing atrocities will be punished
according to law. Undue external interference will
only be counterproductive and will be detrimental to
Myanmar’s effort to enforce the rule of law, peace and
national reconciliation.
I would like to state in unequivocal terms that
Myanmar will never accept any measure that violates
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country,
such as the creation of a “safe zone” for Muslim
populations inside Myanmar’s territory, as proposed
by Bangladesh’s Prime Minister and just repeated by
the representative of Bangladesh a few minutes ago
in this Chamber. Bangladesh’s incessant attempt to
destroy our bilateral efforts to solve the humanitarian
problem of Rakhine state and its action to demonize
the Government and the people of Myanmar will not
contribute to solving the problem in Rakhine state and
will only create further polarization and prolong the
suffering of the people.
72/96

23/05/2019

Armed conflicts displace persons, deprive them of
their normal livelihood and their basic human rights.
Even the very essential humanitarian assistance cannot
reach affected populations under circumstances of
active hostilities. It is necessary to build trust and
understanding among all stakeholders, including the
Government, non-State actors and aid providers, to
enable humanitarian access to civilian populations in
need. It is crucial that the provision of humanitarian
assistance be made in accordance with the four
humanitarian principles without politicization.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the relevant United Nations agencies,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
relevant non-governmental organizations, particularly
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
the relevant civil society organizations for providing
humanitarian assistance for the people affected by
armed conflict. The role of civil society organizations
is also crucial to facilitating agreements. Recently, the
Myanmar Government’s National Reconciliation and
Peace Centre and the Kachin Humanitarian Concern
Committee successfully discussed the way forward
towards ensuring the return of displaced persons in
Kachin state to their homes safely and with dignity,
while addressing humanitarian needs and closing
internally displaced persons camps centres.
As long as there is armed conflict, there will always
be civilian casualties. Silencing the guns and achieving
durable peace will ultimately end the suffering of
innocent civilians, mainly women and children,
who bear the brunt of those predicaments. Myanmar
is committed to ending the decades-long internal
armed conflict by peaceful means through political
dialogue. We are striving to create an enabling political
environment to establish a fully functioning democracy
by initiating a constitutional amendment process.
The Government and the people of Myanmar have
fixed their eyes on the national mission of building a
peaceful, prosperous and democratic federal union.
Peace and reconciliation will be at the core of that
endeavour. We shall not be led astray from our chosen
path to peace and democracy under any circumstances
or in the face of any form of challenges. We hope that
the international community will be able to contribute
constructively to achieving peace, development and
democracy in Myanmar so that all our people will
be free from conflict and live together in peace and
harmony, enjoying human rights, justice and equality.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
for convening this important open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
This year marks several important anniversaries
in the protection of civilians, namely, the adoption
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions — a cornerstone
of international humanitarian law — the holding
by the Security Council of its first open debate on
the topic in February 1999 (see S/PV.3978), with
presidential statement S/PRS/1999/6 as its outcome,
the subsequent adoption of the first Security Council
resolution — resolution 1265 (1999) — on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the authorization,
through resolution 1270 (1999), of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation with the explicit mandate to
protect civilians under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations.
However, civilians continue to suffer from
inadequate protection in situations of armed conflict.
A defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts is still
the failure of the parties to respect and ensure respect
for their obligations to protect civilians. Indeed, as the
concept note (S/2019/385, annex) points out, ensuring
the implementation of international humanitarian law
constitutes the central challenges of today, and should
be the key priority of Member States for the years ahead.
Fundamental to enhancing respect for international
law is the need to ensure accountability for wrongdoing.
It is critical that under no pretext peace efforts
encourage, accept or tolerate situations achieved by the
unlawful use of force and other egregious violations of
general international law, such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity, ethnic cleansing and genocide.
Azerbaijan supports the increased focus on the problem
of forced displacement as a result of armed conflict.
There is a need for strengthened effort to prevent,
address and resolve the challenges of such displacement,
particularly by supporting the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons in safety and dignity.
Among the pressing issues requiring urgent action
is that of civilians taken hostage and reported missing
in connection with armed conflict. We continue our
consistent effort to raise awareness of the problem
at the international level and further develop rulesbased guidance to that effect, including through the

S/PV. 8534

relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Commission on the Status of Women, of which
Azerbaijan is a main sponsor.
The issue that we are discussing today is of the
utmost importance for the Security Council, the entire
international community and my country in particular.
The forcible deportation of some 250,000 Azerbaijanis
from their homes in Armenia at the end of the 1980s
was accompanied by killings, enforced disappearances,
the destruction of property and pillaging. At the end
of 1991 and the beginning of 1992, full-scale war was
unleashed against Azerbaijan, which claimed the lives
of tens of thousands of people and caused considerable
destruction of civilian infrastructure, property and
livelihoods in my country.
A significant part of the territory of Azerbaijan,
including the Nagorno Karabakh region, the seven
adjacent districts and some exclaves, was seized by
Armenia and remain under its occupation in violation
of international law and resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993). The occupied
territories were ethnically cleansed of all Azerbaijanis.
As a result, my country has one of the largest displaced
populations in the world, as has been stated by various
representatives of the Secretary-General on the human
rights of internally displaced persons.
Moreover, purposeful measures are being
undertaken by the Armenian side to prevent Azerbaijani
internally displaced persons from returning to their
homes and properties. Such measures include the
implantation of settlers in the occupied territories,
infrastructure changes and the destruction and
desecration of historical and cultural heritage. Those
activities undermine the rights and freedoms of
hundreds of thousands of people uprooted from their
homes and pose an imminent threat to peace, security
and stability in the region.
Furthermore, as of 1 May, 3,888 citizens of
Azerbaijan were registered missing in connection with
the conflict. Among them are 718 civilians, including
71 children, 266 women and 326 elderly persons. As the
Secretary-General points out in his report,
“It is incumbent on parties to conflict to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law
as it relates to missing persons [and in particular]
to take all feasible measures to account for those
reported missing”. (S/2019/373, para. 45)

19-1500473/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In that connection, I would like to stress that the
denial of the responsibility for crimes is a violation of
human rights and a direct obstacle to lasting peace and
genuine reconciliation.
In conclusion, we believe that it is critically important
that the Security Council consistently maintain its focus
on the protection of civilians affected by armed conflict
and systematically reiterate its demand that all parties
to armed conflict comply fully with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Paraguay, I am grateful for the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/373) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and for the initiative by the Indonesian
presidency to convene this open debate.
We believe that, with regard to the Security
Council, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
must be clearly and explicitly included in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. That protection must
be a priority in situations where civilians are at high
risk of violence and must also be explicit with regard
to protection against sexual violence, in its broadest
sense, and the specific protection of children and
adolescents in armed conflict. The existing mandates
of peacekeeping missions must also be amended in
that regard.
We further emphasize that education and training
in international humanitarian law and international
human rights law to stop and prevent acts of violence,
attacks and threats against civilians are critical to
improving the system for the protection of civilians. In
the context of peacekeeping operations, we stress the
need for military and police personnel to receive general
training on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
prior to their deployment to missions, in line with the
needs of the location where they will be deployed. The
training of contingents once deployed in host countries
should only be complementary to that received in the
country of origin.
It is imperative that both the Security Council
and States Members of the Organization, regardless
of their status as parties to conflicts, contribute to
establishing an effective system for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In its effort to contribute to
74/96

23/05/2019

comprehensive political and legal frameworks for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, the Republic of
Paraguay recently ratified the Kampala amendments to
the Rome Statute, thereby reaffirming its commitment
to cooperation with the International Criminal Court
in order to address and prevent impunity by ensuring
justice and reparation for victims of international
crimes. We also support the Secretary-General’s
proposal to Member States to participate constructively
in the development of a political declaration on the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. We reiterate
our adherence to the Santiago Communiqué of 2018 and
urge Member States to adhere to the Oslo Safe Schools
Declaration of 2015.
Finally, the Republic of Paraguay condemns
disregard for the fundamental norms of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by parties to conflicts, in particular the practices of
starvation of the civilian population as a method of
warfare, restrictions on humanitarian access and the
protection of civilians, and undermining the institution
of asylum and the principle of non-refoulement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Indonesia and you, Mr. President, for presiding
over and convening this open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the Executive Director of the
Center for Civilians in Conflict for their briefings
this morning.
This debate is very timely, as it takes place at a time
when the international community is commemorating
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions
and 20 years since the Security Council included the
protection of civilians as an item on its agenda under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Yet,
despite all that, we continue to witness the suffering
of millions of women, children and men trapped in
conflicts around the world.
Chile is strongly committed to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts and directs
its international action based on the promotion and
protection of human security, defined as the right of
people to live in freedom and dignity without fear of
their overall development and human potential being
threatened. Everyone, in particular the vulnerable, has
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8534

the right to live without fear and, in this case, civilians
have the right not to be targets of war.

protecting civilians, in particular children, by helping
to re-establish a sustained peace.

My delegation believes that in order for peace
operations to be more effective in their key task, which
is the protection of civilians, it is necessary for mandates
to be clear and specific with regard to the aspects of
that protection, with an appropriate assessment of the
conditions on the ground. That also includes the need to
improve information and intelligence work.

In conclusion, Chile reiterates its support for the
reforms and the strengthening of the system for the
protection of civilians in conflict, since it puts into
practice the general principles of our foreign policy,
such as strict compliance with international law, the
promotion of democracy, respect for human rights
and support for multilateralism. The Council and the
institutional framework of the United Nations must
ensure the protection of civilians on the basis of
effective, people-centred, comprehensive, contextspecific and prevention-oriented responses. Chile will
remain committed to that end, based on its pursuit of
peace that inspires my country’s diplomatic efforts.

In that regard, I would like to echo the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2019/373) and highlight the
importance of disaggregated data of victims, which
provide the necessary information to identify patterns of
violence and risks to particular populations, including,
as I have said, children, women, internally displaced
persons, journalists, teachers, medical personnel and
humanitarian workers.
We highlight the need to promote accountability
and justice in the case of indiscriminate attacks
and support the participation of entities such as the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
and independent civil society actors, which are
valuable sources of information, especially those
based in communities affected by conflict and with
limited access.
I would like to reiterate my country’s commitment
to the protection of civilians from the use of explosive
areas in populated areas, including through active
participation in the focal points network on the issue and
the convening in my country in December 2018 of the
Latin American and Caribbean regional conference on
protecting civilians from the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. The outcome of the conference, in
which 23 Member States participated, was the Santiago
Communiqué, in which participants acknowledged
the need to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and supported the
development of a political declaration.
In line with the above, Chile is deeply committed
to the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers and the Safe Schools Declaration, signed in
Oslo in May 2015. For our country, supporting those
principles represents a way of contributing to the
collective commitment to maintaining international
peace and security so as to make the work of personnel
deployed in peace operations more effective in

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Raum (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the important topic of
the protection of civilians, which reflects Indonesia’s
commitment in that regard. My delegation fully
associates itself with the statements made by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of
Switzerland, on behalf of the Group of Friends for the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/373),
which contains useful recommendations. We share the
irrefutable analysis of the Secretary-General and of the
other briefers who have enhanced this debate.
In 2019, as we celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions and the anniversary of
resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians,
the fact is that, despite the legislative progress made,
armed conflicts, which not only afflict civilians
but often deliberately target them, continue. The
norms and rules of international humanitarian law
are intended to protect all of humankind. It is our
collective responsibility to defend and uphold those
rules and standards and ensure that they are respected,
and Luxembourg is actively engaged in that regard.
We support the practical implementation of the code
of conduct developed by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group regarding timely and decisive
action by the Security Council, as well as France and
Mexico’s initiative on limiting the use of the veto. We
also support Switzerland’s initiative to include in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court the

19-1500475/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

use of starvation as a war crime in non-international
armed conflicts. Luxembourg would like to make
four proposals.
First, all peace operations should have a civilian
protection component when the situation on the ground
requires it, and operations should be provided with the
capacity they need to fulfil their mandate in that regard.
Secondly, if we are to change things, we must know
how to measure them. Civilian casualties in conflicts
must be effectively and independently tracked so
that the United Nations can measure the extent of the
challenge and improve the protection of civilians. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is a
good example.
Thirdly, impunity must end, because it often leads
to further violence. When Heads of State choose to
pardon war criminals instead of bringing them to
justice, they perpetuate impunity and sow the seeds
of future crimes. In that context, Luxembourg fully
supports the International Criminal Court and the work
of its Prosecutor.
Fourthly, we must ensure that the connection
between the protection of civilians and post-conflict
peacebuilding is recognized. If warring parties and
their international supporters target civilians and
civilian infrastructure, they are not just guilty of war
crimes, they are also ruining the chances of restoring
and building just and lasting peace after a conflict. That
is unfortunately evident in Syria, where Government
forces and their allies continue to deliberately target
civilians, hospitals and other protected facilities, in
particular in Idlib.
The protection of civilians involves many of the
topics on the Council’s agenda. It overlaps with the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and with the fight against
sexual violence in conflict and the protection of
children in armed conflict. Luxembourg is committed
to all of those areas and supports in particular the
mandates of Special Representatives Virginia Gamba
and Pramila Patten, as well as the framework for action
of the Safe Schools Declaration and the Paris Principles
and Commitments.
The continued engagement of the Council’s
permanent and elected members is essential to
strengthening the protection of civilians while ensuring
that United Nations peace operations have the mandate
76/96

23/05/2019

and capacity to protect civilians — men, women and
children — who are the most vulnerable to violence in
today’s conflicts, and to prevent conflicts before they
claim other innocent victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me begin by warmly
commending the Indonesian presidency for its
successful leadership of the Council this month and for
the focus it has given to today’s important topic.
The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of States, a fundamental principle of
international humanitarian law and a critical benchmark
by which the performance of the United Nations is
judged. Emerging in response to the international
community’s failures to prevent mass atrocities in
Rwanda and the Balkans in the 1990s, the protection-ofcivilians agenda of the United Nations has become a
critical component of the Security Council’s work in
maintaining international peace and security. While a
solid normative protection-of-civilians framework has
been established under international law and through
Council practice, the realities on the ground often
paint a different picture. The majority of casualties in
armed conflict are civilians. Vast numbers are killed,
maimed, raped, starved or forced to flee. Civilians are
often indiscriminately targeted. I would like to make a
few points about what more can be done to ensure the
protection of civilians.
First, the Council must be more systematic,
comprehensive and consistent in addressing protection
concerns within and across conflict situations. Where
peaceful means are inadequate and national authorities
manifestly fail to protect their populations, the
Council must uphold the international community’s
responsibility to protect populations from mass
atrocities. We urge all States to sign the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
and to support France and Mexico’s initiative on veto
restraint, to ensure that Council resolutions designed to
prevent or halt mass atrocities are not blocked.
Secondly, the credibility and legitimacy of United
Nations peacekeeping depends on the Council’s
capacity to act when civilians are under threat. The
effective protection of civilians requires comprehensive
and trusted engagement with local communities to
understand and respond to their protection needs.
We welcome the expansion of community liaison
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

alert networks and recognize the indispensable role
of women and child protection advisers in combating
sexual violence and the recruitment of child soldiers.
We urge Council members to further explore the
unarmed civilian protection methodologies employed
by a number of organizations. Community engagement
is central to the success of those efforts. Uniformed
components must be well trained and equipped for
protection-of-civilians tasks that require a proactive
posture. New protection-of-civilian performance
assessments will help address shortcomings and
strengthen accountability. We encourage all troopcontributing countries to endorse the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians.
Thirdly, we must enhance and ensure respect
for international humanitarian and human rights
law in conflict. We welcome the development of
national protection-of-civilians policies to ensure
that international obligations are met and protection
strategies are effective. In 2015, we adopted the
Australian Guidelines for the Protection of Civilians.
We applaud the ongoing engagement with States and
non-State armed groups to deepen understanding and
respect for international law, including ongoing efforts
to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Finally, we support more robust and innovative
approaches to accountability, including through
sanctions and independent investigative mechanisms,
to help bring justice and deter future crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We share the concern reflected in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373), which
points out that civilians continue to account for the
vast majority of casualties in conflict and are the
targets of indiscriminate attacks and other violations.
The States Members of the United Nations must act
decisively to prevent conflicts, for conflict prevention
is the safest and least costly way to protect civilians.
To that end, the Charter of the United Nations, and its
purposes and principles in particular, must be strictly
respected. It is also essential to work to eradicate
the underlying causes of conflicts, in particular by

S/PV. 8534

supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The Security Council must fulfil its vital
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security by encouraging respect for international
law and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It should
refrain from supporting military ventures and from
resorting to the threat or use of force to resolve
conflicts. The responsibility for conflict prevention
and the protection of civilians during conflicts belongs
to States. The international community, the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations can
provide constructive assistance but cannot replace the
role of the Governments of the countries concerned.
They should support and complement the efforts of
national Governments when requested, impartially and
unconditionally, with strict respect for their sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence. It is
totally unacceptable for efforts to protect civilians to
be used to advance the geopolitical interests of certain
States or as a pretext for disregarding and violating the
principles of the Charter and meddling in the internal
affairs of States.
We firmly condemn the killing of innocent people
and the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of
force against civilians. Their protection cannot serve
as a pretext for legitimizing military interventions with
the aim of imposing regime changes and overthrowing
the legitimately established political, economic and
social order.
We recognize that humanitarian assistance
constitutes a fundamental component of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, but it must be provided
in accordance with the principles of the Charter,
international law, international humanitarian law and
General Assembly resolution 46/182. The guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance — humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence — must
be respected, and assistance must be provided in
accordance with international law and the national laws
of the countries concerned, and with the consent of
the host States. We reject the political manipulation
of humanitarian assistance and the imposition and
strengthening of unilateral coercive economic
measures, which cause severe deprivation and harm to
the very civilians they seek to protect.
All parties involved in hostilities must comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian

19-1500477/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

law, as enshrined in the Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional. That also applies to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly those
with protection of civilian mandates. They must have
realistic and achievable mandates, with concrete, clearly
defined objectives and the necessary resources to avoid
jeopardizing the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Peace operations with robust mandates that allow
for the proactive use of force in the protection of civilians
have not always ensured a safer environment. The
flexible application or reinterpretation of peacekeeping
principles has increased the risk of threats and attacks
against United Nations personnel and affected their
integrity, credibility and neutrality.
As the Secretary-General’s report reflects,
concrete improvements are possible, particularly if
arms transfers to unauthorized non-State actors are
prohibited, military expenditures and the exponential
development of sophisticated conventional weapons
reduced, lethal autonomous weapon systems and the use
of military attack drones banned, and war machinery
stopped and its resources reallocated to economic and
social development.
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and
their Protocols Additional, relating to the protection
of victims of non-international armed conflicts, their
provisions remain in full force. The life and dignity of
persons in hostilities must be protected and respected,
without discrimination of any kind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of San Marino.
Ms. Bartolini (San Marino): I would like to
thank the Indonesian presidency for convening this
very important meeting. I would also like to thank
the briefers for their presentations this morning. San
Marino welcomes the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/373) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and supports its recommended measures.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions, civilians continue to be victims
of direct and indiscriminate attacks on a daily basis.
They continue to be killed, targeted and forced to flee
their homes. Even humanitarian and medical workers
are often attacked, killed or kidnapped, and hospitals
and medical facilities are bombed or looted. San Marino
78/96

23/05/2019

firmly condemns such attacks, which are in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law.
The implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of health services in armed conflict,
remains critical. San Marino also welcomes resolution
2417 (2018), which condemns the use of starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare, as well as the unlawful
denial of humanitarian access. Humanitarian space
should always be respected, including in domestic
counter-terrorism measures. San Marino also supports
the Swiss proposal for an amendment in article 8 of the
Rome Statute on the inclusion of starvation as a war
crime in internal armed conflicts.
The situation of vulnerable groups is of great
concern, since it tends to worsen during armed
conflicts. Children, for example, are being recruited
as soldiers, and their schools have been attacked,
destroyed or used as military facilities. San Marino
condemns those acts in the strongest terms and fully
supports the development of action plans to prevent and
end grave violations against children. San Marino has
joined the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Safe Schools Declaration, the Vancouver Principles
and the new #ACTtoProtect campaign — important
instruments aimed at protecting children in conflicts
and ensuring their rehabilitation and reintegration.
I would also like to highlight the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on persons with disabilities.
Conflicts always cause physical impairments, primarily
as a result of the use of explosive devices, which also
disrupt basic services for the disabled, who are often
unable to flee attacks. Furthermore, women and girls
with disabilities are in particular at risk of violence and
abuses. It is urgent and essential to act for the protection
and assistance of those specific groups.
San Marino fully supports the Secretary-General’s
call on parties to conflict to avoid the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in urban centres.
These weapons cause massive suffering to civilians.
They damage and destroy their homes and critical
infrastructure. We firmly believe that all parties should
avoid the use of such devices in populated areas, and
we support the Secretary-General’s call to develop a
political declaration as a measure to address that threat.
The Security Council has now been debating the
item on today’s agenda for 20 years. Much progress has
been made, but it is essential that we continue to stress
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8534

the importance of respecting international humanitarian
law. All parties must abide by these norms, and we
need to prioritize measures to ensure accountability. In
that regard, we welcome investigations at the national
level and we call on States to support the work of
the International Criminal Court. San Marino firmly
believes that ensuring greater respect for international
humanitarian law is one of the most effective ways to
protect civilians.

commitment to helping to alleviate the suffering of
populations in areas affected by crisis, as reflected in
our national humanitarian mission in Syria in response
to the request of the Syrian authorities and the Armenian
community. Demining specialists from Armenia are
currently operating in the southern communities of
Aleppo, and our medical team provides assistance in
four hospitals, as well as in a medical facility under the
Armenian Relief Cross of Syria in Aleppo.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.

Promoting the norms of international humanitarian
law and raising awareness in that regard is an important
element in Armenia’s security-sector governance.
International humanitarian law is incorporated in
the curricula of Armenia’s military educational
institutions. We also highly appreciate the cooperation
with the ICRC in implementing training projects
and reaching out to people affected by conflict who
are in need of humanitarian assistance. Armenia’s
commitment to promoting the importance of the safety
of children and students in armed conflict is reflected
in its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration.

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council
for the choice of the theme of today’s open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in
Conflict for their briefings earlier today.
This meeting provides an important opportunity to
reflect on the ways in which the global efforts for the
protection of civilians have evolved over the past 20
years. We recognize the considerable progress achieved
within the Organization and the efforts of the Security
Council to strengthen the normative framework
of the protection agenda. At the same time, we are
concerned about the persisting challenges highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/373) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Supporting impartiality and independence in
humanitarian action and providing safe, timely and
unimpeded humanitarian access is crucial to preventing
and alleviating the suffering of civilians caught up in
conflict. Attempts to politicize humanitarian access,
along with the refusal to cooperate at the level of
the relevant authorities, demonstrate an intention to
deliberately impede efforts to protect and assist those in
need. We strongly condemn violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel, as well
as violence, threats and intimidation against journalists
and media workers.
Armenia has been consistent in advancing the
prevention and protection agendas, including through
our involvement in United Nations and United Nationsmandated peace and stability operations, namely, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We have also shown a consistent

We fully recognize the importance of the
empowerment of women and how it is linked and
intertwined with sustainable peace and development
efforts on different levels. An important example of
women’s participation in peacebuilding efforts is the
Women for Peace initiative led by the spouse of the
Prime Minister of Armenia, as an inclusive platform for
women and mothers to promote peace and reconciliation
in our region and beyond. Armenia is fully committed
to the promotion of gender-sensitive policies and has
adopted a national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) that prioritizes the enhancement
of training and career-development possibilities for
women, with a view to increasing their participation in
peacebuilding activities.
The civilian population of Nagorno Karabakh and
the bordering regions of Armenia have been constantly
exposed to serious humanitarian risks. Azerbaijan’s
attempted aggression against Nagorno Karabakh in
April 2016 was accompanied by grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including barbaric acts rising to the level of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, such as beheadings,
mutilations and other atrocity crimes. Attacks and
indiscriminate shelling, including of a school building,
inflicted losses on our civilian populations, including
children and the elderly.

19-1500479/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The international community should resolutely
condemn any pursuit of military solutions to conflict
situations. We reject any alternative to a peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. The
ceasefire agreements of 1994 and 1995 signed
by Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia
constitute the foundation of the cessation of hostilities.
Armenia urges Azerbaijan to undertake genuine
steps to create conditions conducive to advancing the
peace process. Azerbaijan should bring an end to its
persistent warmongering and cultivation of hatred and
intolerance against Armenians and instead invest real
efforts in promoting a culture of peace and respect for
human rights.
The effective utilization of the capacity of the
regional dimension in the prevention and resolution of
conflict is of the utmost importance. Armenia welcomes
the support of the international community, the United
Nations and the Secretary-General for the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group
co-chairmanship towards the peaceful resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Protecting civilians in armed conflicts is closely
linked to the prevention of mass atrocities, including the
crime of genocide. To be effective in our determination
to protect, a primary role should be given to early
action on warning signs of deteriorating situations that
can potentially result in conflicts, atrocities and human
suffering. As is well known, crises, atrocities and
genocides do not occur overnight; they are detectable
and predictable. The denial of past crimes, impunity
and discrimination and the prevalence of hate speech
are among the precipitating factors leading to massive
crimes and conflict and represent explicit and detectable
early-warning signs. We are of the view that the Joint
Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect has a
prominent function in detecting such risks. The United
Nations system should do more to engage affected
populations, including women and girls, and support
entities that amplify their voices.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic):, I would like to
extend to the President and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia the appreciation of the League of
Arab States for their initiative in holding today’s open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
80/96

23/05/2019

This meeting coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
protection of civilian persons in time of war. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the leading
role played by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the International Committee
of the Red Cross as impartial and credible organizations
in applying the provisions of international humanitarian
law and providing maximum protection for defenceless
civilians who are victims of armed conflict. I also thank
this morning’s briefers.
Undoubtedly, the Security Council’s discussion
today of this important topic, following the meeting held
last month under the German presidency on promoting
and strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security (see S/PV.8499), is a
testament of the fact that the Council is determined to
ensure that States Members of the United Nations uphold
their commitments set forth in international treaties
and legal instruments on international humanitarian
law, which they ratified without politicization or double
standards, in particular with regard to the protection
of civilians.
The ongoing current crises — mostly in Africa,
the Arab world and Asia — have led to a surge in
humanitarian needs. There are about 140 million persons
in dire need of humanitarian assistance, mostly owing
to armed conflict, which is three times the number 10
years ago. The problem is aggravated by a new trend
among certain warring parties and their sponsors
to not uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The successive events in Palestine,
Syria, Libya, the Sudan, Iraq, Somalia and other Arab
States are stark examples of this trend, which clearly
reveals double standards and selectivity in dealing with
situations involving refugees, displaced persons and
others affected by waves of armed conflict spreading
across the Arab world, on the one hand, or of terrorism,
on the other, which deeply affects civilians without
regard to their race, creed or religion on the other.
The attack against the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) that we witnessed during yesterday’s
Security Council meeting on the Middle East with regard
to the Agency’s role in providing relief to Palestinian
refugees (see S/PV.8532) is definitive proof that some
States do not respect humanitarian work. Rather, they
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

seek to undermine the international solidarity that
supports the exemplary work of UNRWA as it serves
5.3 million Palestinian refugees. The United States of
America has cut its funding for UNRWA and sought
to exclude the refugee issue and the issue of Jerusalem
from any final-status negotiations, while seeking to
undermine the deep-rooted international legitimacy
of the Middle East peace process, whose objective is
to bring about — through direct negotiations between
the State of Palestine and Israel, without interference
or pressure by any partial external parties — the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital and based on the 1967
borders. The League of Arab States will continue to
uphold this legitimacy through the implementation of
its resolutions adopted at the ministerial and summit
levels, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative, which is the
overarching framework of the various Arab positions
on the Palestinian question.
Any discussion on the protection of civilians must
include the protection of the defenceless Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories from
the cruelty of the Israeli occupation and settlers,
who have been shedding the blood of Palestinian
civilians especially since the incidents of Earth Day
on 30 March 2018. That has claimed the lives of more
than 400 Palestinians and injured tens of thousands
more. All of this is happening as the Security Council
has been clearly unable to act; whereas the Group of
Arab States has asked the Council to adopt a draft
resolution on establishing a clear mechanism to protect
the Palestinian people against the attacks of the Israeli
army and settlers. One permanent Council members
has even used its veto to stand against the international
collective will and portrayed Hamas and Islamic Jihad as
those responsible, and not Israel, the occupying Power,
which continues to violate the Geneva Conventions
without deterrence.
The tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly, which reconvened on 13 June 2018, adopted
resolution ES-10/20, which requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report on specific proposals for the
establishment of a mechanism to protect the Palestinian
people. Although the Secretary-General indeed
submitted his report to both the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the Council neither discussed
it, at even a single meeting, nor sought to agree on a
mechanism for the protection of the Palestinian people
under occupation.

S/PV. 8534

That failure encouraged Israel, the occupying Power,
to proceed with ending the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, which had been ongoing since
1994. That was another flagrant violation by Israel of
all its commitments on the protection of civilians in
accordance with Geneva Conventions, especially given
that the justifications for establishing the International
Presence to protect the defenceless Palestinian people
still exist, as does, moreover, the continued illegal
occupation of Palestinian territories.
The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, has a duty to robustly defend
humanitarian work based on international legal
principles. All Member States must fight against
any exploitation of humanitarian work, as well as
against manipulating or politicizing it. Humanitarian
assistance must therefore not be halted, especially for
those who cannot meet their basic needs. We must
support impartial and fair organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Red Crescent Society, as well as facilitate
their work instead of impeding and restricting it. We
must also increase humanitarian funding, particularly
for UNRWA. States must implement the commitments
they undertook under the Geneva Conventions 70 years
ago, within a framework of transparency and credibility.
Most important, there must be accountability for all
violations of international humanitarian law and the
norms and principles of the Geneva Conventions, and
above all for the international legitimacy represented
by the Council and its ability to oblige whomever dares
violate those provisions to commit to them and be held
accountable. The League of Arab States has confidence
in the ability of the Security Council to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the Special
Representative of the NATO Secretary-General for
Women, Peace and Security.
Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the protection of civilians
and for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
behalf of NATO.
The protection of the civilian population is a
centrepiece of NATO’s work, equally relevant to each
of our overarching core tasks, namely, collective
defence, cooperative security and crisis management.
NATO leaders have adopted a holistic approach on
the protection of civilians, recognizing that civilian
protection goes far beyond just high-intensity military

19-1500481/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

operations. For NATO, the protection agenda is allencompassing. It integrates the cross-cutting areas of
children and armed conflict, women and peace and
security, conflict-related sexual violence, cultural
property protection and human trafficking.
Over the past decade, NATO and its partners have
elevated the commitment to protecting civilians and,
in line with the Council’s guidance, has developed a
diverse and robust body of policies and doctrine in
the planning and conduct of operations and missions.
NATO’s 2016 policy on the protection of civilians sets
out a coherent, consistent and integrated approach
on protection. Its guiding principles require that all
NATO-led operations and missions be conducted in
accordance with applicable international law. The
policy was developed together with all member nations
and 26 NATO partners, and in consultation with the
United Nations and other international organizations. It
is strengthened by a concrete action plan, implemented
by allies and partners and regularly reviewed by the
North Atlantic Council.
While the NATO-led missions and operations
change and evolve over time, our commitment to the
cross-cutting areas of protection remains steadfast.
For example, today NATO’s mandate in Afghanistan
is limited solely to training, advising and assisting,
because NATO does not conduct combat operations,
as reflected in the NATO-Afghanistan status of forces
agreement, whose signing was noted by the Council.
We have incorporated lessons from the past into all
areas of our civilian protection mandate, while giving
specific attention to the protection of women and
children. NATO recognizes that the protection children
in conflict is of the utmost importance. Together with
the United Nations, we have developed practical, fieldoriented measures to address conflict-related violations
against children.
NATO’s 2015 policy document entitled “Protection
of Children in Armed Conflict — the Way Forward”
provides additional guidance on integrating Security
Council resolutions into the alliance’s military doctrine,
education, training and exercises. It includes standing
operating procedures for monitoring and reporting
violations against children in NATO military operations
on the ground. We are particularly proud of our efforts
in assisting the Afghan authorities in developing their
first child-protection policy. The policy aims to shield
children from the adverse effects of armed conflict, and
82/96

23/05/2019

especially to prevent perpetrators of violence against
children in combat operations.
We are also constantly advancing our work on
efforts to better protect women and girls from conflictrelated sexual violence. The long-term destructive
nature of conflict-related sexual violence, as well as
its grave effect on entire communities, continues to
pose significant threats to global peace and security.
In response, in June 2015, we developed military
guidelines on the prevention of and response to conflictrelated sexual violence.
NATO allies have strongly committed to putting
the protection of civilians at the core of our operations
and missions in how they train soldiers, operate in the
field and interact with civilians in combat zones. While
standards and training alone are not the only answer,
they do ensure that personnel recognize the different
populations affected by conflict and are trained to
prevent, recognize and respond to violations. The
recognition that predeployment training is critical
to articulating those principles and translating them
into operational effect is key. NATO nations therefore
undertake mandatory predeployment training on
the protection of civilians and children and armed
conflict for personnel deployed to NATO-led missions
and operations.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that NATO’s
commitment to civilian protection is indisputable.
NATO’s policy on the protection of civilians
demonstrates the shared commitment of all NATO
allies to strengthening efforts to better protect civilian
populations. Reflecting on lessons learned, we will
continue to reinforce our collective protection mandate
by building up institutional capacity, training and
dedicating resources as needed. That is a vital part of
creating lasting cultural changes and guaranteeing the
rights of all citizens.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure, at the outset, to express our sincere thanks to
the Republic of Indonesia for organizing this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to express our appreciation to Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, for presiding over this meeting. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Executive Director
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of the Center for Civilians in Conflict for their thorough
briefings to the Security Council.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the four Geneva Conventions, following the
end of the Second World War. The Conventions were
not merely legally binding international instruments.
They were also the result of a painful humanitarian
experience caused by the scourge of the Second World
War. The international community drew many lessons
from those experiences, which in turn were translated
into a number of principles, purposes and fundamental
norms that were enshrined in the Conventions. They
now form the cornerstone of the rules of international
law. The Conventions guaranteed protection for people
from the scourge of war and its destructive effects, in
particular for those not involved in acts of aggression,
including the wounded, the sick, prisoners and
civilians, as well as civilians living under occupation.
The Conventions called for the protection of their lives
and dignity without discrimination.
This year also coincides with the twentieth
anniversary of the Council’s adoption of resolution 1265
(1999) and the inclusion of the protection of civilians as
an item on its agenda.
There has been major development at the conceptual
level with regard to the protection of civilians, in
particular since the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), which placed the issue of protecting civilians
at the top priorities of the Security Council and as
one of the fundamental pillars of the peacekeeping
mandates. However, it is a source of grave concern
that that conceptual development was not accompanied
by progress in translating it into concrete measures
to protect civilians on the ground. Civilians continue
to bear the brunt of conflicts and constitute the vast
majority of their victims.
The tragedies of civilians in many of today’s world
conflicts, in particular in the Middle East and Africa,
pose an unprecedented challenge to the fundamental
pillars of international humanitarian law and the
enforcement of the principle of protecting civilians in
armed conflict, especially women and children, who
are the most vulnerable to violations.
Egypt recognizes its responsibility to prevent such
violations. That is why we have made tireless efforts to
advance the agenda of protecting civilians within the
United Nations system, including the initiative in which
we participated along with four other non-permanent

S/PV. 8534

members of the Security Council at the time. The
purpose was to introduce a draft resolution on medical
protection in armed conflict, which was later adopted
as resolution 2286 (2016) at the very beginning of
Egypt’s presidency of the Security Council in May 2016
Also, based on Egypt’s belief in the importance of
promoting the frameworks and governing principles
of peacekeeping operations, in particular with regard
to the protection of civilians, we acceded to the Kigali
Principles, in November 2018, as well as to the voluntary
compact on combating sexual exploitation and abuse.
Egypt has also taken a number of national measures
and actions in support of the agenda of protecting
civilians in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, at the
March Ministerial on Peacekeeping, Egypt pledged to
hold training sessions on comprehensive protection for
civilians, which are currently being developed.
It is no secret that peacekeeping operations face
serious challenges in implementing the protection of
civilians mandate in armed conflict. There has been a
significant qualitative and quantitative change in the
nature of conflicts. Contemporary conflicts are usually
characterized by the phenomenon of non-State armed
actors systematically targeting civilians as a military
strategy. Furthermore, conflicts are increasingly taking
place in densely populated areas where explosive
weapons with indiscriminate effects on civilians are
used. All that requires a comprehensive approach
that takes into account the specific characteristics of
each conflict and prioritizes above all the protection
of civilians, particularly women, children and the
most vulnerable.
In order to be effective, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict cannot be limited to material or
physical protection. It also must focus basically on
finding political solutions to end a conflict and prevent
its recurrence. As well, it must address the root causes
of conflict and take a more comprehensive approach
that addresses the challenges of eradicating poverty
and socioeconomic marginalization, while promoting
the role of national institutions and mechanisms
involved in preventing and managing conflicts,
regardless of their nature, as well as promoting stability
and ensuring that all parties to a conflict comply with
the rules and provisions of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law and ensuring
that violators are held accountable. In addition, more
attention is needed in future to address new challenges

19-1500483/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

that threaten civilians, above all the spread of
international terrorism.
We also stress that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States and Governments.
The goal of peacekeeping operations is to strengthen
the ability of States to fulfil their commitments. At the
same time, peacekeeping operations must respect the
principles of sovereignty, national ownership and the
culture of the host State.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that our
meeting today constitutes an opportunity to assess the
scale of progress made with regard to the implementation
of the agenda related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We strongly stress promoting the noble
values and principles of international humanitarian
law on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, in
particular the most vulnerable, including women and
children, without politicization or selectivity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I would like to thank the
Indonesian presidency for organizing a debate on this
important topic. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/373) and the representatives of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the Center
for Civilians in Conflict for their respective briefings.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
As we reflect today on the progress made over the
past 20 years since the protection of civilians in armed
conflict was prioritized by the United Nations, Latvia
agrees with the previous speakers that there have been
important advancements, especially in the normative
framework. The protection of civilians during armed
conflict is a cornerstone of international humanitarian
law, which is binding for all parties to armed conflict,
State and non-State alike. International humanitarian
law also identifies and protects particularly vulnerable
civilian groups, such as women, children and
displaced persons.
The Security Council has strengthened the
framework for the protection of civilians through
its relevant resolutions, including prioritizing the
issue in peacekeeping mandates. We believe that the
international community has grown more aware of
the need to prevent and stop violations against civilian
populations during conflicts, especially owing to the
84/96

23/05/2019

nature and media coverage of contemporary conflicts.
It must be noted that the Council has heard many
moving testimonies by survivors of conflicts.
The legal framework is solid and relevant. Yet,
despite those developments, civilian protection in armed
conflicts has not been sufficient. The latest report of
the Secretary-General once again confirms that far
too many civilians continue to be robbed of their lives,
health, future prospects and homes. Challenges remain
to the protection of civilians in diverse conflict-affected
areas, including Syria, Yemen, Libya and Ukraine, to
name but a few. It is extremely worrisome when parties
to a conflict fail to spare the civilian population and
civilian objects in the conduct of military operations, as
required under international humanitarian law.
Latvia is deeply concerned that the civilian
population is often deliberately targeted by parties to
an armed conflict, illegal armed groups and terrorist
organizations. The use of air-launched, explosive
and — more deplorable — chemical weapons in
populated urban areas, forced displacement, sexual
and gender-based violence, starvation, sieges and the
denial of much-needed humanitarian assistance have
become frequently used methods of warfare. Latvia
strongly condemns attacks on civilian objects, as well
as on humanitarian and health-care infrastructure
and personnel in armed conflict, which unfortunately
continued at a high rate last year. We welcome all
efforts by the Security Council to address that serious
issue. Regrettably, increasing humanitarian needs
will likely continue, including conflict-related forced
displacement. In that regard, Latvia emphasizes the
need to allow safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access to populations in need.
The facts on the ground show that greater
compliance with international humanitarian law by
all parties to armed conflicts in protecting civilians is
necessary. We therefore support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his latest report
on how to strengthen the practical impact of the
protection agenda. Those recommendations should be
addressed with a sense of urgency.
As the current President of the fifth Conference
of States Parties of the Arms Trade Treaty, Latvia is
pleased to see that the report also addresses the context
of arms exports and transfers, and encourages all States
to become parties to the Arms Trade Treaty and similar
regional instruments without delay.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Latvia believes that promoting the protection of
civilians in all United Nations activities is essential.
The Security Council must view this matter as a
priority when addressing situations of concern, and it
must remain an important component of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. We reiterate our call on the
permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from the use of the veto in situations of atrocity crimes.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
fundamental legal obligation and our common interest to
promote and ensure the effective protection of civilians
from the devastating consequences of armed conflict.
Impunity for disregarding humanitarian principles in
present-day conflicts must not become the new normal.
In the absence of accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, such violations will only continue to proliferate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council,
particularly Her Excellency Mrs. Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for organizing this open
debate. I also thank the briefers for their input.
I associate myself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
It is a source of grave concern that civilians
still account for the vast majority of casualties in
armed conflicts. The worst aspect of this issue is that
most of the victims are among the most vulnerable
civilians — women and children. Recalling that 2019
marks the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of four
Geneva Conventions, the question arises as to why we
still face — as confirmed by the Council — the erosion
of respect for international humanitarian law, despite
those and other important legally binding instruments.
Citing certain examples from our own region, I will try
to briefly answer that question.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/373), not only did civilian casualties increase
in Afghanistan in 2018, but so did civilian casualties
resulting from the use of air-launched weapons — by
61 per cent — the highest number in a single year
since 2009. What was the Council’s reaction to such a
violation of international humanitarian law by United
States and NATO forces?

S/PV. 8534

In Syria, where, in accordance with our obligations
and religious teachings, we accord the highest priority
to the protection of civilians, a United Nations
assessment mission to Raqqa in April 2018 found that
nearly 70 per cent of buildings in the city had been
destroyed or damaged and that essential services, such
as water, electricity and health care, were absent or
severely limited. Did the Council hold the United States
and its partners accountable for such a clear violation of
international humanitarian law?
In Gaza, during the Great March of Return, for
the period from 30 March 2018 to 29 March 2019,
Israel brutally killed nearly 280 civilians, including
56 children, and wounded nearly 32,000 others, more
than 3,000 of whom were children. The Council has
been completely silent on those crimes. The inhumane
blockade of Gaza by Israel — the clearest violation of
international humanitarian law and a crime against
humanity — entered its twelfth year in 2019.
Lastly, according to the Secretary-General’s report,
civilian casualties increased in Yemen throughout 2018,
with a devastating impact on children. On 9 August
2018, in a single incident, a school bus in the market of
a densely populated area in Dhahyan was deliberately
targeted by Saudi Arabia. The attack left 52 civilians
dead, among them 40 children, and 79 wounded,
including 56 children. It was the single-worst attack
since 2015. What was the Council’s reaction?
In conclusion, I would like to cite two examples
from a United Nations publication published by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
“In 2015, the Israel Defense Forces were initially
listed but removed prior to the report’s publication
[and]; [i]n 2016, the Saudi-led coalition, which
had been listed for grave violations in Yemen,
was removed from the listing following political
pressure”. (Building a Culture of Protection, p. 32,
footnote 132)
The conclusion that can be drawn is that respect for
international humanitarian law continues to be eroded
because criminals are not held accountable, because
they continue to commit those crimes with impunity
and because they are emboldened to disregard
international humanitarian law and commit further
brutalities. The Council can show its seriousness in
protecting civilians, which is a legal obligation as well
as a moral imperative, by putting an end to a policy
based on political considerations.

19-1500485/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Ikiara (Kenya): I thank the President for
organizing this important open debate. I also thank
His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres,
Mr. Peter Mauer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello,
Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in
Conflict, for their informative briefings earlier. We
take note of the Secretary-General’s report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
and the concept note (S/2019/385, annex) that you,
Mr. President, provided to guide this debate, which
marks the seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council seizing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict as an agenda item.
The Security Council’s continued consideration
of this agenda item is an indication of its commitment
to protecting civilians in conflict situations. Civilians
continue to account for most casualties in armed
conflicts today. According to successive reports of the
Secretary-General, it has become a constant problem
in many conflict-affected regions, especially in
Africa, such as the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen, as well as Syria, among others, where
hundreds of thousands of civilians have been uprooted
from their normal daily lives by the effects of conflict.
We must continue to make concrete and specific
efforts to ensure the dignity of those distressed by
war. The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a humanitarian as well as a human rights issue and
is in conformity with international humanitarian law.
Although there have been some achievements in that area
in the past few years, including increased engagement
by the Council through the adoption of resolutions 1738
(2006), 2175 (2014) and 2286 (2016) and prioritizing the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping mandates, much
remains to be done.
My delegation notes with concern that today’s
conflicts are increasingly non-conventional and are
characterized by armed insurgencies where civilians are
used by armed groups and terrorist organizations both
as human shields and as potential recruits as fighters,
including child soldiers. The protection of civilians
is put at risk, as national and international responses
require anti-insurgent and counter-terrorist measures
86/96

23/05/2019

that are in strict conformity to obligations under
international humanitarian law. That is a challenge that
we believe all Member States need to address boldly
and sustainably.
I would like to address a few areas that are of
concern to my delegation. They include the issue of
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers, a lack of clarity of mandates
of peacekeeping missions and their scope, the absence
of common applicable doctrine, resource gaps and
difficulties in the integration of the diverse set of
military, police and civilian actors required for effective
protection of civilians. All such factors affect the overall
capability of missions to effectively protect civilians.
Historically, gender-based violence has been used
as a calculated tactic of war. Extremism and terrorism
are prominent features of conflict situations often
posing new forms of threats to women’s rights and lives.
Women who are, or are assumed to be, family members
of fighters are often targeted by security actors and
experience harassment within their communities,
affecting their ability to live freely. In areas where
civilians affected by conflict receive aid and other
humanitarian support, women and girls have been
forced to provide sexual favours and bribes in order to
receive their portion of support. In many cases, women
have been faced with the impossible choice of either
putting themselves at risk of violence or saving their
husbands, brothers and sons, who, as men, are often
targeted to be killed or kidnapped.
Kenya condemns sexual exploitation and abuse by
those entrusted to protect civilians. We need to prevent
and combat those violations of women’s and girls’
fundamental human rights. As a troop-contributing
country, we are committed to the implementation of
resolution 2272 (2016), which seeks to hold accountable
troop-contributing countries that fail to credibly deal
with allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. Kenya
is already implementing the resolution by strengthening
sexual exploitation and abuse predeployment training.
Kenya fully endorses the Vancouver communiqué,
which specifies that United Nations peacekeeping
missions must have clear and achievable mandates,
as well as the resources and capability to carry them
out. Peacekeepers have been faced with more complex
environments with ever-increasing security risks and
peacekeeper casualties are more now than they have
ever been before.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Security Council’s mandates must be explicit,
practical and with an unambiguous focus, taking full
note of the fundamental tasks of the peacekeepers
and the situation on the ground. Troop-contributing
countries must be involved in the deliberations on those
mandates as they are developed and adjusted for their
on-the-ground expertise and point of view.
Accordingly, commanders tasked to execute such
mandates should be allowed the necessary latitude
devoid of unrealistic caveats. That is the only way
to ensure effective country-specific strategies in
peacekeeping. We must ensure that all components
receive the proper training, skills and equipment
to be able to protect civilians as well as themselves
and to deliver on such mandates in accordance with
applicable law.

S/PV. 8534

targets of armed attacks, both by non-State armed
groups and by regular armies. The increasing number
of civilians killed or wounded — more than 22,800 in
2018 alone — the destruction of civilian infrastructure,
the many obstacles to humanitarian convoys, the
indiscriminate use of weapons of mass destruction, the
use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, the recruitment
of child soldiers and forced displacement are, among
other things, scourges that sufficiently demonstrate the
extent of civilian vulnerability in armed conflicts.
In addition, peacekeepers are regularly called
upon to protect civilians with limited resources and in
often very large and changing security environments
where new forms of threats are emerging and where
it can be difficult to differentiate between civilians
and combatants.

In conclusion, Kenya fully affirms its commitment
to enhancing its performance with regard to the
protection of civilians and encourages all Member
States to do the same by supporting the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, which seek
to assist peacekeepers in effectively implementing
their protection of civilian mandates. Their full
implementation would make peacekeeping missions
more effective, improve civilian security and save lives.

On the eve of the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers, on which the Secretary-General
will award, for the first time, the Captain Mbaye Diagne
Medal for Exceptional Courage to Private Chancy
Chitete of Malawi, I would like to pay a warm tribute
to all those who have fallen in the service of peace.
I would particularly like to commend the work and
memory of Captain Diagne, who was killed in Rwanda
in 1994 after having saved countless human lives.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.

To be effective and efficient, the protection of
civilians must be part of an inclusive approach that
promotes better coordination between the Security
Council, which defines the protection-of-civilians
mandates of peace missions, the Department of Peace
Operations and the Department of Operational Support,
which are responsible for planning and managing peace
operations, and troop-contributing and host countries.
As part of that approach, efforts should also be made
to engage non-State actors in upholding humanitarian
and human rights standards and to incorporate the
obligation to protect civilians into peace and ceasefire
agreements. It is also crucial to ensure that missions
have clear and realistic mandates for the protection
of civilians, since, as the Secretary-General has said,
ensuring the safety of civilians requires clarifying what
is expected of peacekeepers and identifying situations
that may exceed their capacity to respond.

Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Indonesian
presidency of convening this open debate and to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer and
Mr. Federico Borello for their very informative
briefings this morning.
The adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) reflected the
Security Council’s clear awareness of the importance of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
That awareness has led, inter alia, to including
explicit provisions on the protection of civilians in the
mandates of several peace operations, the deployment
of protection of civilians advisers in some peace
missions and the development of guidelines on the
implementation of civilian protection mandates for the
United Nations Police.
While there is no doubt that significant progress
has been made in the area, it is clear that, as the
latest report of the Secretary-General on this topic
(S/2019/373) shows so well, civilians continue to be

The
establishment
and
strengthening
of
protection-of-civilian training for personnel awaiting
deployment, as well as those already deployed in
operations, is another challenge. Senegal has its
own model. For example, our intervention reserve

19-1500487/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

infantry battalions in Mopti and Gao, as well as
its attack helicopter unit deployed in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, are trained
to maintain a permanent proactive posture. It is also
important to bear in mind the importance of providing
missions with appropriate equipment in order to
strengthen peacekeepers’ operational capabilities and
thereby enable them to maintain superiority amid
negative forces.
Particular emphasis should also be placed on
information-sharing through close cooperation with
host and neighbouring countries but also, and above
all, with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
local communities, in order to identify threats and
develop appropriate responses. In that regard, I want
to point to the findings of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
on the importance of working closely with NGOs and
local communities in promoting unarmed strategies
for the protection of civilians. Furthermore, the ability
to communicate in the language of the host country
certainly helps to make the protection of civilians more
effective through the interactions it facilitates with the
local population and the trust it builds between the
people and peacekeeping personnel.
Lastly, since the protection of civilians is closely
linked to security-sector reform, it is essential to fully
execute disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants and support host
countries in consolidating their defence and security
forces’ presence throughout their territory.
Accountability in cases of gross and systematic
human rights violations ensures the credibility of
mechanisms for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. It is therefore important to focus on measures
aimed at prosecuting the perpetrators of such abuses.
Senegal fully supports that vision, which requires
strengthening international initiatives to investigate and
prosecute those who violate international humanitarian
law and human rights.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the best
way to protect civilians is to create an environment
that promotes prevention and where special attention is
paid to the root causes of conflict and to inclusive and
lasting development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
88/96

23/05/2019

Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
associates itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The protection of civilians is at the front and
centre of the dialogue on peacekeeping operations.
It has been 20 years since an explicit mandate on
the protection of civilians was established for the
peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone. The late former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for a culture of
protection to permeate the United Nations system and
the mindset of those in the field. In 2015, what are now
the Departments of Peace Operations and Operational
Support defined the protection of civilians around three
tiers of protection — protection through dialogue and
engagement, the provision of physical protection and
the establishment of a protective environment.
In theory and practice, the protection of civilians
has gained traction among Member States and has
become a priority in nine United Nations peacekeeping
missions to which 95 per cent of peacekeepers are
currently deployed. However, the implementation of
the protection-of-civilians mandate is beset by three
key challenges. First, missions tend to implement the
protection-of-civilians mandate in a process-oriented
way or based on activities; secondly, there is a disconnect
between the protection of civilians and political
strategy; and thirdly, there is the question of how to
apply a whole-of-mission strategy, which involves the
political, civilian, military and police components,
in order to pursue a protection-of-civilians mandate.
We are hopeful that those challenges will be clearly
addressed by the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
adopted by 151 Member States in September.
We commend Indonesia, in its presidency of the
Security Council, for today’s ministerial-level open
debate on the subject, an appropriate follow-up to the
open debate on investing in peace (see S/PV.8521)
held two weeks ago. Much is expected of the mandate
giving first priority to the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping, with an emphasis on the protection of
children and on combating sexual exploitation and
abuse. As it should be, it is the standard by which
the performance of United Nations peacekeeping is
measured, affecting its legitimacy and credibility. The
Philippines reiterates its support for Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions that underscore the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

principal issue of preventing conflicts and protecting
civilians if conflict does break out. We would like to
make the following suggestions.
First, predeployment training should be incentivized
to draw on existing policy, guidance and training
resources to explain what the protection of civilians
means in a given operational context, defining the
responsibilities, opportunities and constraints that
peacekeepers deployed in that context face. The
Philippines encourages Member States to host centres
of excellence by region to deliver training packages
to troop- and police-contributing countries consistent
with United Nations standards.
Secondly, the Philippines encourages the
deployment of more women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including in positions of
command. The Philippines has an all-female civilianrelations company from the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and the Philippine National Police to assist
in the rehabilitation and recovery of internally displaced
persons from the Marawi crisis. They complement
peacekeeping operations by helping internally displaced
persons, conducting peace education and extending
psychosocial debriefing among the traumatized,
particularly women, children and young people.
Finally, the Philippines calls on the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to promote unarmed
strategies and unarmed civilian protection as a key
complement to the protection-of-civilians toolkit — no
arms, no mistaken intentions and therefore no excuses.
The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process acknowledges civil society’s active role in
bringing peace to Mindanao through, for example,
Ceasefire Watch, Spaces for Peace, Mothers for Peace
and Tiyakap Kalilintad, or Care for Peace, which partner
with Government agencies. In 2009, the Philippine
Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
agreed to expand the mandate of the international
monitoring team to include civilian protection. That
civilian-based ceasefire monitoring and response
is a model for other countries in conflict. Grassroots leaders from various countries have travelled
to Mindanao to learn more about it on the ground. In
May 2017, the Government of the Philippines and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front established a peace
corridor to first provide a safe and secure corridor for
the rescue of trapped individuals in conflict areas, and
secondly to provide a secure space for humanitarian
assistance to pass through the province most affected

S/PV. 8534

by the Marawi crisis. At the end of its operations in
Marawi, a total of 255 civilians were rescued and safe
passage of aid was provided to many Government and
humanitarian organizations.
I want to conclude by noting that an effective
protection-of-civilians mandate must be anchored
in human rights and international humanitarian law,
particularly with regard to vulnerable groups, as well
as in adherence to the principles of accountability,
conflict sensitivity and peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): I would first
like to thank the Indonesian presidency for convening
this important open debate.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Malaysia reaffirms the importance it attaches
to general principles on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Secretary-General’s latest report
on the subject (S/2019/373) reflects the grim reality that
the state of the protection of civilians today is tragically
similar to that of 20 years ago. We are troubled that
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in situations of armed conflict.
Malaysia remains deeply concerned about the
fact that deliberate and indiscriminate attacks on
civilians are common in armed conflicts. Innocent
civilians should never be made victims or victims
for ransom, and any actions detrimental to civilians’
well-being are by definition acts of cowardice and
should never be condoned. In that context, Malaysia
reaffirms its support for prioritizing protection-ofcivilians mandates in peacekeeping missions. There
is no question that modern peacekeeping missions
are multidimensional, with tasks that address the full
spectrum of peacebuilding activities, from providing
secure environments to monitoring human rights and
rebuilding the capacity of the State. Increasingly, such
mandates also instruct peacekeeping missions to stress
the physical protection of civilians. The link between
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping mandates
is central. The safety and security of civilians is critical

19-1500489/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to the legitimacy and credibility of peacekeeping
missions. While missions work to manage high
expectations, they must also address the security of
civilians in order to carry out their mandated tasks in
assisting local reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts.
The protection of civilians is also a critical component
of sustainable peace.
The credibility of United Nations peacekeepers
depends largely on their willingness to act when civilians
are at risk to threats. Any failure of peacekeepers to act
or follow orders should be brought to the attention of the
Council. In addition, the Council must be prepared to
provide political and operational support when threats
to civilians exist. Malaysia therefore welcomes the
Secretary-General’s efforts to improve the performance
of peacekeepers through his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We share the view that military and police
personnel should receive predeployment training
on the protection of civilians, child protection and
the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence in
accordance with United Nations standards. For its part,
Malaysia, through the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre,
has successfully organized courses for peacekeeping
personnel on the protection of civilians.
Malaysia has consistently expressed concern about
the humanitarian situation of communities affected by
armed conflict and the need to alleviate their suffering.
As the protection-of-civilians agenda has been a focus
of the Council over the last two decades, it is important
to ensure that the Council continues to advance
the discourse. It should send a clear message that
impunity must end and that all parties, including State
and non-State actors, should be held accountable for
violations of international humanitarian law. Malaysia
therefore urges all permanent Security Council
members to refrain from invoking their veto power in
situations where the lives and well-being of civilians in
armed conflict are at stake.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I would like
to thank the Indonesian presidency for convening this
important debate. We also thank the International
Committee of the Red Cross for its briefing and
indispensable humanitarian work and the Center
for Civilians in Armed Conflict for its briefing and
important advocacy work.
90/96

23/05/2019

At this critical moment, we must reflect not only
on our collective duty and responsibility to ensure
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, but also
consider real and practical solutions for addressing
the serious challenges we face in fulfilling that
sacred obligation. Failure to uphold international law,
including the very clear provisions of humanitarian law
crafted to protect civilians in times of war, and a failure
to implement Security Council resolutions relevant
to the protection of civilians, including children, has
enabled a fierce culture of impunity to grow and spread
as a source of shocking, serious breaches and pervasive
violations of human rights that have caused immense
suffering, displacement, loss of life and injury, and
trauma for enormous numbers of innocent civilians.
It is unconscionable that 80 per cent of casualties in
conflicts today are civilians. Vulnerable men, women
and children around the world continue, and regrettably
will continue, to endure such injustice, indignities and
insecurity for as long as the international community
continues to hesitate to match its principled words
and commitments with serious action to stop those
violations. The role of the Security Council is central
in that regard.
While humanitarian action continues to be pursued
worldwide to treat the suffering caused by armed
conflicts, it cannot stop the bloodletting. We have seen
that over and over again in crises across the years, in
which the norms and rules for protecting civilians are
not only disregarded but are even more blatantly and
gravely breached through prolonged conflict and an
absence of accountability. Protecting innocent people
requires establishing enforcement measures that hold
perpetrators accountable within the full extent of the
law, including international criminal law. Without
consequences or costs, modern history has shown us
that these violations and war crimes will never cease.
Palestine is one of the most glaring cases facing
the international community. Time and again it has
been said that the Palestine question is a litmus test
for the international community, the credibility of the
Security Council and the rules-based order. That is
more true today than ever, and the stakes are high. For
decades now the Palestinian people have suffered grave
breaches of humanitarian law and massive human
rights violations as Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued to act with absolute impunity, in contempt of
the law and the Council’s authority.
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Our civilians, including the most vulnerable — children,
women, refugees, displaced and disabled persons, as
well as humanitarian and medical personnel — continue
to be directly, deliberately, systematically and violently
targeted by the occupying forces, as do civilian
structures, including homes, hospitals and schools.
Palestinian civilians continue to be killed, injured or
forcibly displaced on a daily basis. In the past year the
Israeli occupying forces have killed more than 300
civilians and injured more than 30,000 people, many
permanently disabled, with more than 140 amputees
in one year. Humanitarian assistance intended to
address protection needs continues to be impeded and
obstructed through access and movement restrictions
imposed by the occupation, most severely through
its inhumane, illegal and suffocating blockade of the
Gaza Strip. Even the protective presence of unarmed
civilian observers is denied, as we witnessed with
Israel’s termination, earlier this year, of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron.
Our reality under this illegal and inhumane
occupation is one in which no one and nowhere are
safe and the security and well-being of our civilians are
under constant threat. And yet, our continuous pleas
for protection continue to go answered, deepening
the decades-long protection crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
consequences have been tragic and severe for our
people, for the prospects for a peaceful solution and for
the viability of multilateralism and the international
system. When we meet in the Chamber and reaffirm
the rules of protection and the laws of war and when
we speak of noble principles and commitments, yet do
nothing to uphold them, we must realize that someone,
somewhere — actually thousands, in so many places
around the world — suffers gravely because of
that negligence.
It is time to implement United Nations resolutions
and fulfil legal obligations, including the inviolable
obligation to respect and ensure respect for the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War in all circumstances. As we approach
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions
this August, let that be our solemn commitment and
objective. We urge the international community to shore
up the political will and courage to act immediately
and without selectivity to protect human lives and to
peacefully and justly resolve the conflicts plaguing our
world, including in Palestine.

S/PV. 8534

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.
Twenty years have passed since the protection of
civilians in armed conflict was first placed on the Security
Council’s agenda. Considerable progress has been
achieved in the normative and deliverable framework,
with 9 resolutions, 13 presidential statements, many
general debates and over 100 meetings of the informal
expert group on the protection of civilians. Nevertheless,
challenges remain, including those mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2019/373). ASEAN
therefore commends the Indonesian presidency for
convening this timely open debate and would like to
make the following observations.
First, every State has the primary responsibility to
protect its civilians. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a well-established obligation in international
humanitarian law that has been further strengthened.
However, the compliance of parties to armed conflicts
with the laws governing armed conflict is variable.
As such, ASEAN joins others in calling on all parties
to armed conflict to enhance respect for the law on
the conduct of hostilities. The protection of civilians
in armed conflict must be guided by the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of host States.
Secondly, peace operations can contribute to the
protection of civilians in certain cases, as long as they
have a clear mandate and are properly equipped and
backed with adequate resources. We note that 9 out
of the 14 current peacekeeping missions authorized
by the Security Council have a mandate to protect
civilians. Much can be learned and improved from their
experience, taking into consideration mission-specific
particularities. The importance of training cannot be
overemphasized and it should start at the national level
in troop- and police-contributing countries, supported
by the efforts of the United Nations and countries in
the region.

19-1500491/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Last but not least, the best way to protect civilians
is by preventing conflict altogether. There is a lot of
wisdom and plenty of lessons to be learned from
peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy, from which
we can all benefit.
As embodied in the ASEAN Community
Vision 2025, ASEAN is a people-centred, rulesbased and peace-loving community. We adhere to
the principles of international law governing the
peaceful conduct of relations among States, including
refraining from the threat or use of force, resolving
differences and disputes by peaceful means, while
strengthening confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy.
ASEAN’s contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security has been constructive
and consistent with the spirit of the Charter, particularly
in consideration of the role of regional arrangements,
as stipulated in Chapter VIII. We therefore call for
the further strengthening of ASEAN-United Nations
cooperation with a view to assisting Member States in
training and sharing experiences, including through
the various peacekeeping training centres of ASEAN
member States. ASEAN also wishes to commend all
personnel involved in the protection of civilians for
their work. We affirm the joint commitment of ASEAN
to the protection of civilians and to our continued
participation in peace operations.
I will now speak in my national capacity.
As a country that has gone through many wars
to secure its independence and sovereignty, we have
experienced first-hand the suffering of the people
and fully empathize with the plights of the civilian
victims of armed conflicts around the world. We call
on all parties to armed conflicts to strictly comply with
their obligation to protect civilians under international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably resolutions 1894 (2009) and 2286
(2016). In that regard, the State should take effective
measures to exercise its responsibility.
With regard to peace operations, while
acknowledging their contribution to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, we stress the importance
of making them more sensitive and responsive to local
dynamics, and of the peacebuilding strategy’s being
tailored to the specific context of each conflict. Through
their participation and inclusion in the process, the local
people will also develop a sense of genuine ownership
92/96

23/05/2019

of the process and build their capacity to protect
themselves and prevent the escalation of the conflict.
Since 2014, Vietnamese peacekeepers have been
sent to various conflict zones in Africa. In 2018, a
second-level field hospital was dispatched to South
Sudan to join the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
mandate, which includes the protection of civilians. We
attach great importance to predeployment training in
international humanitarian law for our peacekeepers
and have adopted a policy of zero tolerance for sexual
violence and abuse.
In conclusion, we support the Security Council’s
efforts to continue focusing on the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts as one of its agenda priorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): At the outset,
we wish to commend the Indonesian presidency for
holding today’s debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Twenty years have passed since the inclusion of
the protection of civilians focus in the agenda of the
Security Council, yet millions of peoples across the
world still face conflict-related challenges. That means
innocent lives lost, families left in grief and enormous
humanitarian consequences in the form of loss of
property, displacement and lack of basic necessities,
such as food, water and electricity.
For Afghanistan, the meaning of protection is
broad and comprehensive, entailing not only physical
protection but also human security. Civilians continue
to bear the cost of the decades-long imposed conflict
in our country. The Taliban and its affiliate terrorist
groups have continued their attacks on all segments of
Afghan society — ordinary Afghans, religious figures
and journalists. They also attack public infrastructure,
such as schools, hospitals and religious sites. When
they do, they spare no one their brutality. Based on
the quarterly report of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, Taliban attacks from January
to March 2019 resulted in almost 700 civilian casualties.
They have resorted to all means and tactics, including
launching attacks from public places and compounds,
civilian homes and mosques, and they have used women
and children as human shields.
This month alone, during the holy month of
Ramadan — a time of spiritual renewal and reflection
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to better one’s life and advance peace, harmony and
solidarity in society — new attacks by these groups
occurred in different parts of the country. A few weeks
ago, in Ghazni province, a Taliban-planted improvised
explosive device killed eight children, while another
such attack in Farah province left many wounded.
These events are a manifestation of the gross violation
and disregard of international humanitarian law and
fundamental Islamic values.
Sadly, we have also seen a rise in the deliberate
targeting of humanitarian personnel and infrastructure
in different parts of the country. This month we
witnessed Taliban attacks on two aid organizations in
Kabul — Counterpart International and CARE — killing
15 people, including aid workers and civilians. The
group vowed that the attacks would not be their last
on aid organizations operating in Afghanistan. They
are doing whatever they can to disrupt the normal
functioning of humanitarian agencies and organizations
in the country.
We strongly condemn all attacks against civilians,
infrastructure and humanitarian personnel in
Afghanistan as a violation of international humanitarian
law. We call on the Council to take appropriate action
to end such atrocities. Continued Taliban attacks come
at a time when the people of Afghanistan and the
international community extended another opportunity
to the group to give up terror for peace. Where Afghans
have made immense sacrifices to achieve peace and
prosperity, the Taliban have responded with the same
old approach: violence, killings and destruction. This
further affirms the need for a careful collaborative
approach in the context of ongoing peace efforts to
end the current conflict in the country. Any eventual
outcome to peace talks should come with clear and
decisive guarantees for a just and lasting peace that will
conform to the needs and expectations of all Afghans.
Our focus on the protection of civilians is being
pursued by various Government institutions and
agencies as their highest priority. The Afghan security
forces are defending our country and people against
the dangerous threats of international terrorism and
extremism. They are operating with professionalism,
adhering to strict guidelines of rules of engagement
and coordinating closely with international forces on
counter-terrorism operations to avoid and prevent
harm to civilian populations, schools, hospitals,
medical facilities and other public infrastructure.
These precautionary measures are also based on

S/PV. 8534

presidential decrees and other directives from the
security institutions. Any incident of collateral damage
by our security forces are investigated thoroughly and
with accountability.
Our protection measures also include a special
focus on ensuring the protection and well-being of
our children in society. To this end, we have signed
a joint action plan with the United Nations, which
is continuing to be steadily implemented. Various
directives, laws and mechanisms have been issued to
ensure the protection of children.
We all know that civilian protection can best be
achieved by preventing conflicts. This requires a new
organizational approach, addressing the immediate
needs of civilians caught in conflict as well as the root
causes and structural drivers of conflict in each given
setting. We welcome the creation of the Departments
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace
Operations as important components of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform agenda. The role of the United Nations
will remain vital in the context of international efforts
to prevent the outbreak, exacerbation and continuation
of conflicts around the world.
In conclusion, let us make sure that today’s meeting
builds on the important work of the Council to protect
civilians in conflict. Our collective success in this
endeavour means success in defending and promoting a
fundamental principle of humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Skåre (Norway): I take the floor on behalf
of the Nordic countries: Iceland, Finland, Denmark,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.
Twenty years after the first Security Council debate
on protection of civilians (S/PV.3980), civilians are still
in the line of fire in armed conflicts across the world, not
least due to the rise in urban conflicts, the proliferation
of non-State armed groups and asymmetric warfare. I
thank you the Indonesian presidency for convening this
open debate on an issue that regrettably must remain of
great concern to the Council.
Let me state the obvious. The civilian population
is not a legitimate target. Attacks directed against
civilian objects such as schools and hospitals must
end, and schools and hospitals must not be used
for military purposes. We are exasperated at the
inadequate respect for international humanitarian law

19-1500493/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2019

and principles and the lack of respect for international
human rights law shown by many parties to conflicts
around the world. And yet we can and must take heed
of the multiple ways in which we have progressed
over the past 20 years. Resolution 2286 (2016) and the
subsequent recommendations of the Secretary-General
are examples of concrete progress on how to enhance
protection of civilians. We welcome the report by
the Secretary-General (S/2019/373), which identifies
further practical measures.

responsible for violations and abuses of international
law against the Rohingya in Myanmar must be held to
account. We must support national efforts and capacity
to pursue justice and reparations in the wake of armed
conflicts. Innovative initiatives such as the Safe Schools
Declaration play an important role in strengthening
the protection of civilians and civilian objects. The
Safe Schools Declaration has now been signed by
89 countries, and we appreciate Spain hosting the third
Safe Schools conference next week.

Sexual and gender-based violence in conflict has
received due attention as the heinous crime that it is — in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, in
landmark convictions by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and in multiple Security Council
resolutions, most recently through the newly adopted
resolution 2467 (2019). The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General monitors, reports and raises
awareness of sexual violence in conflict. Protection of
civilians has become firmly embedded in mandates and
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, the Security Council needs to maintain the
issue of medical care on its agenda and strongly underline
the seriousness of attacks on medical-care facilities and
denial of access, as suggested by the recommendations
of the Arria Formula meeting on protecting medical
care in armed conflict held in December last year. The
Council should, to a greater degree, consider issues
relating to the protection of medical care in country
resolutions and mission mandates.

Nevertheless, sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict is often an unreported crime. There is a lack
of support for victims, and perpetrators go unpunished.
Norway, Iraq, Somalia, the United Arab Emirates,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
are hosting a conference today and tomorrow precisely
to improve coordination and mobilize greater resources
in the humanitarian response to sexual and genderbased violence. In these efforts, we must listen to those
affected. Persons with disabilities are particularly at
risk of violence, exploitation and abuse, and women’s
participation and rights must be a priority.
The developments mentioned are no small feat.
Still, they are not sufficient. We can and must do better.
First and most obviously, we must increase the United
Nations capacity to prevent and solve conflicts. We
must continue to strengthen United Nations mediation
efforts, support the Organization’s broader political
and peacebuilding efforts and enhance the situational
awareness of peacekeeping operations. In this regard,
we welcome the revised peacekeeping-intelligence
policy of the Department of Peace Operations.
Secondly, we need to enhance respect for
international humanitarian law and principles and for
international human rights law. For example, those
94/96

In conclusion, we must constantly stand up and
say that medical-care facilities and civilians are not
legitimate targets.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Pereira Sotomayor (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Republic of Indonesia for
convening this important debate. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict must remain an overarching
objective of the Security Council, along with the
political will of the United Nations to implement
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
My delegation thanks the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Executive Director of the Center for Civilians in Conflict
for their briefings, as well as Secretary-General António
Guterres for his report (S/2019/373), updated in May,
which highlights the wide range of effects from which
civilian populations continue to suffer. We regret that,
even though that item has been on the Council’s agenda
since 1999, the situation of immeasurable human and
social destruction has not changed, and, even worse,
that the suffering and tragedy of civilians persist.
Ecuador believes that the protection of civilians
must be a rational, unwavering and firm commitment
of the community of States and that the obligations
based on the Geneva Conventions are permanent.
My country attaches the greatest importance to the
19-15004

23/05/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilians in armed conflicts. It considers it
inhumane that the main victims continue to be civilians,
particularly women, children, persons with disabilities,
internally displaced persons and refugees. We have had
international humanitarian law rules for more than half
a century, but it is civilians who are affected by forced
displacement, limitations of humanitarian assistance,
attacks against medical and humanitarian personnel
and sexual and gender-based violence.
In that regard, we appreciate the Security Council’s
decision to include and prioritize the protection of
civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
as in the case of nine missions. It is essential, however,
that they respond to a realistic assessment of the
situation on the ground and be allocated sufficient
resources to ensure their effective implementation
and support activities aimed at resolving conflicts by
peaceful means. Nonetheless, as the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations has emphasized, the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
rests with host Governments, which is why close
cooperation and consultation with national authorities
and field missions are important.
Ecuador also reiterates its deep concern that civilians
are targeted by and subjected to indiscriminate attacks,
violations and damage to or the unlawful destruction of
civilian infrastructure, hospitals, schools, property and
livelihoods of the population, and that those attacks are
increasingly taking place in urban areas.
The humanitarian impact of the use of explosive
weapons on civilian populations cannot be overlooked;
that is why we saw the Santiago communiqué — adopted
at the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Meeting
on Protecting Civilians from the Use of Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas, organized by the
Government of Chile — as a valuable contribution.
As those present have already heard, some countries,
including Ecuador, endorsed the communiqué. The
communiqué recognizes the need to prioritize the
prevention of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas and supports the preparation of an international
political declaration that would enable and promote the
best protection of civilians, mainly women, children,
the elderly and persons with disabilities, in armed
conflicts by preventing the use of long-range explosive
weapons in populated areas.
Ecuador’s migration policy takes a human rights
approach and our legislation recognizes the same

S/PV. 8534

rights for refugees as for Ecuadorian citizens, with a
view to allowing people in that condition to exit the
welfare system and become agents of development for
the benefit of the society that welcomes them. With that
experiment, we recognize the importance of finding
political solutions to conflicts, the lack of which makes
it difficult to realize opportunities for the safe and
sustainable return of millions of internal refugees.
My country believes that the global compact on
refugees, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution
73/151 last year, offers an innovative and practical model
for promoting solidarity and responsibility-sharing
as a guarantee of the right to return. In that regard, it
is an inevitable obligation to cite the situation of the
Palestinian people and their seven decades of waiting.
Faced with that desolate humanitarian scenario,
Ecuador wishes to acknowledge the excellent work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the international protection of refugees
worldwide and highlight the humanitarian operations
organized and carried out on behalf of 71.4 million
refugees, asylum-seekers, displaced persons and
stateless persons. We also acknowledge and reiterate
our support for the extraordinary work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in providing assistance to a
total of 6.02 million Palestinian refugees, according to
figures in its report of 1 January 2018.
Allow me to conclude by pointing out that crimes
against civilians should not go unpunished, regardless
of who commits them, where they are committed and
when they occur. The lack of accountability continues
to victimize civilians, destroys the credibility of the
international community’s ability to act and foments
disregard for the law. In that regard, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s view that it is urgent to adopt more
effective, robust, systematic, universal and coherent
approaches to ensure accountability for the commission
of those serious crimes and respond to the need to
provide reparations for serious violations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Almanzlawiy (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Indonesian presidency on steering wisely the work of
the Security Council for this month. We also thank you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting.

19-1500495/96

S/PV.8534

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2019

This year coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
My country continues to urge the international
community to take a united and comprehensive
approach to protecting civilians and keeping them at a
distance from armed conflict. The contemporary reality
of a world of successive and continuing conflicts causes
suffering and harm to civilians and innocent people,
depriving them of the most basic rights of life. Some
conflicts drive children into combat, depriving them of
their fundamental right to education and to be in school,
and innocent people of the basic rights of life. We
therefore call on the Security Council to operationalize
its relevant resolutions, which must deter violators of
international humanitarian law.

We call on the Council and the international
community to work together to find a shared perspective
on protecting civilians in armed conflicts of all kinds.
We also call for preserving the neutrality status of
innocent civilians, and on the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities by taking a strong position
against the Houthi militias supported by Iran, which
target vital areas populated by innocent people with
ballistic missiles and drones in cities of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, in gross violation of international
humanitarian law and the Council resolutions.

The change in the nature of conflicts requires
ongoing adaptations to protect the lives of civilians.
For example, the Israeli siege of Gaza represents total
disregard for the principle of protecting civilians and
their most fundamental rights. The theft of food in
Yemen by Houthi coup militias also subjects civilians
to the threat of famine. I would like to clarify that any
attack on vital facilities in populated areas represents
direct and clear disregard of the lives of civilians.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to take
the floor in order to clarify the reference to Srebrenica
in our statement to the Security Council this morning.
The United Kingdom is clear that the Srebrenica
massacre was an act of genocide, as confirmed by the
judgments of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Court of Justice.

96/96

The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.

The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.

19-15004
