S/PV.7334

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7334th meeting

Wednesday, 10 December 2014, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2014/812)

14-68443 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1468443*

S/PV.7334

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2014/812)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and Mr. Jackson K. Tuwei, Special Envoy of the African
Union for the Issue of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/812, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily (spoke in French): I have the honour to
introduce today the report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2014/812). This report presents
an overview of the political and security situation in
Central Africa and provides an update on threats to
peace and security in the subregion. It also discusses
the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, Member States and
subregional organizations.
(spoke in English)
Since the publication of the last report (S/2014/319),
in May, the situation in the Central African Republic
has remainsed of foremost concern in the region. The
political situation is still fragile. Security conditions
are volatile. The humanitarian situation is precarious.
Human rights violations continue to be reported.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees are being hosted in
neighbouring countries.

2/6

10/12/2014

However, this last period has also seen a
consolidation of international support for the Central
African Republic and resolutionenewed momentum to
keep the political transition on track. In July, the fifth
meeting of the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic expanded the mediation led
by President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of
the Congo on behalf of the Economic Community of
Central African States to an international mediation that
now comprises the United Nations, which I represent,
and the African Union, as represented by its Special
Envoy on the Central African Republic, Mr. Soumeylou
Boubèye Maïga.
We worked closely in order to facilitate the signing of
an agreement on the cessation of hostilities and violence
at the Brazzaville forum on the crisis in the Central
African Republic in July. In August and September,
I encouraged the transitional authorities in Bangui to
adopt a more consultative approach to decision-making
following the controversy surrounding the selection of
a new Prime Minister. In October, following violent
attacks that erupted in Bangui, I returned to the Central
African Republic and encouraged all parties to reject
violence and focus on advancing the transition.
Tensions subsequently decreased and the Central
African actors, together with their international
partners, renewed their commitment to a peaceful,
inclusive and speedy transition at the sixth meeting of
the International Contact Group. In close collaboration
and consultation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Babacar Gaye, I have
employed the good offices of the Secretary-General
to ensure that all the actors remain committed to the
peace process. On a daily basis, I maintain contact with
all leaders and stakeholders to prevent a derailing of the
process. Although it has not been fully implemented,
the Brazzaville agreement generated new momentum
and provides a framework that calls for the regrouping
of ex-combatants and includes the participation of the
ex-Séléka and anti-balaka in the peace process.
While instability in the Central African Republic
threatens the subregion from within, armed groups on
the periphery threaten it from without. In that regard,
incursions by Nigeria-based terrorist group Boko
Haram have expanded into the Lake Chad basin region.
A joint UNOCA-United Nations Office for West Africa

14-68443

10/12/2014

Central African region

(UNOWA) assessment mission to the areas of Cameroon
and Chad affected by Boko Haram was undertaken
in October. The mission observed that attacks have
increased in frequency and intensity, especially in
northern Cameroon. As a result, scores of people have
been killed, tens of thousands of refugees have arrived
in Cameroon, and abductions continue. The mission
also observed the humanitarian and socioeconomic
impact of Boko Haram’s activities in Chad. Beyond
Cameroon and Chad, the other countries in the Lake
Chad basin region should be kept under close watch and
are at risk of being destabilized by Boko Haram.
The situation, if left unaddressed, may soon
overwhelm the capacity to respond. I have therefore
advocated for strengthened coordination in the design
and implementation of a multidimensional response
to Boko Haram during my many interactions with the
Governments concerned. I welcome in that regard the
reactivation of the joint multinational task force for the
Lake Chad basin countries and the development of a
draft regional counter-terrorism strategy for the Lake
Chad basin area.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has been
weakened by concerted military and civilian efforts,
but it continues to threaten populations in the region,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Central African Republic, where UNOCA conducted
assessment missions in July and August. The missions’
findings revealed a noticeable increase of LRA activity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a lack of
reintegration support and development programming
to combat the LRA. Killings and abductions continue.
More than 160,000 persons are still displaced. There
are persistent reports of LRA activity in the disputed
Kafia Kingi enclave and of the group’s involvement
in ivory poaching in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, gold and diamond trafficking in the Central
African Republic and opportunistic alliances with the
ex-Séléka.
International cooperation involving LRA-affected
countries and their national and international partners
is at the centre of the efforts to address the threat
and impact of that armed group. In that regard, I am
collaborating closely with the African Union Special
Envoy on the Lord’s Resistance Army, Jackson Tuwei,
on the fight against the LRA. I am pleased that he
will be addressing this body today. Tomorrow, I will
participate in the International Working Group on the
Lord’s Resistance Army, chaired by the United States

S/PV.7334

and the European Union. I would like to acknowledge the
Government of Uganda for its steadfast commitment to
the collective effort against the LRA and, in particular,
the Uganda People’s Defence Forces for their critical
operational role within the African Union Regional
Task Force. The international community and States in
the region must remain committed to putting an end to
the LRA threat once and for all.
The region also continues to suffer from the
scourge of a wide range of illegal activities, including
piracy, armed robbery at sea, illegal fishing, the
illicit wildlife trade and other forms of transnational
organized crime. The inauguration of the Interregional
Coordination Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf
of Guinea in Yaoundé and the operationalization of the
Regional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in
Central Africa in Pointe-Noire, the Congo, represent
important steps towards the establishment of a regional
information-sharing architecture for maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea. In that respect, UNOCA continues
to actively support the implementation of the decisions
of the 2013 Summit of Heads of State and Government
on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
held in Yaoundé.
The coming two years will see a majority of
countries in the Central African region hold elections,
thus affecting the lives of more than 100 million people.
In a number of countries, tensions are heightened as
a consequence of the limited participation of certain
segments of society, the polarized tone of the political
debate, restrictions on the exercise of civil and political
rights and possible constitutional amendments related
to term limits, as seen recently in Burkina Faso, in West
Africa.
In that context, I began to hold consultations with
political actors in the subregion, including the leaders
of ruling parties and opposition figures, encouraging
stakeholders to manage their political differences
by engaging in dialogue, fostering consensus and
advancing the consolidation of democracy. In addition,
UNOCA co-organized a workshop in October in Douala,
Cameroon, to promote the political participation of
women, particularly in the countries scheduled to hold
elections.
(spoke in French)
It is important to improve the coherence of the
United Nations work in Central Africa. As noted, I
have worked closely with the Special Representative of

14-684433/6

S/PV.7334

Central African region

the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic,
Mr. Babacar Gaye. In September, I travelled to Dakar to
meet with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNOWA to enhance cooperation
between our respective offices in areas of common
interest, such as maritime piracy and the fight against
Boko Haram. In the same spirit, MINUSCA, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Office
to the African Union took part in the meeting of the
focal points on the LRA held in Entebbe, Uganda, and
UNOCA participated in the retreat organized by the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit.
UNOCA is also working with the World Health
Organization to support the subregion in the
development of a coordinated response to the possible
spread of the Ebola virus. In that respect, although
Central Africa has thus far been spared infection by the
disease, the potential for populations becoming infected
and the capacities of Governments in the subregion
being disrupted remains real. We must therefore remain
vigilant and ensure that States are ready to respond
appropriately.
UNOCA is also strengthening its partnership with
the African Union, including by taking part in the
African Union Summit and, in October, at the meeting
of African Union mediators and special envoys on
issues of peace and security. I worked closely with the
African Union special envoys on issues pertaining to
the Central African Republic and the LRA.
At the subregional level, UNOCA has stepped
up its cooperation with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). In June, as soon as
I took office, I went to N’Djamena to consult with the
ECCAS Chairman-in-Office, President Idriss Deby
Itno of Chad. I then took part in a meeting of ECCAS
Heads of State on the Central African Republic, on the
margins of the twenty-third African Union Summit. I
am also in regular contact with the ECCAS mediator
for the crisis in the Central African Republic and the
Secretary-General of ECCAS on all relevant issues
under our respective mandates.
Recently, UNOCA organized a workshop on
mediation aimed at improving the skills of ECCAS
and UNOCA experts and to strengthen institutional
cooperation. UNOCA and ECCAS are also working
together to organize a meeting of experts for the
4/6

10/12/2014

preparation of a subregional response strategy with
regard to the threat posed by the Ebola virus.
Finally, in its capacity as the secretariat of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA supported the
organization of the Committee’s thirty-eighth and
thirty-ninth ministerial meetings, held, respectively,
in August in Malabo and in December in Bujumbura.
The Committee continues to provide a regular forum
for Governments in the subregion to allow progress
to be made on a number of initiatives with regard to
promoting peace and security in Central Africa.
Central Africa remains a fragile subregion. It
has enormous potential, but it faces considerable
challenges. UNOCA will continue to play the role of
catalyst in collaborating with other United Nations
entities, while strengthening institutional partnerships
and supporting the subregion in capacity-building for
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Bathily
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tuwei.
Mr. Tuwei: On behalf of the African Union
Commission and its Chairperson, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, I would like to thank the Council for
the opportunity afforded to me to share some thoughts
with Council members about the fight against the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), within the particular
framework of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for
the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
I would especially like to thank the United Nations,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) in Libreville and its Head, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, for the continued cooperation in our joint
efforts in the fight against the LRA. I would also like to
thank all United Nations missions and agencies in the
areas where the LRA continues to operate — namely,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan — for the support
they continue to provide in the implementation of the
African Initiative and to meet the needs of the people
affected by the criminal acts of the LRA.
In that regard, I would like to recognize the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), the United Nations Organization

14-68443

10/12/2014

Central African region

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF
and so forth. I also thank other stakeholders and
partners, particularly the United States of America for
its operational and logistical support and the European
Union for its unparalleled financial contributions.
I cannot forget the many local and international
non-governmental organizations that constantly pound
the pavement so that we do not give up the struggle
against the LRA and work hard to provide assistance
to victims and communities affected by the atrocities
of the LRA.
At this stage of my remarks, I would also like to
warmly congratulate my predecessor, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, on the initial work of the
implementation of the Initiative and the particularly
encouraging results he obtained, together with all the
stakeholders, when he was still in office.
The fight against the LRA seems to continue
indefinitely, and some say that Joseph Kony is still on
the run. Weariness is staring at us. But we who are at
the forefront want to draw the attention of everyone
to the collective work in which we are engaged. It is
most difficult, even exhausting, given the sacrifices
and logistical and financial resources required. The
crises that erupted in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan over the past two years have been
most devastating, but we have continued despite
those obstacles and those encountered in the theatre
of operations. We feel encouraged by the successive
defections that occurred within the LRA, the increasing
number of victims rescued and the significant reduction
in attacks and in the number of displaced persons due to
the LRA. With the assistance of the continued presence
of contingents of the African Union Regional Task
Force in Obo, in the Central African Republic, and in
Dungu, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have managed to persevere. With the Task Force, we
have been able to respond quickly and deal a fatal blow
to significantly reduce the nuisance capacity of the
Lord’s Resistance Army.
However, we have not achieved the ultimate goal,
namely, the physical capture of Joseph Kony and
putting an end to the atrocities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army. Undoubtedly, from wherever he is hiding, Kony
is following and watching us to adjust his operational

S/PV.7334

mode. The information reaching us, especially from
those who have defected, indicates that Kony is
establishing opportunistic and even strategic alliances
and is engaged in all kinds of trafficking, particularly
in ivory and diamonds. It is now clear that Kony has
contacts with ex-Séléka in the Central African Republic,
and certainly with other nomadic groups of people
in the vast area that extends from South Sudan to the
northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, covering
all border areas between the Central African Republic,
the Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That trafficking shows clearly that Kony
maintains a network of relationships and is therefore
accessible, even if it is true that the group is divided
into several small, highly mobile and active groups,
almost exclusively in the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
These latest developments convince us that there is
great interest in the need to review our strategies and
adapt them wisely. That is why I would like, on behalf of
the African Union Commission and its Chairperson, to
earnestly request the Council to maintain and increase
its support for the Regional Cooperation Initiative,
particularly through the means made available not only
to UNOCA, but also to MONUSCO and MINUSCA,
so that the scope of cooperation between those
Missions and the Regional Task Force can be expanded
operationally and take into account the logistical
support to the contingents of the Regional Task Force
based in Obo and Dungu.
We also want to request the Council to use its
influence to persuade others of good will to join us,
and encourage all the stakeholders involved in the fight
against the Lord’s Resistance Army to pursue their
commitments in that collective campaign, and not to
give in to discouragement, despite the rigours of the
tests that lie ahead. It would be difficult to understand
and explain how the African Union, the United Nations,
the United States, the European Union and many other
actors, all together, failed against Joseph Kony and
some 200 men fighting in the bush.
As regards the African Union and the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, and considering the outcome of
my recent tour to Bangui, Kinshasha and Kampala,
we shall go to work to give a new impetus to the
Initiative through an enhancement of cooperation and
commitment between the Member States of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative, a reorganization of the Regional

14-684435/6

S/PV.7334

Central African region

Task Force headquarters, including the operational and
tactical plans, with the support of the American Special
Forces, and an extension of our field of manoeuvre
by working and involving the Sudan further in 2015.
Furthermore, the enhancement of relations among the
Regional Task Force contingents, MONUSCO and
MINUSCA on the theatre of operations remains a key
focus of our action plan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Tuwei
for his briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of

6/6

10/12/2014

today’s meeting. I thank the Council Members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to this statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/25.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

14-68443
