182

General Assembly-Thirty-first s~sion

Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing the
purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,12
and to give increased importance to its role in relations
among States,
Welcoming the fact that the International Law Commission completed the first reading of the draft articles
on the most-favoured-nation clause,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the International Law Commission on State responsibility,
succession of States in respect of matters other than
treaties and the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses,
Noting with satisfaction that the International Law
Commission continued to pay special attention to the
question of rationalizing further its organization and
methods of work,
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-eighth
session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1977;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Complete at its thirtieth session, in the light
of comments received from Member States, from organs
of the United Nations which have competence on the
subject-matter and from interested intergovernmental
organizations, the second reading of the draft articles on
the most-favoured-nation clause adopted at its twentyeighth session;
(b) Continue on a high priority basis its work on
State responsibility, taking into account relevant General Assembly resolutions adopted at previous sessions,
with a view to completing the preparation of a first
set of draft articles on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, if possible within the next
term of office of the members of the International Law
Commission, and take up, at the earliest possible time,
the separate topic of international liability for injurious
consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law;
(c) Proceed with the preparation, on a priority
basis, of draft articles on:
(i) Succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties;

(ii)

Treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between international
organizations;

(d) Continue its work on the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses;

5. Urges Member States that have not yet done so
to submit to the Secretary-General their written comments on the subject of the law of the non-navigational
uses of international watercourses;
1 2 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

6. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to adopt the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
7. Supports the request of the International Law
Commission to the Secretary-General to prepare and
publish as soon as possible a new and revised edition
of the handbook entitled The Work of the International
Law Commission;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International
Law Commission and that an increasing number of
participants from developing countries be given the opportunity to attend these seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission for its attention the
records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/98.

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the value of arbitration as a method of
settling disputes arising in the context of international
commercial relations,
Convinced that the establishment of rules for ad hoe
arbitration that are acceptable in countries with different
legal, social and economic systems would significantly
contribute to the development of harmonious international economic relations,
Bearing in mind that the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law have been prepared after extensive consultation
with arbitral institutions and centres of international
commercial arbitration,
Noting that the Arbitration Rules were adopted by
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law at its ninth session18 after due deliberation,
1. Recommends the use of the Arbitration Rules
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law in the settlement of disputes arising in the
context of international commercial relations, particularly by reference to the Arbitration Rules in commercial contracts;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the widest possible distribution of the Arbitration Rules.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/99.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its ninth session, 14
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. V, sect. C.
14 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17).
