United Nations

S/PV.4709

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4709

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 February 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pleuger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Germany)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De la Sablière
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Akram
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Arias
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 6 February 2003 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2003/153).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-24986 (E)

*0324986*

S/PV.4709

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 6 February 2003 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2003/153)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Bahrain, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Costa
Rica,
Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, the Gambia,
Georgia, Greece, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, the Marshall Islands,
Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Listre
(Argentina),
Mr.
Dauth
(Australia),
Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain), Mr. Ivanov (Belarus),
Mr. De Moura (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada),
Mr.
Stagno
(Costa
Rica),
Mr. Rodríguez Parilla (Cuba), Mr. Yépez Lasso
(Ecuador), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Yauvoli
(Fiji), Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia), Mr. Adamia
(Georgia), Mr. Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Acosta
Bonilla (Honduras), Mr. Kristjansson (Iceland),
Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Djumala (Indonesia),

2

Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan),
Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait), Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia),
Mr. Diab (Lebanon), Mr. Own (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr Wenaweser (Liechtenstein),
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia), Mr. Capelle (Marshall
Islands), Mr. Loulichki (Morocco), Mr. Mackay
(New Zealand), Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua),
Mrs. Yahaya (Nigeria), Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman),
Mr. De Rivero (Peru), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar),
Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Huntley (Saint
Lucia), Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Tan
(Singapore), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr.
Mahendran (Sri Lanka), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr.
Staehelin
(Switzerland),
Mr. Kasemsarn
(Thailand), Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia), Mr. Pamir (Turkey), Mr.
Kuchinsky (Ukraine), Mr. Al-Shamsi (United
Arab Emirates), Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay), Mr.
Vohidov (Uzbekistan), Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet
Nam) and Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform
Council that I have received a letter from
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
United Nations addressed to the President of
Security Council, which reads as follows:

the
the
the
the

“In accordance with article 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
discussion of the agenda item under consideration
by the Council on Iraq, which will start on 18
February 2003.”
That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/184.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Yahya Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.4709

I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, to take the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the request
contained in the letter dated 6 February 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa addressed to
the President of the Security Council, which was issued
as document S/2003/153.
I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2003/183, containing the text
of a letter dated 14 February 2003 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I wish to recall that at our meeting last Friday, 14
February, ministers were given seven minutes for their
statements. In view of the long list of speakers before
us, I would appeal to all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five to seven minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing, and
to deliver the condensed versions in this room. There
are 61 speakers on my list. If they speak for seven
minutes each, that means seven hours of debate, not
including all the procedural time we need.
As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the Council table. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the Conference Officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table.
I propose that we suspend our meeting tonight at
6.30 p.m. and resume tomorrow morning at 10 a.m.
sharp, because otherwise we will not be able to finish
our discussion. I would be very grateful if all members
of the Council and those speaking in the Council
Chamber would cooperate in this for the sake of
expediency in the organization of our meeting.
I would like to welcome the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Fréchette, at
this meeting.
The first speaker on my list is the representative
of South Africa, to whom I give the floor.

Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I should like to
congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February. We
would also like to thank Security Council members for
having scheduled this open debate. Above all, we wish
to commend the Security Council for its continued
transparency in addressing the situation between Iraq
and Kuwait.
Before I begin my statement, I would like, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, to express our
condolences to the people of South Korea and the
people of the United States with regard to the tragedies
that recently befell them.
We, the 115 States Members and 15 observer
States of the United Nations that belong to the NonAligned Movement, called for this meeting because we
believe that the Security Council is engaged in a
crucial debate which has important repercussions for
the entire international community.
The Non-Aligned Movement has always
understood resolution 1441 (2002) to be about
achieving verifiable disarmament in Iraq through
inspections that would avoid leading us into a situation
of war. From the outset, we understood that the
inspections were designed as a necessary intrusive
instrument to ensure the elimination of proscribed Iraqi
programmes. To us, resolution 1441 (2002) was, and
still is, about ensuring that Iraq is peacefully disarmed.
Through the adoption of that resolution, the
Security Council unanimously decided to establish an
enhanced inspection regime with the aim of bringing
the disarmament process to full and verified
completion. The stated purpose was, in the words of
resolution 1441 (2002), “to afford Iraq ... a final
opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations
under relevant resolutions of the Council” (para. 2).
The Non-Aligned Movement fully supports the
intentions of resolution 1441 (2002). Even before the
resolution was adopted, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Non-Aligned Movement called on Iraq to
abide by all relevant Security Council resolutions. At
that time, the Ministers stated:
“We wish to encourage Iraq and the United
Nations to intensify their efforts in search of a
lasting, just and comprehensive solution to all
outstanding issues between them in accordance

3

S/PV.4709

with the relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions.”
The Non-Aligned Movement has noted the offer
by several States to strengthen the inspection process.
We believe this is in line with resolution 1441 (2002),
which, in paragraph 2, mandates “an enhanced
inspection regime with the aim of bringing to full and
verified completion the disarmament process”. The
resolution also requests all Member States to give full
support to the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in the
discharge of their mandates. In that regard, we are
pleased that Iraq has accepted an offer from South
Africa of experts who led our country’s programme to
destroy our nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
of mass destruction and the missiles for the delivery of
those weapons. I am also pleased to announce that that
team is on its way to Iraq as we speak.
On 14 February 2003, both Mr. Hans Blix,
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Director General of the IAEA, told the
Council that they detected increased and substantive
cooperation by the Government of Iraq. They testified
that access to inspection sites was prompt and without
prior knowledge of the sites that the inspectors visited.
Mr. Blix stated that UNMOVIC has so far not found
any weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. More than
200 chemical, and over 100 biological, samples have
been collected at different sites, and the results to date
have been consistent with Iraq’s declaration. He made
the important point that many materials related to
Iraq’s
previous
weapons
programme
remain
unaccounted for but that one must not jump to the
conclusion that proscribed weapons exist. We call on
Iraq to cooperate fully and answer all questions raised
by Mr. Blix. We welcome the cooperation Iraq has
already given to the inspectors, and we hope that it will
continue.
Mr. ElBaradei reported to the Council that since
the IAEA had already neutralized Iraq’s nuclear
weapons programme by December 1998, the focus of
its current activities has been on verifying whether Iraq
revived its nuclear programme in the intervening years.
He informed the Security Council that “We have to
date found no evidence of ongoing prohibited nuclear
or nuclear-related activities in Iraq.” (S/PV.4707, p. 9)
However, the IAEA’s investigations are continuing.

4

The message that has emanated from the 14
February debate in the Security Council is that the
inspection process in Iraq is working and that Iraq is
showing clear signs of cooperating more proactively
with the inspectors. Significantly, the inspectors have
also had the opportunity to verify the accuracy of the
information that has been provided by several
countries. There are still countries that claim to have
information on Iraq that could be helpful to the
inspectors, and we would urge the Security Council to
encourage such countries to share that information with
the inspectors as soon as possible. None of the
information provided thus far would seem to justify the
Council abandoning the inspection process and
immediately resorting to the threatened “serious
consequences”.
The Security Council has yet to fully utilize the
inspection mechanisms of resolution 1441 (2002) that
would make for more robust and intrusive inspections.
As a result, the Council has recently received several
offers from Member States that have included the
deployment of additional inspectors, surveillance
aircraft and mobile customs teams to check for
prohibited goods entering Iraq. We would urge the
Council to fully explore all those practical options,
which may assist in enhancing the success of the
inspection process.
Although questions have been raised about how
long the inspections should be allowed to continue in
Iraq, we recall that there are no time limitations
stipulated for inspections in resolution 1441 (2002). As
Mr. Blix stated on 14 February, UNMOVIC has been
on the ground in Iraq for only 11 weeks, during which
the inspectors have been at full operational strength for
only two weeks. Mr. Blix stated that the time frame
would depend on which task one has in mind: the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction and related
items and programmes, disarmament, or monitoring to
verify that no new proscribed activities occur. Mr. Blix
pointed out that monitoring was essential and that it
would remain an open-ended and ongoing process until
the Council decides otherwise.
We believe that the Security Council must
redouble its efforts to bring about a peaceful resolution
to the situation in Iraq, in line with international law
and the provisions of the United Nations Charter. The
United Nations is the most authoritative voice in a
world of complex multilateralism and interdependence.
It is an Organization founded on the need to preserve

S/PV.4709

international peace and security. We should not allow
its legitimacy and credibility to be undermined by this
issue.
When the Security Council passes resolutions,
those resolutions are binding on all Member States.
Security Council resolutions must be enforced without
exception. We would hope that a Member State
attempting to abide by Security Council resolutions
would be encouraged to do so. We believe that
resorting to war without fully exhausting all other
options represents an admission of failure by the
Security Council in carrying out its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I thank the representative of
South Africa for his kind words addressed to me.
I would like to remind members of the Council
and speakers to kindly adhere to the seven minutes
allotted. Every additional minute or two adds up to
another hour of debate in the Council. In order to give
speakers the full use of their seven minutes, I would
propose that we consider that the Ambassador of South
Africa spoke on everyone’s behalf in addressing kind
words to me. I would therefore suggest that all other
speakers refrain from addressing kind words to me.
Other kind words are fully welcome.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President, and to
the members of the Security Council for acceding to
the request made by the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Movement to convene this open meeting.
I also have the pleasure of conveying my gratitude to
the delegation of South Africa for having requested the
convening of this meeting to hear the views of the
Member States of the United Nations as a whole, and
of the members of the Movement in particular, within
the framework of increased transparency and ideas and
views that may contribute to managing and peaceably
resolving the current crisis.
The United States of America and Britain are
continuing their feverish efforts to launch an
aggressive war against my country, which has been the
subject of an unjust comprehensive embargo for over
12 years. Their aim is to change the national
Government of Iraq and to impose American
hegemony over the region and its resources, as a first
step towards world domination through the use of

force. This is a dangerous precedent in international
relations that threatens the credibility of the United
Nations and exposes international and regional peace
and security to grave dangers.
Iraq’s record of compliance with Security Council
resolutions is unprecedented in this international
Organization and in the history of international
relations. During 1991 and 1992, Iraq, along with the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
destroyed all the sites, facilities and materials related to
its previous programmes of weapons of mass
destruction. From 1992 to 1998, Iraq cooperated with
UNSCOM and the IAEA to ascertain that Iraq was free
of any proscribed programmes. Ambassador Rolf
Ekeus, the former Chairman of UNSCOM, stated on 13
January 1993 that Iraq had met 95 per cent of its
disarmament obligations. He also repeated that
statement in an interview with Swedish radio on 7
September 2002.
When the Security Council decided to conduct a
comprehensive review of Iraq’s compliance with
Council resolutions in order to lift the embargo
imposed on it after the Secretary-General’s visit to Iraq
in 1998, the United States ordered Richard Butler, the
former Executive Chairman of UNSCOM, to withdraw
the inspectors in preparation for its aggression in
December 1998, dubbed “Operation Desert Fox”.
During that operation, Iraq was bombed by hundreds of
missiles that killed thousands of Iraqis, and Iraq’s
infrastructure was destroyed, having been rebuilt after
1991.
The whole world condemned that act of
aggression. The United Nations Secretary-General
considered it to be a dark day in United Nations
history. I would like to point out here that the United
States Government confirmed then, in 1998, that
Operation Desert Fox had destroyed all the weapons of
mass destruction that Iraq possessed. After the
aggression, the Security Council formed a panel headed
by Ambassador Amorim. The panel recommended that
the remaining disarmament questions could be dealt
with in the reinforced ongoing monitoring and
verification.
Ambassador
Amorim
based
his
recommendations on the former UNSCOM report of
1997, which stated that there no longer remained much
more unknown about Iraq’s remaining military
capabilities.

5

S/PV.4709

Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) adopted
the recommendations of the Amorim panel. Paragraph
2 of the resolution entrusted the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) with the establishment and operation of a
reinforced monitoring system that would resolve the
remaining disarmament issues. In its planning and
organizational structure, UNMOVIC has taken into
account the concept of integrating disarmament issues
with ongoing monitoring, as described in paragraph 13
of document S/2000/292.
In November of last year, Iraq agreed to the
return of the inspectors. The Secretary-General
conveyed Iraq’s agreement in a letter to the Security
Council. The letter included two basic issues. The first
considered the return of inspectors as a step towards a
comprehensive review of the issue of Iraq, with a view
to lifting the embargo imposed on it. The second dealt
with the necessity of respecting Iraq’s sovereignty and
independence. From what we see today, these two
issues are still awaiting implementation by the Security
Council.
During its three rounds of talks with the
Secretary-General last year, Iraq requested that no
threats be made to its sovereignty and security. It also
requested the initiation of technical talks with Mr. Blix
in order to agree on a mechanism to identify the most
important remaining issues and ways of solving them.
At that time, Mr. Blix said that identifying remaining
issues would be decided by the Security Council after
the submission of a work programme to the Council
two months after the start of work in Iraq. After Iraq
agreed to the return of the inspectors and its subsequent
agreement to resolution 1441 (2002), Iraq again put the
matter before Mr. Blix. However, he repeated that the
inspections would have to start first, for two months,
and then a work programme would be prepared,
followed by consultation with Iraq on the remaining
issues.
The United States has exploited this ambiguity to
transform the issue from a technical and scientific one
into a political one. It requested Iraq to prove that it is
free of the alleged weapons of mass destruction,
although what was originally requested was active
cooperation with the inspectors.
Nevertheless, Iraq has provided all sorts of active
and full cooperation, as follows. First, in record time,
Iraq submitted a full and comprehensive declaration of

6

its previous programmes of weapons of mass
destruction, in addition to submitting new documents
covering the period from 1998 to 2002. Secondly,
inspectors were granted immediate and unconditional
access to all sites they wished to visit, without
exempting private homes or the presidential sites,
which are a symbol of Iraq’s sovereignty. Inspection
teams have conducted over 700 inspections to date,
covering 400 sites. The cooperation was not limited to
opening the doors; it also extended to answering all the
questions posed by the inspectors by providing the
requested documents, plans and explanations.
Thirdly, Iraq established two specialized
commissions to search for documents or materials
related to previous proscribed programmes in order to
expedite the work of the inspectors. Fourthly, Iraq has
allowed inspectors to use helicopters and aerial
surveillance in their work, including U-2, Mirage and
Antonov planes. The U-2 planes have started their
work in the last two days.
Fifthly, Iraq’s cooperation is demonstrated by
facilitating interviews with scientists and persons the
inspectors may wish to see. Those persons were
encouraged to accept private interviews with the
inspectors, and this is precisely what is taking place
now. Sixthly, new methods were suggested to dispel
any doubts regarding remaining disarmament issues.
Any suggestions submitted by UNMOVIC to solve
these issues are welcome. It is only natural that the
proposals made by countries will also be equally
welcome.
Seventh, Iraq provided inspectors with logistical
support to overcome any obstacles that they may
encounter in their inspections, and this includes the
opening of regional offices for the inspectors
throughout Iraq, thus facilitating their use of technical
and scientific means for the immediate and effective
completion of their task.
We would like to reiterate here — in particular
with regard to the controversy surrounding the issue of
VX and anthrax, which were unilaterally destroyed by
Iraq — that Iraq submitted practical suggestions during
the recent technical talks with Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei in Baghdad on 8 and 9 February, with the
objective of clearing up what the former Special
Commission saw as remaining issues and vague points.
This can be done through measuring the dissolved
quantities of VX and anthrax in the unilateral

S/PV.4709

destruction sites, using chemical and physiological
analyses. Iraq submitted documents proving the
validity of this process, as well as the results it has
reached in conducting searches regarding other issues.

rights. We also demand respect for Iraq’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political choice expressed by
the Iraqi people during the general popular referendum
to reaffirm Iraq’s political leader and leadership.

This active cooperation resulted in refuting all the
allegations emanating from the United States and the
United Kingdom. Those allegations started with the
statement delivered by the United States President at
the General Assembly. This was followed by reports
issued by the United States and the United Kingdom
Administrations, the last case being the presentation by
Mr. Powell before the Security Council on 5 February.

The launching of an attack by the United States
and the United Kingdom against Iraq would be proof of
the failure of the entire international system. That
system must rely on the Charter of the United Nations
as its indispensable point of reference for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
an attack would undermine the credibility of the
Security Council.

Reason and wisdom make it incumbent upon us
to ask if there is any justification for the United States
and the United Kingdom to launch war against Iraq
under the pretext of their concern about Iraq’s
possession of weapons of mass destruction. Even at a
time when Iraq is under an ongoing monitoring and
verification system, is it to be rewarded with yet
another attack by the United States, which is
threatening to use weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear weapons?

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm Iraq’s
commitment to continuing full and active cooperation
with UNMOVIC and the IAEA. In that regard, the two
organizations have responded well in implementing
Security Council resolutions in a professional and
honest manner, in accordance with the Charter and
unaffected by political influence and pressure from the
United States and the United Kingdom.

Through its journey of compliance with the
international Organization’s resolutions over the last 12
years, Iraq has paid a dear price and has made
sacrifices. It has lost close to two million of its people.
It is now facing another threat of destruction and
killing. Therefore, from this rostrum, we call upon all
Member States to shoulder their responsibilities, in
particular the member States of the Security Council,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter, which
emphasizes peaceful solution. We call upon them to put
an end to the unjust embargo imposed on Iraq and to
eliminate the no-fly zones unilaterally imposed by the
United States and the United Kingdom.
We call upon all countries in the world to heed
the call of millions of people the world over, who
during the last few days rejected the idea of any
aggression or threat of war or war against Iraq. These
millions of people condemned the troops amassed as a
military threat to Iraq and the region and alerted the
world community to the dangers of military aggression
against Iraq, its people and its territorial integrity. We
warn against the serious consequences of a war in a
region that has suffered the agony of many wars, a
region that is still suffering from the continuation of
the policy of occupation and destruction by Israel
against the Palestinian people and their legitimate

We would like to reiterate to the world
community that if an aggression against Iraq takes
place, Iraq’s people, famous for their struggle against
the British occupation in the 1920s, will defend their
country and will allow no encroachment upon Iraq’s
sovereignty and independence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are confident that with your expertise and skill you will
be able to lead the Council’s work successfully at this
critical juncture. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, Permanent Representative of France,
Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sablière, for the valuable efforts
he and his delegation made while presiding over the
Council last month.
In October of last year, the Security Council held
an open meeting to discuss developments in the crisis
between Iraq and the United Nations in response to a
request by the Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Many members participated, and the views
of those members crystallized international opinion,
helping the Council to reach agreement, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002). The resolution was a

7

S/PV.4709

major achievement, through which the Security
Council showed its determination to shoulder the
responsibility entrusted to it under Article 24 of the
Charter: the maintenance of international peace and
security. Today’s meeting comes in response to a
similar request. However, it is being held in more
difficult circumstances, due to the Iraqi Government’s
reluctance to fulfil its commitments under Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 1441
(2002).
It is regrettable that Iraq has continued to defy the
will of the international community for so long, not
realizing the gravity of its policies and their
repercussions for the peace and stability of the entire
Gulf region. For more than 20 years, the region has
suffered the negative effects of the Iraqi Government’s
actions and its failure to respond to the resolutions of
international legality. After the adoption of resolution
1441 (2002) in November, everyone was optimistic that
the beating of the drums of war would be stopped and
that the Iraqi Government would come to its senses,
realize the gravity of the situation, seize the final
opportunity offered by that resolution and cooperate
fully with the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) by
declaring its activities in the manufacture of weapons
of mass destruction and by giving an account of all its
proscribed weapons. However, that optimism soon
evaporated and was supplanted by concern when Iraq
submitted its full, final and complete declaration on
7 December last year. UNMOVIC and the IAEA stated
that the declaration was incomplete and contained no
important new information. The periodic reports
submitted to the Security Council by the Executive
Chairman of UNMOVIC and the Director General of
IAEA, the last of which was delivered last Friday, have
concluded that Iraq has not fully cooperated in
responding to the requirements of resolution 1441
(2002). That is truly regrettable, especially since such
an attitude undermines the chances of peace and
increases the possibility of war, which we are all trying
to avoid because it would have negative repercussions
on the region and its peoples. Kuwait, because of its
geographic location, could be more heavily impacted
than other countries by developments in Iraq’s relations
with the United Nations. As part of our contingency
planning, Kuwait has recently taken precautionary
measures to ensure peace and security for its people.

8

On many occasions, Kuwait has expressed its
views, which are as follows. First, Iraq must fully
commit to the complete and faithful implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, Kuwait supports all efforts made to
reach a peaceful solution to the question of Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction, in accordance with
resolutions of international legality. We urge the Iraqi
Government to respond fully to regional and
international appeals and resolutions calling on Iraq to
comply with their provisions in order to avoid war.
Thirdly, Kuwait pays tribute to the UNMOVIC
and IAEA inspectors for their impartiality,
professionalism and objectivity. It appreciates the great
efforts that all are making to fulfil UNMOVIC’s
mandate.
Fourthly, Kuwait hopes that the use of military
force will be a last resort and will take place under
international legality. We believe that the Iraqi
Government alone can spare the brotherly Iraqi people
and the other peoples of the region the negative
repercussions and dangers of military action by
modifying its conduct as soon as possible and by
cooperating with the inspectors on substance rather
than merely on process.
Fifthly, we reaffirm the need to maintain the unity
of the Security Council because that is an important
element in ensuring commitment to the resolutions
adopted by the Council. Previous Council experience in
the handling of the question of Iraq has proven that a
common stance and unified will are more effective in
realizing our desired objectives.
The Security Council has been intensively and
repeatedly seized of the question of the elimination of
Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction. The issue is very
important because it affects international peace and
security. However, it is not the only commitment
included in relevant Security Council resolutions. The
resolutions contain other important commitments
directly affecting Kuwait that have not yet been settled.
The most important of these issues are missing persons
and prisoners of Kuwaiti and other nationalities, and
that of Kuwaiti property seized during Iraq’s
occupation of Kuwait. It is regrettable that the methods
employed by the Iraqi Government with respect to the
inspection teams tasked with the destruction of Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction since 1991 are the same
methods Iraq uses in addressing the situation of

S/PV.4709

prisoners, missing persons and Kuwaiti property,
despite that issue’s humanitarian aspect. This proves
that Iraq’s procrastination and evasion of commitments
are an entrenched approach for the Iraqi authorities.
With respect to the Kuwaiti and other prisoners
and missing persons, no progress has been made in
resolving this humanitarian question. Those people
have been missing for more than 12 years. Iraq
sometimes boycotts the work of the Tripartite
Commission and the Technical Subcommittee chaired
by the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
sometimes it resumes its participation with one or the
other body for purely political reasons. For more than
three years, Iraq refused to cooperate with the HighLevel Coordinator, Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov,
appointed by the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999). Iraq recently
agreed to invite the High-Level Coordinator to Iraq.
That visit took place in January. However, no tangible
progress was made.
Cooperation on procedure is the main
characteristic of how Iraq has handled the humanitarian
situation for all these years in total violation of
Security Council resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991)
and 1284 (1999). Therefore, we hope that the Security
Council will continue to pressure the Iraqi Government
to meet the demands of the resolutions of international
legality. We are not content with presidential
statements intended purely for the press.
As concerns the issue of the property usurped by
Iraq during its occupation of Kuwait, the way that Iraq
has addressed this question is not different from the
way in which it has dealt with other issues. Procedural
and nominal cooperation is the main characteristic of
Iraqi conduct. Iraq claimed that it did not have any
Kuwaiti property, and documented those claims in a
letter it addressed to the Secretary-General in 1994.
Later, however, it admitted that it still had some
Kuwaiti governmental and institutional documents and
property. Iraq even claimed that these documents
represented the notional archives of Kuwait. Then,
when those documents were returned, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in the presence of
the League of Arab States, and when we studied them
to determine which properties had been returned, we
found that these were simply correspondence between
different organs of the State apparatus and that they
could not be the official archives of Kuwait.

We therefore sent a letter to the Secretary-General
in order to place on record our position. That document
was issued under the symbol S/2002/1412 on 24
December 2002. Iraq’s failure to cooperate in returning
the national archives of Kuwait and other property is a
cause for concern. The letter from the Iraqi President
addressed to the Kuwaiti people on 7 December of last
year confirmed our doubts and the fact that Iraq does
not intend to respect its Arab and international
commitments or the sovereignty and independence of
Kuwait.
Kuwait submitted a letter to the Council with
information on the subject, contained in document
S/2002/1350, dated 11 December 2002.
In conclusion, the Security Council, as the
principal organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security, is facing a grave
challenge: to bring about the implementation of its
many resolutions with regard to the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait. The Council has the responsibility of
preserving its authority, credibility and legitimacy
before the international community. We hope that the
Council will present a unified will and take the same
position that it has in the context of previous
international crises, in a manner that enhances the role
of the United Nations and promotes the realization of
the purposes and principles of the Charter.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Morocco, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
thank the delegation of South Africa for the initiative,
taken on behalf of the non-aligned States, to hold this
public meeting on the question of Iraq.
In accordance with your recommendation, Sir, I
shall limit myself to associating myself with the
gratitude expressed and the compliments paid by
Ambassador Kumalo to your predecessor, Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sablière.
We followed with interest the presentation of the
reports by Mr. Hans Blix, the Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We have taken due note of the progress that
has been achieved in the inspections. Together with the
members of the Security Council, we have taken note

9

S/PV.4709

also of the measures undertaken by the Iraqi authorities
to implement the provisions of resolution 1441 (2002).
Mr. Blix’s statement contained encouraging indications
regarding the desired results through the continued
work of the inspectors in a serious manner and in a
favourable climate.
The Kingdom of Morocco, which desires to see
peace prevail in the region and this crisis overcome by
peaceful means in order to avert more tragedies in the
region, believes that the progress achieved is
encouraging. The Kingdom of Morocco urges Iraq to
demonstrate continued constructive cooperation with
the United Nations inspectors in implementation of
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002).
To achieve the desired goal, efforts must
continue. A favourable climate must prevail and
sufficient and necessary means must be provided to
facilitate the work of the inspectors and enable them to
discharge their duties with the greatest possible
efficiency.
The Middle East region cannot tolerate fresh
agonies or the ravages of a new war. Indeed, it badly
needs to see hotbeds of tension extinguished and peace
and security reign throughout the region.
The Kingdom of Morocco, which has always
made the settlement of disputes through peaceful
means a basic principle underlying its regional and
international relations, sincerely hopes that this
meeting will result in the elaboration of an approach
that will spare the brotherly Iraq people suffering and
the ravages of war and preserve its national unity and
territorial integrity within the framework of
international legality.
All of this will serve to strengthen the credibility
of the Security Council as the organ entrusted with the
maintenance of collective security and will allow it to
achieve the lofty and ultimate objective for which the
United Nations was created: to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
The President: The next speaker
representative of Cuba, on whom I now call.

is

the

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The impressive anti-war demonstrations that
took place all around the world on Saturday, 15
February; the opinion polls; the productive and
substantial ministerial debate held on 14 February in
the Council; the prudence and objectivity of the

10

presentations given by the Executive Chairman of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); and
the almost unanimous support for the courageous,
measured and constructive statement of the French
Foreign Minister, all of these express a powerful
consensus: peace must be preserved as the ideal and the
very reason for the existence of the United Nations and
in order to ensure that it can exercise its inalienable
and exclusive rights and duties under the Charter.
A blue canvas over Picasso’s “Guernica” cannot
disguise the fact that it is a warning to the Security
Council — a warning that cannot be ignored —
concerning the exceptional nature of the prerogative of
the use of force, exercised on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations and for which history
will demand accountability. Nor does it diminish our
memory of the horrors that gave rise to the United
Nations.
Only 72 hours ago, President Fidel Castro stated:
“These are not days of hope and glory for
peace in the world. A war is on the verge of
breaking out. This would not be a confrontation
between comparable forces. On the one side
would be a hegemonistic super-Power, with all of
its overwhelming military might and technology,
backed by a main ally, another country with
nuclear capability and a member of the United
Nations Security Council. On the other side
would be a country whose people have suffered
more than 10 years of daily bombings and the
loss of hundreds of thousands of lives, mainly
those of children, through hunger and disease,
following an unequal war provoked by Iraq’s
illegal occupation of Kuwait, which was an
independent State recognized by the international
community. The vast majority of world public
opinion is unanimously opposed to a new war.
Above all, it does not accept the adoption of a
unilateral decision by the United States
Government,
in
complete
disregard
for
international rules and for the power and
authority of the United Nations, limited as they
already are. This is an unnecessary war, on
pretexts that are neither credible nor proven.

S/PV.4709

“Completely debilitated by the last war
against the United States in 1991, Iraq ... utterly
lacks the capacity to counteract the offensive and
defensive weaponry at the disposal of the United
States, which is fully capable of annihilating any
threat.”
We have the absolute conviction that there is not the
slightest risk for that country or for its friends in the
region, and that it would be an unnecessary war.
The consequences of an unnecessary and
unjustified military action in Iraq would be extremely
grave. As has been foreseen, the humanitarian
catastrophe could be massive and terrible. The deaths
and destruction would be unpredictable. No one could
calculate its duration. The economic and political
effects on a world in recession would be enormous,
especially in developing countries, which are already
paying unsustainable increases in oil prices that are
disastrous for their economies and that, with the
launching of the first missile, would rise to even more
exorbitant levels.
Unquestionably, Iraq has cooperated with the
inspectors and has confirmed its resolve to complete its
compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions, in order to eliminate any doubt with
respect to the possibility that it still possesses weapons
of mass destruction. Recently, it accepted additional
inspection components and adopted new legislative and
executive measures; this has been favourably received
by the international community, with the sole exception
of those who appear to have made up their minds in
advance to carry out military action at any cost and
with economic objectives based on control of energy
resources and on domestic policy concerns.
The resolutions must be implemented in good
faith by all parties in order to move forward towards a
comprehensive solution to the question of Iraq that
guarantees peace and stability in the region and
includes the lifting of the sanctions regime, which is
causing so much suffering for the Iraqi people. The
sovereignty, territorial integrity
and
political
independence of Iraq, of Kuwait and of all the other
countries in the region must be respected. The NonAligned Movement Summit Countries will surely make
a decisive contribution to peace.
Cuba defends international law, because we
consider it to be the only viable guarantee of
international peace and security. We believe that the

world should be regulated by a system of collective
security, based on cooperation, that provides
guarantees for all. Such a system cannot be replaced by
“the law of the jungle” for the benefit of the powerful
and, ultimately, of the only super-Power. The unipolar,
unsustainable, unjust and profoundly inequitable
international order cannot be succeeded by an even
more primitive, unstable, unpredictable and dangerous
one.
The new doctrine of pre-emptive attack that some
seek to impose advocates the right to use or threaten to
use force in international relations and the right to take
unilateral military action against other States, in
advance and in the face of indeterminate and vague
threats. That is a flagrant violation of the spirit and the
letter of the Charter of the United Nations and seeks to
turn the inherent right of legitimate self-defence into a
blank check.
It is very dangerous to attempt to resolve national
security concerns through unilateral action or
unfounded accusations rather than through cooperation
among States parties to treaties and through the use of
the procedures defined in them for that purpose.
Cuba, which for four decades has been a victim
of the nuclear super-Power’s aggression and hostility
and which has never developed, and has the firm
resolve never to develop, weapons of mass
destruction — whether nuclear or of any other kind —
reaffirms that general and complete disarmament,
particularly nuclear disarmament, is the only possible
path to peace. We reaffirm that the use of such weapons
under any circumstances, the further development of
such arsenals, their proliferation or the attempt to
secure such capabilities would be madness, with
unpredictable consequences.
Apparently, the United States is now promoting a
draft resolution in the Security Council designed to
make a war against Iraq inevitable. It would follow up
on elements of resolution 1441 (2002) related to the
supposed ceasefire of 1991 — the concepts of
“material breach” and “serious consequences” —
which, as we warned at the time, were intended to
support the interpretation of the hawks that the
resolution authorizes the use of force in the event of
alleged Iraqi non-compliance. The facts have
increasingly confirmed the rightness of our warnings.

11

S/PV.4709

Despite the building of opposition to war around
the world and within the United States and the United
Kingdom, the risk of unilateral attack is growing. Cuba
strongly hopes that, among the members of the
Security Council, adherence to their countries’
legitimate national interests and to fundamentally
democratic respect for the will of their peoples will
prevail.
The Security Council, so often held hostage to the
anti-democratic and arbitrary exercise of the veto, now
has an opportunity to restore, to a degree, its
diminished credibility by building a solid and
insurmountable majority in defence of peace. In that
event, it would act with broad international backing
and with the support of public opinion. Moreover, the
United Nations could rely on the enormous political,
moral and legal force of the General Assembly.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to whom
I give the floor.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I should
like to join previous speakers in briefly expressing our
felicitations to you, Mr. President, and to your French
predecessor, as well as our appreciation to Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei.
My country, as one of Iraq’s neighbours, is
following attentively the situation concerning Iraq and
its disarmament obligations under Security Council
resolutions. On the one hand, we directly experienced
the horror of becoming the victim of all-out aggression
and of the massive use of chemical weapons in the
1980s. Today, 15 years after the end of the war, the
wounds are yet to be healed. Tens of thousands of the
chemically wounded civilians and soldiers who
survived the horror continue to live agonizing and
excruciating lives, and hardly a week goes by without
one or several of them dying as a result. Therefore, we
have an unparalleled interest in ensuring that there will
never again be an aggression in our neighbourhood and
that weapons of mass destruction will never again be
used there.
On the other hand, the prospect of another
destabilizing war in our immediate vicinity is a
nightmarish scenario of death and destruction. The
Iranian people and Government are concerned first and
foremost about the humanitarian catastrophe that would
undoubtedly befall the Iraqi people in the event of a

12

war — let alone the influx of displaced persons and
refugees.
The extent of destabilization in the region and of
uncertainty in Iraq in the event of a war might go far
beyond anything we can imagine today. Given the state
of Iraqi society and of the whole region, there are many
wild cards that no one can fit into his calculations with
any degree of certainty. But one outcome is almost
certain: extremism stands to benefit enormously from
an ill-calculated adventure in Iraq. The prospect of
appointing a foreign military commander to run an
Islamic and Arab country is all the more destabilizing
and only indicates prevailing delusions.
Bearing all that in mind, every effort should be
made to fulfil the international community’s unanimous
demand for the disarmament of Iraq without recourse
to armed force. Under the current circumstances, and
with a devastating war in the offing, it is all the more
incumbent upon the Iraqi leadership to cooperate fully
and proactively with the weapons inspectors, especially
on substance, as the inspectors have repeatedly called
for. Iraq’s other obligations — including that it release
prisoners of war and cease harbouring terrorists on its
soil — have yet to be fully carried out.
Likewise, we do not see any reason for the rushto-war rhetoric. We agree that resolution 1441 (2002) is
about disarmament and not about inspections. But we
believe that, while the chief inspectors are signalling
their intention to continue to work, there is no ground
for aborting the process and embarking on military
action, with all its known and unknown devastating
consequences.
We
further
believe
that
the
strengthening of the inspection regime by providing it
with additional inspectors and equipment cannot be
readily discarded by a rush to war. We therefore
express our full support for the efforts of members of
this Council and the proposal of France to strengthen
the inspection system.
We are increasingly hearing that the United
Nations should show backbone and courage or become
an irrelevant talking society. While we fully agree with
the need for the effectiveness of the United Nations as
the sole universal Organization, we cannot accept that
the priorities of one Power should provide the criteria
for the effectiveness or relevance of the United
Nations. We need not recall that dozens of Security
Council resolutions explicitly demanding an end to
Israeli occupation of Arab lands have been dead letter

S/PV.4709

not for weeks or years, but for decades; nor do we need
to name the only major Power that has enabled Israel to
contemptuously flout the will of the international
community.
The same dubious track record applies to
weapons of mass destruction. The international regime
governing the prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction has enormously suffered from the
application of self-serving and arbitrary criteria,
condoning and even encouraging friends of the day on
the path of acquiring such weapons. The provision of
chemical precursors and biological agents to Iraq in the
1980s, which is widely documented and lies at the
origin of the current crisis, is a brazen example in this
respect. Condoning Israel’s nuclear arsenal and
precluding the realization of the repeated demands of
the General Assembly and even of this Council to
establish a zone free from weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East is another illustrative case.
Against this backdrop, it is difficult to accept
such arguments about the effectiveness of the United
Nations or the repeated claims to moral clarity.
We believe that what is at stake today goes far
beyond the mere disarmament of Iraq. The rush-to-war
rhetoric is not coming out of a vacuum; neither is the
anxiety expressed by the international community
hyperbole. We are approaching the peak of a trend,
which includes pre-emptive strikes and the use of
tactical nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States.
What we witnessed last Friday here in this
Chamber and, more importantly, what followed the day
after across the globe were clear expressions of
concern and alarm over a trend which, willingly or
otherwise, is undermining not only the international
consensus to eradicate Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction, but in fact the very institution and norms
that have been instrumental in forging that consensus
and in maintaining international peace and security in
general.
In closing, let me stress that the current and
historically non-permanent power imbalance and
patterns of friendship should not induce anybody to
indulge themselves in undermining the credibility and
authority of the Security Council. It is imperative that
the Security Council, as the legally competent forum
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, remain
the centre of decision-making on how to deal with the

Iraqi issue, and all members of the international
community should genuinely abide by its decision.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Algeria, on whom I now call.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset, Sir, very briefly to
congratulate you and your predecessor, Ambassador
Jean-Marc De La Sablière. I also wish to thank you for
having granted the request of the chairmanship of the
Non-Aligned Movement to convene this open debate
on an issue that has continued to be central to the
concerns of the entire membership of the international
community ever since the debate we held in October
2002.
Like the rest of the international community,
Algeria has followed with keen concern the events that
have taken place since then and therefore cannot fail to
be anxious regarding the serious dangers now
threatening regional and international peace and
security.
It is nevertheless appropriate to stress here that,
since Iraq’s acceptance on 16 September of the
unconditional return to its territory of the United
Nations inspectors, followed in November by its
unconditional acceptance of resolution 1441 (2002),
never in more than a decade have there been conditions
so conducive to a political and diplomatic settlement of
what is called the Iraqi crisis or have the prospects for
a peaceful disarmament of Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction been so near at hand.
We owe these positive developments, in contrast
to the period of defiance that characterized the
relationship between Iraq and the United Nations, in
particular over the past four years, first and foremost to
the determination of the international community to see
its decisions implemented and to the outstanding unity
demonstrated by the Security Council, which is the
international community’s embodiment, during the
process that concluded on 8 November 2002 with the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1441 (2002).
However, it is equally correct to say that we owe
these positive developments to Iraq, which, in
demonstrating realism, wisdom and responsibility in its
relationship with the United Nations, has been able to
work in sync with the peaceful aspirations of the
international community and, in particular, with the
efforts to that end made by the Secretary-General and

13

S/PV.4709

by the leaders of the countries members of the League
of Arab States.
Ever since the resumption of inspections in Iraq
on 26 November 2002, the international community
has been able to measure progress achieved towards a
peaceful settlement of the thorny issue of the
disarmament of Iraq with respect to weapons of mass
destruction. Resolution 1441 (2002), in creating a
strengthened inspections regime, provided the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) with the means to
carry out their missions. During each of the stages
provided for in the adopted timetable, the effectiveness
of the established system has proved itself.
The interim reports made to the Security Council
by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei on 27
January 2003 clearly highlighted the cooperation of the
Iraqi authorities with regard to the freedom of
movement and action of the inspection teams, which, it
should be recalled, is one of the strongest demands laid
down in resolution 1441 (2002). Those reports also had
the merit of placing these facts once again into context
by establishing that the disarmament of Iraq with
respect to weapons of mass destruction had been
achieved to a substantive, indeed decisive degree under
the old inspections regime established under earlier
Council resolutions that form an integral part of
resolution 1441 (2002).
The period between 1998 and 2002, when the
inspections were interrupted, was clearly of a nature to
give rise to questions as to the fate of the stocks of
weapons of mass destruction that were not destroyed or
to the potential resumption of the production of
prohibited weapons. The heads of the inspections
teams, however, objectively and solemnly raised these
legitimate issues on 27 January.
We believe that it is vital, however, to ensure that
the dynamic set in motion by the resumption of
inspections should contribute daily to a shrinking of
the remaining grey areas regarding the existence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and to bringing us
closer to a comprehensive implementation of resolution
1441 (2002), which is the surest way to stave off the
prospect of the use of force.
Thus, Member States have been able to take
advantage of the resources provided by resolution 1441
(2002), paragraph 10 in particular, by providing

14

UNMOVIC and IAEA, in addition to sophisticated
material means, with a significant amount of the
information available to them, such as in the
presentation made to the Council by Mr. Colin Powell
on 5 February, which highlighted the full importance
and relevance of strengthening the inspections and the
need for Iraq to cooperate fully and promptly with
UNMOVIC and IAEA to achieve peaceful
disarmament.
The momentum of the inspections has clearly
been increased, as the presentation of the 14 February
reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei before the
Security Council attests. The reports emphasized
significant progress and greater cooperation by Iraq
with the United Nations on substantive issues,
strengthened by the Iraq’s adoption of legislation
prohibiting the production of weapons of mass
destruction, which shows that the country has
committed itself to abide by international legality. That
being the case, any proposal aimed at improving the
effectiveness of the inspections and allowing the
inspectors to discharge the duties entrusted to them
must be a subject of attention from the Council.
Despite these positive events, the threat of armed
conflict continues, unfortunately, to loom over the
region and give rise to the gravest of fears regarding
the extremely serious consequences that such a conflict
would bring about in Iraq itself and in other countries
of the region.
Algeria, for its part, notes with hope that since
the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002) nothing has
happened that is liable to justify the implementation of
the paragraphs that open the way to the use of force. A
military operation against Iraq would have a disastrous
impact on the Iraqi people — who for 12 years have
been subjected to sanctions, which are in many respects
inhumane — and on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq, to which the Security Council has
reaffirmed its dedication in resolution 1441 (2002). It
would also have serious consequences for the peace
process in the Middle East, which is already moribund,
as well as for the Israeli-Arab conflict as such.
From that point of view, the international
community expects that the Security Council will
maintain its authority and credibility, and that of the
United Nations, by knowing first of all how to find the
resources within the Organization that enable it to
remain in control of the process of a peaceful and

S/PV.4709

political settlement of the Iraqi crisis, through unity of
all its members. It can then work to strengthen the
authority and credibility that has been undermined by
Israeli intransigence by shouldering its responsibilities,
all its responsibilities, towards the Palestinian people
and by demonstrating equal determination and firmness
regarding all of those who are trampling under foot its
resolutions and by rejecting them.
It is extremely important here to emphasize that
the decision taken by the international community to
make the Middle East a zone free from weapons of
mass destruction, contained in paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991), must not be limited to
Iraq. It is equally applicable to Israel, which has
arrogated to itself the right to be the sole nuclear power
in the region in defiance of international legality.
The future of the system of collective security,
carefully crafted, depends on equal treatment afforded
all the members of the international community, which
for us, nations large and small, constitutes the
guarantee that the law will prevail in any and all
circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I have full
confidence in your ability to lead the Council
successfully thanks to your experience and wisdom.
We would also like to congratulate your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of France, for so ably
presiding over the Council last month. We would also
like to thank the Council for convening this open
meeting to express the concerns of Member States at
the United Nations.
We are meeting today to discuss the situation of
Iraq amidst difficult circumstances. We welcome the
reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, which we heard
on Friday. The reports included many positive points
with regard to the disarmament of Iraq’s weapons of
mass destruction and stressed the importance of
continuing the inspections, which will reduce the
possibility of war and its ravages. We would like to
thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei for their great efforts
to bring to a close this complex case.

The Arab Summit in Beirut last March stressed
the importance and necessity of safeguarding peace and
stability in the Gulf region. It also stressed the
importance of creating positive conditions conducive to
the development of normal relations among the
countries of the region. In this context, we stress the
importance of Iraq’s implementation of Security
Council resolutions relevant to the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait, particularly the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners and missing persons from third countries, as
well as its cooperation with the United Nations to
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people.
The United Nations expressed its grave concern
over war and its negative impact and repercussions on
Iraq, which would lead to untold suffering. We cannot,
therefore, ignore the humanitarian aspect of the
situation in Iraq. When all is said and done, those who
will suffer are the Iraqis, who have been suffering,
actually, for more than 10 years. We should work to
alleviate their suffering and assist them in resolving
this predicament. The Iraqi people have suffered the
scourge of many wars during the last decade.
International sanctions have exacerbated their
suffering.
We should stress here that it is Israel, the party
that owns a destructive and lethal nuclear arsenal, that
should be held accountable by the international
community. The international community has ignored
the crimes perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian
people, thereby fuelling and increasing the cycle of
violence in the region, all as a result of the policies
pursued by the current Israeli Government, which
continues to occupy Arab territories and to commit war
crimes.
We therefore call for the enforcement of
paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991), which calls for
the declaration of the Middle East a region free from
weapons of mass destruction. The international
community must play the role entrusted to it by the
Charter, without any selectivity or double standards.
We have been following the inspections
operations in Iraq. It has become clear to us that the
tasks undertaken by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
have yielded positive results. What is required now is
to allow the inspections more time to complete such
tasks.

15

S/PV.4709

The Iraqi Government should cooperate more
actively to bring this enduring case to a close. We
believe that Security Council resolution 1441 (2002),
unanimously adopted, provides for a framework that
has not been fully used yet. As Members of this
international Organization, which was established to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
we should commit ourselves to the implementation of
international law and the enhancement of human rights.
We should also spare no effort to peacefully settle any
crisis that we face, so that we can maintain the
foundations of international peace and security.
Continued inspections in Iraq, with more time for
the inspectors to implement their mandate, will assist
in disarming Iraq, which is the objective that,
collectively, we are seeking. The disarmament of Iraq
by peaceful means is our objective. There is an
alternative to war; military force should be a last resort.
The Security Council, which is entrusted with
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should spare no effort to use every
means at its disposal peacefully to disarm Iraq of its
weapons of mass destruction. Iraq should cooperate
more actively with the international community and
should implement all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
In conclusion, we would welcome any initiatives
or ideas calling for the peaceful resolution of this
question and stressing the need to preserve the unity,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. We
hope that the efforts of the Council and other
international efforts will be successful in finding a
solution to the current crisis.
The President: The next speaker
representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.

is

the

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): Our Organization was established
after the Second World War in an endeavour to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war
through the maintenance of justice, respect for
international law and the promotion of basic human
rights. As such, the United Nations took it upon itself
to maintain international peace and security through
collective measures to remove the causes of war and
threats to peace and to bring about, by peaceful means
when possible, and in accordance with the principles of
justice and international law, the settlement of

16

international disputes that could lead to a breach of the
peace.
Given the current situation, which threatens to
exhaust peaceful means in dealing with the Iraqi issue,
the Jordanian Government believes that all States
Members of the United Nations should work together
to achieve a solution through all available peaceful
means, and to avoid any measures that would breach
the peace and further exacerbate the situation in the
Middle East.
That in itself makes it incumbent on the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the
Charter, in particular paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 24.
The rest of the membership of the Organization has
entrusted the Security Council with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the Council must therefore use
all possible reasonable means to resolve the Iraqi issue
through negotiation and dialogue. In that connection, I
would like to reiterate the position of the Jordanian
Government that the implementation of Security
Council resolutions — all resolutions on the Middle
East, whether on Iraq or on the occupied Palestinian
territories — is an obligation on all States without
exception.
The Jordanian Government believes that a
peaceful way out of the current crisis would require
that Iraq fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including those related to inspections, in
particular resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002). Resolution 687 (1991) created the
framework for and set out the goals of the inspection
process in Iraq; resolution 1284 (1999) clarified, inter
alia, the obligations of both Iraq and the inspectors in
relation to resolving the remaining disarmament issues
and to the creation of a reinforced system of ongoing
monitoring and verification; and resolution 1441
(2002) provided the inspectors with significant rights
and the authority to build a robust, enhanced and
effective inspection system. Such a system would put
an end to Iraq’s proscribed weapons programmes in a
peaceful manner, provided that suitable conditions for
the process existed. To date, this system has shown
evidence of unprecedented effectiveness. It should
continue and, if necessary, be enhanced, as its failure
would constitute a threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council would then have to
convene to consider that failure, as well as how to
restore international peace and security.

S/PV.4709

In this regard, the Government of Jordan would
like to reiterate that the Security Council resolutions
relevant to Iraq complement one another. It further
expresses its support for the continuation of the
inspection process and for the work being carried out
by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Government of Jordan also calls for improved
cooperation on the part of all relevant parties,
especially the Iraqi Government, to ensure that Iraq’s
proscribed weapons programmes are brought to an end
in a peaceful manner. In this regard, it welcomes the
outcome of the recent talks that took place in Baghdad,
including unconditional permission for surveillance
flights and the conducting of private interviews with
Iraqi scientists, as well as a commitment by Iraq to
enact, without conditions, legislation prohibiting the
manufacture and stockpiling of proscribed weapons.
Jordan calls on the Iraqi Government not to waste
this opportunity and to take the initiative by
cooperating proactively in the implementation of the
relevant Council resolutions. That would save Iraq, the
region and its peoples from the scourge of war and
from the suffering that would inevitably follow. The
Government of Jordan hopes that that would be the
right step towards a comprehensive solution
encompassing the implementation of all relevant
Council resolutions, including those related to Kuwaiti
and third-party prisoners of war and missing persons.
That in turn would lead to an end to the long-drawn-out
suffering of the Iraqi people, allowing them to live in
prosperity and dignity, and would ensure that future
generations of Iraqis can live in peace and security.
The wars that plagued the Middle East region in
the previous century were, and still are, the major
cause of political, economic and social instability in
that region. This in turn has had negative repercussions
on international peace and security and has contributed
to the creation of a major global economic crisis. Any
new war would therefore have serious repercussions,
not only on the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq,
but on the whole region. Furthermore, we are deeply
concerned about the humanitarian crisis that would
inevitably result from such a war — the deaths, the
injuries, the refugee movement and the displacement of
millions. Jordan, as one of Iraq’s neighbours, would
like to recall the serious humanitarian and economic

consequences that continue to affect it as a result of the
first Gulf war.
For those reasons, the Government of Jordan calls
on the Security Council and on all parties directly
involved in the crisis to make use of every available
solution to avoid war; to contribute to the stability and
security of the Middle East; to respect the rights of the
countries of the region and their peoples; to abide by
the provisions of the Charter; and to act within the
framework of international legitimacy and the Security
Council.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of The Gambia, on whom I now call.
Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia): My delegation is
speaking in its capacity as Chairman of the Group of
African States.
At the outset, let me commend you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting at the request of
the Non-Aligned Movement, which constitutes a
sizeable chunk of the membership of the United
Nations. As you are aware, the member States of the
African Union together make up a significant bloc in
the Non-Aligned Movement. It stands to reason that the
position of the African Union on issues such as the one
we are at present considering would be prominently
reflected in the concerns of the Non-Aligned
Movement on those issues. It is therefore our hope that
those concerns will inform the decisions that the
Council will, from our debate today, ultimately make
on the burning question of Iraq.
The subject of today’s meeting has engaged the
whole world for a very long time now, and all peaceloving nations sincerely wish that it may be speedily
brought to closure, peacefully and for the greater good
of all. In striving towards that objective, the entire
international community has a responsibility to ensure
that the process is managed in such a way that does not
unleash negative and destabilizing effects on our
security, our economies, our societies and our political
systems.
Experience has taught us in Africa that when
elephants fight it is we, the grass, who suffer. We are
fully aware that just as we bore the full brunt of the
conflagrations of the cold war, so also do we now stand
to suffer if the impending conflict is not averted
through proper management and a peaceful resolution.
Already, it is on our soil and among our innocent

17

S/PV.4709

people that terrorism has reared a good part of its ugly
head. We cannot forget the terrorist attacks in Nairobi,
Dar-es-Salaam and Mombasa that caused huge loss of
life and extensive destruction to property. We shall
surely be even more exposed if mismanagement of the
Iraq issue leads to the provocation of terrorist attacks
on member States. Our nations do not have the
sophisticated security, detection and early-warning
capacities that aid preventive actions in developed
countries. Our systems are not so highly developed as
to be able to easily anticipate and ward off terrorist
attacks, nor is it so easy for us to quickly recover from
such attacks.
It is to be expected that recourse to war as a
means of resolving the crisis will also naturally have a
negative impact on the already weak economies of our
countries, at a time when we can ill afford or sustain
such an unwelcome outcome. The African economy is
already showing signs of stress as a result of the
uncertainties surrounding this looming conflict. War
will certainly further frustrate the efforts being made
by African Governments to tackle poverty and prevent
conflict on the continent.
The sparring that has been going on between the
opposing forces on the subject of our debate is leading
many to believe that the prophetic clash of civilizations
is already upon us. In many parts of the Muslim world
ordinary people believe that a war on Iraq is a war on
Islam. Erroneous as that perception may be, it does not
give much comfort in many quarters. Africa has one of
the largest concentrations of Muslims in the world. In
the Sahel alone there are more than 100 million
Muslims. For those large numbers of Muslims in our
communities to be made to feel that they are being
singled out for attack by the international community,
of which we are all a part, is an eventuality that all
African Governments earnestly wish to pre-empt.
Africa does not want war. In the declaration of
the Central Organ of the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution of the African
Union on the Iraqi crisis, which was made at Addis
Ababa on 3 February 2003, African Governments
stated that
“military confrontation in Iraq would be a
destabilizing factor for the whole region and
would have far-reaching economic and security
consequences for all the countries of the world,
and particularly for those of Africa”.

18

Further, the Central Organ declared that
“the territorial integrity of Iraq should be
respected and … all diplomatic means should be
pursued by international community to ensure
that the Iraqi Government complies fully with the
provisions of resolution 1441 and that, in any
case, any new decision on the matter should
emanate from the UN Security Council after a
consideration of the final report of the inspection
team”.
The position taken by African Governments on
the issue is clear and is fully consistent with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, Article
51 of which permits the use of force only “if an armed
attack occurs”, and even then, only “until the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security”. We are satisfied that
the Council has taken those measures in authorizing,
and continuing with, the inspections in Iraq.
Just a few days ago the Council received reports
from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on the work of the
inspectors in Iraq. Most members of the Council agreed
that the Iraqi authorities were beginning to cooperate
and that progress was being made. Such a development
encourages us all to expect that, through the work of
the inspectors, Iraq will be made to disarm itself of all
weapons of mass destruction without having to suffer
the pains of war.
My delegation strongly urges the Iraqi authorities
to cooperate fully and unconditionally with the
Security Council and to comply with all the
requirements put before it, not only in resolution 1441
(2002) but also in all the other resolutions that relate to
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. In particular, we
call upon them once again to release the several
hundred Kuwaiti prisoners of war they are holding and
to return the Kuwaiti archives to where they rightfully
belong, that is, in Kuwait.
The voices that have appealed for patience and
for the inspections not to be interrupted or rushed are
many. We urge the Council to listen to those voices and
to pay heed to their most reasonable appeal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): I did have a whole lot of
nice things to say about you at the start of my address,
Mr. President, but, following your instructions, I have

S/PV.4709

withdrawn them. That is not to say that I do not mean
them.
We all know that on 8 November 2002 the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1441
(2002), affording Iraq a final opportunity to comply
with its disarmament obligations. That resolution came
11 years and seven months after resolution 687 (1991)
demanded that Iraq give up its weapons of mass
destruction. Given the amount of time that has passed,
we had hoped that resolution 1441 (2002) would have
been be the final step in resolving this issue. Given its
unanimous adoption by the Council, we had hoped that
the Government of Iraq would finally get the message.
But, sadly, 11 years and 10 months after the Security
Council first demanded that Iraq disarm, Saddam
Hussain still has not understood the message.
Resolution 1441 (2002) set up two objective
criteria of compliance: the provision by Iraq of a full
and complete declaration of its programmes of
weapons of mass destruction, and unconditional
cooperation with weapons inspectors. More than three
months later, by any objective reading of those criteria,
Iraq has failed to meet its obligations.
On 7 December Iraq delivered a declaration that
was patently incomplete. As the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) noted, it provided no new information
and failed to answer serious outstanding questions,
including questions about the production of anthrax,
VX and mustard gas.
On 27 January, after some 60 days of inspections,
neither UNMOVIC nor the IAEA were able to say that
Iraq was actively cooperating. Serious questions about
VX and about thousands of litres of chemical and
biological agents remained unanswered.
On 5 February Secretary of State Powell
presented further evidence that Iraq was not
cooperating, indeed, that it was actively trying to
subvert the inspection process. Australia found the
intelligence presented by Secretary Powell compelling.
If some believe that that information was open to
interpretation, that is of course their right. But given
Saddam’s record of deception, I am not sure why we
should be giving him the benefit of the doubt.
And on 14 February, after almost 80 days of
inspections, UNMOVIC and the IAEA again reported

to the Council. What did we hear? We heard that Iraq
had been working to extend the range of its missile
systems beyond prescribed limits. And what did we not
hear? We did not hear that Iraq had finally decided to
cooperate immediately, actively and unconditionally
with inspectors.
It is patently clear, by the criteria established
under resolution 1441 (2002), that Iraq is in further
material breach of its obligations. The question today is
what the Security Council, as the primary multilateral
instrument of international peace and security, is going
to do about it. Last year the Council spent eight weeks
putting in place a robust inspection regime. Resolution
1441 (2002) gave inspectors the tools they needed to
verify Iraqi disarmament — and it is verifying Iraqi
disarmament which is their job, not a game of catch as
catch can.
But that was only one part of the solution to this
problem. Active Iraqi cooperation remains the other,
more fundamental, part. And this is still missing. In the
examples I have already listed — in everything we
heard from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei — the one
thing missing was immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation, as demanded by resolution 1441 (2002).
All of us understand the importance of this. I have
heard no one here say that doubling the number of
inspectors or giving them more time and more
resources will work without Iraqi cooperation. This is
what the Council should be focusing on today.
Yes, the Council could give Iraq more time. Yes,
we could wait until March; we could wait another three
months. But do we really think more time will make
Iraq cooperate? Does Iraq really need three more
months to make a decision that it should take in no
more than three minutes?
In Australia’s view, the Security Council cannot
wait forever to confront this issue. Either Iraq has
complied or it has not. In our view, the Council should
move quickly to consider a further resolution that deals
decisively with Iraq’s failure to comply with resolution
1441 (2002). The Security Council has a fundamental
responsibility to assert its authority. If it does not, it
places in jeopardy not only the cause of Iraqi
disarmament, but also the very basis of our current
system of collective security.
Resolution 1441 (2002) gave Iraq a final
opportunity to meet its obligations and promised
serious consequences if it did not comply. Is the

19

S/PV.4709

Security Council now saying that Iraq should be given
yet more opportunities and can forget about the serious
consequences? What message does that send to other
States prepared to thumb their noses at international
law and international norms?
Delays and divisions in the Council will only play
into Iraq’s hands. We cannot allow a tyrant to evade
Council decisions. The Security Council must stand
united around what is fundamental, and must not be
distracted. It must act decisively to ensure that, after 12
years, Iraq finally meets its obligations.
The President: The next speaker
representative of Turkey. I give him the floor.

is

the

Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Ever since the question of
Iraq entered its present phase, Turkey has been
unequivocal in its commitment to the principles that
continue to govern its 80-year-old relationship with its
southern neighbour. Likewise, Turkey has actively
supported the wide-ranging quest for a peaceful
solution of the Iraqi crisis, and we have been at the
forefront of the regional initiatives in that vein. More
recently, the Istanbul Declaration, carrying the
signatures of the regional countries, called on the Iraqi
leadership to move irreversibly and sincerely towards
assuming its responsibilities in restoring peace and
stability in the region.
At about the same time, my Government let the
Iraqi authorities at all levels know directly of our dire
assessment of the unfolding events. We told them that
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) can in no way
be construed as other than an unambiguous signal of
what it said in writing.
Our efforts were geared to strengthen not the
tone, but the substance, of the message that these were
indeed last warnings; that it was incumbent upon the
Iraqi leadership to do everything in its power to help
the United Nations inspectors to absolve them, once
and for all, of the charge of continuing to produce
weapons of mass destruction and of continuing to
conceal whatever it had of that nature, especially those
biological and chemical agents that remained
unaccounted for.
Today, we continue to look for the same thing: a
peaceful solution. We are looking for a solution that
will not require military involvement, while reassuring
the world that there are no lurking dangers whatsoever
of the sort that Security Council resolution 1441 (2002)

20

deals with. In that vein, yesterday’s European Union
summit declaration should be seen as the latest
significant initiative aiming at similar ends.
I happen to speak on behalf of another old
country — founded in 1071, precisely five years after
the French, according to Mr. Straw, founded Britain in
1066. And this old country has every reason to be
worried. Because, along with the people of Iraq and
other neighbouring countries, it is Turkey which has
been receiving the raw impact of instability to its
south. We cannot observe what is taking place in this
oldest part of the world with any degree of
indifference.
When, in 1991, for instance, nearly 500,000
refugees entered Turkey in distress, many old countries
of Europe were loath to accept more than a mere 20 to
90 refugees, men, women and children. Throughout the
1990s, Thomas Friedman and others talked and wrote
about Amazon tribesmen watching satellite television
and demanding New York prices for their ounces of
gold. Literature, both scholarly and shoddy, about
globalization, extolling the beneficial effects of that
process, abounded all over the world. And, throughout
that decade, my country, for the first time in 1,000
years, was not able to trade to its south, because of the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. Instead, we had to fight and
lose tens of thousands of our most promising
generation to contain and finally eradicate terrorism of
the worst sort. Time has shown the truth.
Today, the very talk of war has a debilitating
effect on our already fragile economy. Whatever the
promise of our riches, and of the opportunities that my
country abundantly possesses and that the Turkish
people offer, foreign investors and other people shy
away from the manifold uncertainties that seem to
haunt the region.
Clearly, the Turkish people have every reason and
right to desire intensely to see an end to this crisis —
and, of course, a peaceful one. But even today, in spite
of all I have been recounting, there are those in some
quarters who would tell us that Turkey has an agenda
with regard to Iraq. I would remind them of the Turkish
proverb cautioning against those anglers who prefer
murky waters. I am sure other languages have their
equivalent warning against those who do not want you
to see what they are actually seeking to achieve.

S/PV.4709

Turkey has no agenda other than reaffirming the
territorial integrity and political unity of Iraq and
defending the rights of all its people — Arab, Kurdish,
Turcoman, Assyrian, Chaldean and others — to live in
security, at peace with the world and in peace among
themselves, as citizens of a country collectively
benefiting from its riches.
We continue to hope that the Council will remain
the focal point. Iraq must fully comply with its
disarmament obligations. The international pressure
exerted to that end should be pursued forthwith. The
Iraqi authorities should be keenly aware that time is of
the essence. More important, we should recognize that
intense diplomatic efforts backed by a credible force
posture still seem to be, especially in this case, the
most plausible means to achieve progress. After all, the
immediate, unconditional, and complete disarmament
of Iraq is still the serious concern confronting
international peace and security that it has been since
1991.
In that connection, we wish to commend Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei for their work and to salute their
efforts towards reaching the peaceful disarmament of
Iraq. We have full confidence in their objectivity and
professionalism. We hope that the recent steps taken by
the Iraqi Government — including allowing
surveillance flights, encouragement of private
interviews without minders in or outside Iraq, and the
provision of additional documentation on outstanding
disarmament issues — will prove to constitute
substantive progress, thus serving the aim of achieving
the long-desired proactive cooperation on the part of
Iraq.
Before I conclude, I wish to underline two
considerations that are foremost in our minds.
The first of these concerns the plight of the Iraqi
people. The people of Turkey have close historical and
cultural ties with them, along with human bonds. We
are cognizant of their difficult situation and dire
humanitarian conditions under the duress of harsh
economic sanctions coupled with the abuse of
resources, which have both gone unabated for years
now. The people of Turkey know very well that they
will continue to be their neighbours, next year, the year
after and forever.
Secondly, Turkey attaches utmost importance to
the unity and coherence of the Security Council. As we
enter the corridor leading to this Chamber, we see the

replica of the Kadesh Agreement, written in cuneiform
on a great stone. It is a gift of Turkey to the United
Nations, in fact, a gift of the Turkish soil, which has
seen the dawn and rise of many empires, from the
Hittites to the Ottoman. The original of this great stone
of the Kadesh Agreement is in Turkey. It was signed
between the Egyptians and the Hittites in 1270 B.C.,
that is, some 3,300 years ago, and it attests to the firstever written agreement between two States.
Indeed, the Security Council being the only tool
humanity has been able to achieve after more than
three millennia of diplomacy, it is incumbent upon the
members of the Council to let collective wisdom
prevail. Bridging whatever gap there may be in the
Council will maintain the unity and the legitimacy of
this body while proving its relevance in these critical
times.
For Iraq, it is the moment of truth. Iraq should
now act with conviction and in a manner convincing
for others in this defining hour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Moura (Brazil): Brazil has been following
with concern and apprehension the situation regarding
Iraq, fully aware of the implications that developments
related to it may have for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The implications of the current situation and the
risk of war it entails are already being felt throughout
the world, through increased uncertainty, political
divisions and jittery markets. There is no doubt that an
armed conflict will entail great costs in human,
political and economic terms. The large anti-war
manifestations we have witnessed over the weekend in
many countries, including my own, clearly show that
significant segments of opinion within those countries
view such a course of action with uneasiness and
doubt, to say the least.
We have noted the opinions already put forward
by Council members. We believe that holding an open
debate in the wake of the presentations made by Mr.
Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei on Friday, 14
February provides the wider international community
with a valuable opportunity for expressing views on an
issue that affects us all.

21

S/PV.4709

The chief inspectors’ presentations provide us the
most recent, informative and impartial appraisals of the
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002). This report
on their work shows the progress achieved so far, the
difficulties involved and the need for immediate, active
and unconditional cooperation with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on the part of the Iraqi authorities.
Brazil has consistently called for Iraq’s full
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 1441 (2002), so as to ensure the
complete elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction and other proscribed weapons, and supports
further peaceful efforts within the context of the
Organization towards achieving those ends. Resolution
1441 (2002) provides a framework whose possibilities
must be thoroughly explored. These clearly involve
full, active and unconditional cooperation on the part
of the Iraqi authorities with the inspectors, greater
efficiency of the inspection regime, and the
development
of
verification
and
monitoring
mechanisms, such as those stipulated in resolution
1284 (1999). Suggestions have been put forward in this
regard by Council members, notably France, Russia
and Germany. We support the goals of these initiatives.
A peaceful solution to this crisis is possible. As there is
still hope for peace, we must insist on it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam has
followed with deep concern the latest developments
surrounding Iraq, which lead to an assumption that war
is inevitable. Under these circumstances, we welcome
the convening of this open meeting for all Member
States to express their views on this crucial issue on the
agenda of the Security Council, which would have farreaching implications for our Organization and its
ability to promote the attainment of world peace and
security.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our view that all peaceful means must be exhausted to
find a political solution to the Iraqi issue in conformity
with the United Nations Charter and international law.
Viet Nam strongly believes that war is not inevitable
and that there is still a chance for a peaceful solution to
the Iraq issue based on respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and on the

22

preservation of the authority and credibility of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We advocate a peaceful solution instead of military
action also because we understand the consequences of
a war, especially in terms of untold human suffering
and material destruction for the ordinary people of the
parties concerned, as well as the multifaceted impact
on the region and in the world over.
The reports provided by the heads of two United
Nations inspection teams, Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, at the Security Council briefing
on 14 February 2003 clarified a number of issues raised
at the previous meeting on Iraq. We have also learned
that the Government of Iraq has demonstrated a new
willingness to cooperate with the inspectors in a
number of areas, such as providing new documentation
on the outstanding issues, agreeing to aerial
reconnaissance over its territory and allowing Iraqi
scientists to be interviewed without witnesses.
Moreover, both inspectors said that they had found no
evidence indicating that Iraq has and was trying to hide
weapons of mass destruction or prohibited chemical
weapons.
We share the views of a large number of other
delegations that the inspections have made real
progress and have not been completed. Therefore
inspections should continue, and the inspectors should
be trusted and provided with all possible assistance to
carry out their work.
My delegation is particularly concerned about the
dire humanitarian consequences of a possible military
conflict for the civilian population of Iraq, who have
already suffered tremendously from the ongoing
sanctions. According to the assessment made by Mr.
Kenzo
Oshima,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs, at his briefing on 13 February
2003, under a “medium-case scenario” of a possible
war, up to 10 million people may require food
assistance during and after the start of the conflict,
while up to half of the Iraqi population may be without
access to potable water. And there is the potential that
2 million people could become internally displaced,
with 600,000 to 1.45 million refugees and asylum
seekers.
Another aspect that has also been brought to our
attention is the negative impact that an armed conflict
could have on the very fragile situation in the Middle
East. A military action would further complicate the

S/PV.4709

already difficult problems in the region. We also fear
that it would affect the global economy at the time
when many economies are struggling to recover from
recession.
Taking into consideration all these aspects, we
believe that, at present, constructive dialogue between
the concerned parties and uninterrupted work on the
part of the United Nations inspectors are still the most
effective means of achieving a peaceful settlement of
the Iraqi issue.
Let me conclude my statement by saying that we
are convinced that the Security Council members will
take into consideration all views expressed in this
meeting, discharge their responsibilities in an objective
manner, and facilitate a peaceful settlement which
enjoys the full support of the vast majority of the
people and countries of the world, so as to fulfil the
Council’s important task of maintaining international
peace and security.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Peru, on whom I now call.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Peru endorses the legal approach
requiring the Government of Iraq fully to comply with
all its obligations in the area of disarmament, including
the total elimination of its weapons of mass
destruction, according to the terms of resolution 1441
(2002) and the other applicable resolutions of the
Security Council. International norms also impose on
Iraq the obligation to cooperate with the United
Nations inspectors in an immediate, active and
unconditional fashion, as was stated by the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission, Mr. Hans
Blix, in his report on Friday 14 February.
Unfortunately, we are still seeing a manifest lack
of cooperation from Iraq. The Government of Iraq must
understand once and for all that the only possibility
that it has of normalizing its relations with the
international community is immediate disarmament and
unconditional compliance with the Security Council
resolutions.
Only such actions could be considered
by the international community as verifiable guarantees
that Iraq possesses no programmes or weapons of mass
destruction. Only in this way can we prevent the
authority and legitimacy of the United Nations from
being undermined.

The Government of Peru is convinced that
conflicts and threats to international peace and
security — as recently stated by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan — must be resolved pursuant to the
principles and mechanisms established in the Charter
of the United Nations. This means that the use of force,
as the Secretary-General has also asserted, must be
considered as the last available recourse, but it is also
important to note here that, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, it is also a legitimate
recourse in order to guarantee international peace and
security.
Current developments are putting to the test the
United Nations security system. But those
developments stem from the violation by the
Government of Iraq of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in attacking Kuwait
and, more recently, from its systematic refusal to
implement the measures for total disarmament of
weapons of mass destruction established by the
Security Council. More than a decade has elapsed, and
the problem still exists, jeopardizing the efficiency of
the system of collective security of this Organization.
It can be said that, as matters stand, the United
Nations and the international security system are being
put to the test.
Peru takes the view that the crisis must be
resolved within the normative framework of the United
Nations, in particular in the context of the decisions
taken by the Security Council, and that, as a matter of
priority, all possibilities for a peaceful solution must be
exhausted. We must do this. But such a peaceful
solution will also hinge on immediate, unilateral and
total disarmament on the part of the Government of
Iraq, according to the provisions and terms set by
resolution 1441 (2002).
The Government of Peru is aware of the complex
nature of the inspectors’ verification task and of the
difficulty involved in arriving at unequivocal results in
their activities. However, at the same time it can be
inferred from their reports that the mandate of
complete and total disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction established by the Council has not been
complied with in full.
In this regard, my Government endorses the
demand for the full implementation of resolution 1441
(2002) within a set time frame. Time should not and

23

S/PV.4709

cannot be used to strip the resolutions of the Security
Council of all substance or useful effect.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Japan, on whom I now call.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I wish to thank you very
much, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting. I
would also like to express my appreciation to Mr. Hans
Blix and to Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei for their reports to
the Council this past Friday.
The issue of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction
represents a threat to international peace and security.
It is a matter of serious concern not only for certain
specific countries but also for the entire international
community. Underlying our concerns is the fact that in
the past, Iraq has actually used chemical weapons and
that, over the course of the past 12 years, it has
challenged the authority and credibility of the United
Nations by continuing to disregard its obligations
under numerous resolutions of the Security Council.
In order to resolve this issue peacefully, Japan has
been making its own diplomatic efforts, including by
urging Iraq proactively to dispel every suspicion, to
abide by all relevant Security Council resolutions and
to abandon its weapons of mass destruction.
While resolution 1441 (2002), which was adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, affirmed that
Iraq was in material breach of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991),
through which Iraq committed to eliminate its weapons
of mass destruction, it also provided Iraq with a final
opportunity to comply with its obligations.
Japan hopes — as do all countries — that this
issue will be resolved peacefully, but it is important to
stress that that depends upon Iraq’s attitude. Based on
the deliberations of the Security Council to date, as
well as on the intelligence briefing by United States
Secretary of State Powell, on 5 February and on the
reports by the weapons inspectors on 14 February, we
cannot help but conclude that the declaration submitted
by Iraq in response to resolution 1441 (2002) was
neither complete nor accurate and that Iraq is not fully
and proactively cooperating with the resumed
inspections. To the best of our knowledge, only Iraq —
no other Member State — has expressed the view in
the Council that it has been cooperating fully and
proactively.

24

We are aware that, in countries around the world,
there is strong opposition to war. We share the desire to
resolve this issue peacefully. It should be stressed,
however, that the root of the problem is whether Iraq
will radically change its attitude, cooperate
immediately, proactively and without conditions and
eliminate its weapons of mass destruction, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In his report to the Council on 14 February,
Mr. Blix reaffirmed that Iraq’s response thus far has
been inadequate. Therefore, even if the inspections are
continued and strengthened, they will hardly lead to the
elimination of its weapons of mass destruction unless
Iraq fundamentally changes its attitude of cooperating
only passively. There is serious doubt as to the
effectiveness of continued inspections.
In our view, it is crucial now that the international
community remain united and that it continue to put
strong pressure on Iraq. If the Security Council fails to
act in unity, it will not only damage the credibility of
the United Nations but also send the wrong message to
Iraq. It would also lead to an ongoing threat,
throughout the world, of terror by weapons of mass
destruction.
The Government of Japan attaches great
importance to international cooperation. Based on the
fact that Iraq is not fully cooperating or fully
discharging its obligations, we consider it desirable
that the Security Council adopt a new resolution that
clearly demonstrates the determined attitude of the
international community. The Council should strive to
adopt such a resolution. Diplomatic efforts have been
made for 12 long years; Iraq now has very limited time.
Japan sincerely hopes that the Council will be united
and that it will take effective action to fulfil its
responsibilities for international peace and security.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of New Zealand, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this open debate. The Council is dealing
with issues that are of vital importance to us all.
Countries that are not members of the Security
Council last had the opportunity to address these issues
in the debate four months ago, on 16 October. Since
then, pursuant to resolution 1441 (2002), inspectors of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and of the

S/PV.4709

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have
returned to Iraq. The Council heard their reports on 27
January and again on 14 February.
The first report suggested that, while Iraq was
cooperating on process, it had not cooperated
sufficiently on substance. The heads of UNMOVIC and
IAEA returned to Baghdad to impress on it that only
full compliance with the requirements of the United
Nations that it disarm and be seen to disarm would
prevent the serious consequences warned of in
resolution 1441 (2002). Last Friday’s report suggests
that Iraq has moved, at least in part, to accommodate
some of the inspectors’ requests. But it still must
answer serious questions about material related to
weapons of mass destruction that remained unanswered
in 1998 when United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) inspectors left.
The New Zealand Government calls on Iraq to
move rapidly to provide the information and
cooperation requested of it to avert the catastrophe that
war would bring to its people. The New Zealand
Government recognizes that the Security Council must
be able to authorize force as a last resort to uphold its
resolution. It does not, however, believe that such a
decision would be justified at this time. The inspectors’
reports strongly imply that their work is useful in
pursuing the objectives of the United Nations as laid
out in a series of resolutions, and, as long as that is so,
it should continue.
The New Zealand Government has a very strong
preference for a diplomatic solution to this crisis. We
place considerable weight on the inspection and
disarmament process. We believe that it should run its
course. We do not support military action against Iraq
without a mandate from the Security Council, and we
do not believe that the Council would be justified in
giving that mandate at this time. Our position is based
on our strong support for multilateralism, the
international rule of law and our respect for the
authority of the Security Council. We will uphold the
Council’s decisions, but we urge it at this time to
ensure that all available diplomatic means are used to
pursue the disarmament of Iraq as set out in the
Council’s resolutions.
The President: The next speaker
representative of the League of Arab States.

is

the

Mr. Mahmasani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): Allow me to join preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Mr. President, and in thanking your
predecessor, the Ambassador of France, and also
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei.
The Arab Summit convened in Beirut last March
adopted a resolution in which it categorically rejected
any attack against Iraq or any threat against the peace
and security of any Arab State. Such an attack was
considered a threat to collective Arab national security.
The resolution also welcomed Iraq’s commitment to
respecting the independence, sovereignty and security
of the State of Kuwait, and it called upon Iraq to
cooperate in order to find a rapid solution to the issue
of prisoners of war and detainees, in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.
The reports of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) presented by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on
14 February confirmed some progress in the
inspections process. They also confirmed Iraq’s
cooperation, which leads us to stress the need for those
operations to continue until such time as the Iraqi file
can be closed and the sanctions can be lifted, in
accordance with paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).
Mr. Blix reported that:
(spoke in English)
“The situation has improved. ...(S/PV.4707, p. 2)
“All inspections were performed without notice
and access was almost always provided promptly.
(ibid.)
“...
“So far, UNMOVIC has found no such weapons
[of mass destruction]”. (ibid., p. 3)
(spoke in Arabic)
The conclusions reached by Mr. ElBaradei in his
report include the following:
(spoke in English)
“We have to date found no evidence of
ongoing prohibited nuclear or nuclear-related
activities in Iraq.” (S/PV.4707, p. 9)

25

S/PV.4709

(spoke in Arabic)
In the light of the conclusions reached by the
inspectors, who are the only legitimate authority
entrusted with the verification and submission of
evidence to the Security Council, there is no
justification for waging war against Iraq. Therefore we
ask: why a war? What are the imminent danger and
sudden threats that would justify it?
The inspectors are pursuing their inspections
throughout Iraq. The eyes of the Security Council are
on Iraq. Satellites and reconnaissance aircraft fly
through the skies of Iraq. Where, therefore, is the
danger posed so starkly by Iraq as to warrant a war
within weeks? The insistence on waging war against
Iraq at a time when the inspectors are striving to verify
that country’s disarmament of its weapons of mass
destruction raises the question as to whether the war is
actually intended to disarm Iraq of such weapons or to
achieve other objectives.
The countries of the Middle East — with the
exception of Israel of course — call for a halt in the
preparations for war against Iraq. International polls
indicate a worldwide rejection of war. Seventy-seven
per cent of the British reject war and 59 per cent of
Americans call for the inspectors to be given more
time. From Sydney to New York, millions have
demonstrated against the impending war in Iraq.
The imminent threat to the peace and stability of
the Arab nation is Israel’s arsenal of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons and their delivery systems.
Israel continues to occupy Arab territories and pursues
a policy of destruction of the Palestinian people. For
the past 22 years, it has rejected the implementation of
Security Council resolution 487 (1981), which calls on
Israel to submit its nuclear programmes and facilities
to the IAEA safeguards regime. For the past 12 years,
it has rejected the implementation of paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991), which calls for the creation of a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. Why do we condone Israel’s behaviour
and why do the inspection teams not head there to
eliminate its weapons of mass destruction? Why, I ask,
are there such double standards?
Amidst the cloud of war hanging over the region,
the Council of Foreign Ministers of the League of Arab
States met in Cairo on 16 February and confirmed the
Arab countries’ rejection of any act of aggression
against or threat to the peace and security of any Arab

26

State. They considered any such threat to be a threat to
collective Arab security. The Council of Foreign
Ministers also rejected any political plan or policy to
impose changes on the region, to interfere in its
internal affairs or to ignore the legitimate interests of
the peoples of the region.
We hope that the end of the cold war late in the
last century will not signal a prelude to the onset of hot
wars in the new century, beginning with a war on Iraq.
The option of war represents a failure of the Security
Council and a collapse of the present international
system, as well as a challenge to the United Nations
Charter, which is the sole safety valve for protecting
countries, particularly the weaker ones, and for
preserving international peace and security.
To preserve the peace in the Arab region and
throughout the world, we call on everyone to reject the
option of war and to give the inspectors sufficient time
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Iraqi question.
The statement adopted by the European Union summit
in Brussels said, in part:
(spoke in English)
“The Union’s objective for Iraq remains full and
effective disarmament … We want to achieve this
peacefully. It is clear that this is what the people
of Europe want.”
It is clear by now that this is what the peoples of
the world want. Let us not fail them.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Ukraine, on whom I now
call.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council. Today’s
meeting provides a unique opportunity to hear the
views of numerous delegations on the most burning
issue of the day.
More than half a century ago, speaking about the
efforts to achieve peace, Sir Winston Churchill said:
“Vast and fearsome as the human scene has
become, personal contact of the right people, in
the right places, at the right time, may yet have a
potent and valuable part to play in the cause of
peace which is in our hearts”.
A few days ago, thousands of people gathered here as a
vast and fearsome ocean at the United Nations, calling

S/PV.4709

it the right place for the right and adequate decision to
be taken in order to preserve the peace.

Secretary of State and, ultimately, to disarm in
compliance with the Security Council’s resolutions.

On behalf of the Ukrainian delegation, I wish to
join those who believe that the right people, gathered
today in the Security Council, will find the right
solution to the critical issue on our agenda, and I
express, Mr. President, our full support for your
strenuous efforts to lead the Council towards that goal.

The Security Council has a common stand on the
issue of the elimination of weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq. Ukraine’s position has been unequivocally
aimed at achieving the disarmament of Iraq in the most
effective way possible, while ensuring at all times that
this goal is achieved at the lowest cost in terms of
human suffering. Under the present circumstances, it is
critical to make further steps towards achieving the
unity of the Security Council on this issue without
undermining the ongoing battle against international
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

Ukraine is extremely concerned about the
situation around Iraq. We understand that there may
exist serious grounds for suspecting Iraq of concealing
its weapons of mass destruction. The position of
Ukraine is well known and clear: Iraq must fulfil all its
obligations under respective Security Council
resolutions, resolution 1441 (2002) included.
Ukraine welcomes the outcome of the inspections
and the report presented to the Council on 14 February
by the Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and by the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as well
as the move by the United States to provide the United
Nations with additional information.
It is imperative that the United Nations inspectors
continue their work so as to be able to clarify the
unresolved questions of the disarmament of Iraq. The
questions still remain.
I would like to express to Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei Ukraine’s confidence in their
mission and our full support. We have already
demonstrated it through the work of the Ukrainian
experts in UNMOVIC. We consider the inspection and
monitoring mechanisms to be the best way to detect,
destroy and verify the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq.
It is perfectly clear that the work of UNMOVIC
and the IAEA can be effective only with full
cooperation in good faith on the part of Iraq. We call
upon the Iraqi authorities to translate concretely and
urgently their declared commitments into active
cooperation and collaboration with the inspection
process, as provided for in resolution 1441 (2002). We
urge Iraq to adopt a more proactive approach, to make
further explanations and clarifications on the issues
raised by the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, the
Director General of IAEA and the United States

We are entering a crucial stage in the
consideration of the Iraqi issue. The Ukrainian
delegation believes that the option of a political and
diplomatic solution has not been fully exhausted and
that it can still provide effective results. As long as
there is the slightest hope for a peaceful settlement, we
should exert our utmost efforts to achieve it. Ukraine,
on its part, is ready to make a further practical
contribution to the international efforts aimed at
achieving a successful settlement of the Iraqi crisis and
at ensuring international security.
As the world is pinning its hopes on the United
Nations and the Security Council in making the
decision, we have to weigh all the pros and cons and
consider what lies ahead not only in the forthcoming
weeks and months, but years. We must make sure that
our decision is guided by wisdom and responsibility.
War is the last and worst resort, and I cannot but
agree with one of the speakers who said here earlier
that war is always the sanction of failure.
What the world needs most today is peace. Let us
stay united and work tirelessly for it. Let us give peace
yet another chance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Oman.
Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to thank you, Sir, and the other members
of the Security Council for quickly agreeing to the
request of the Group of Non-Aligned States to hold this
open meeting to study the report presented by the heads
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the

27

S/PV.4709

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
destruction of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

consequences would be tragic not only for Iraq but also
for the region and the entire world.

The Security Council is meeting today to study
and important question, namely the assessment of the
conclusions of the teams of inspectors entrusted with
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq
and the monitoring and verifying of the presence of any
such weapons. We have studies with interest the two
reports submitted by the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC and Director General of IAEA, Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei, respectively.

Thus, we hope that all the members of the
Council will be able to take position designed to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and
other States of the region by peaceful means and
through the United Nations. In light of this, and aware
of the legal, political and moral responsibility that
devolves on Council members to maintain international
peace and security in accordance with the principles of
the Charter, we hope that the Council will discharge its
responsibilities and make it possible for UNMOVIC
and the IAEA in accordance with the demands of their
mandate. We hope that the Council will make it
possible for both bodies to continue their work,
discharge their responsibilities under their mandates.

We are convinced that significant results in fact
have truly been achieved. These achievements are
consonant with Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) on the one hand, and are also in accordance to a
great extent with the demands of the chief inspector.
During the meetings of the inspectors in Baghdad he
asked the Iraqi Government to adopt three measures.
The first was to allow for free and unconditional aerial
surveillance through surveillance reconnaissance
aircraft. The second was for private interviews with
Iraqi scientists without third parties present. The third
was that Iraq adopt and enact legislation prohibiting the
possession or local manufacturing of weapons of mass
destruction. Iraq has recently done so. It has been
involved in dispelling concerns regarding substantive
issues. We have seen this in the statements of
international inspectors and through Iraqi acceptance of
overflights of American U-2 planes of its airspace.
We welcome the positive steps undertaken by Iraq
to cooperate with UNMOVIC and the IAEA and
believe that such positive cooperation, which is
continuing between Iraq and UNMOVIC, will lead to a
settlement of remaining unresolved issues.
We understand the profound and real concerns of
the United States and United Kingdom regarding the
dangers of the use of weapons of mass destruction for
the security and stability of the world. We welcome the
positions of member States of the Security Council. In
particular the positions of the permanent members, for
they have demonstrated a great sense of responsibility
during study of the issue. We understand all of that.
However, it also behooves the international
community to maintain international peace and
stability. Therefore, the United States and the United
Kingdom are crucial partners for the Middle East. They
must work to avoid war in this region. The

28

Thus, efforts would be pooled to facilitate
inspections, which have proved to be effective. That
would enable the peaceful implementation of the
Council’s resolutions. Another report would then be
presented to the Council on Iraqi cooperation with the
international inspectors in the area of the destruction of
weapons of mass destruction, if they existed.
In that context, and in light of regional and
international events and of the repeated statements we
have heard opposing military action against Iraq, my
delegation reiterates the hope that it will be possible to
avoid any military action of any kind. For that would
threaten the security and stability of the Gulf region in
particular and the Middle East as a whole. Therefore
this prompts us to support the initiatives for peace to
deal with this issue.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm the need for Iraq to quickly and
unconditionally fulfil its remaining obligations to
facilitate matters for UNMOVIC and the IAEA. We
also urge the Council to exhaust all peaceful means and
diplomatic efforts to implement the relevant resolutions
for international peace and security, to put an end to the
suffering of the Iraqi people and to ensure respect for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Iraq.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council at

S/PV.4709

this very sensitive time. I should also like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the special relationship
between our two friendly countries, which is daily
growing stronger. At the same time, I would like to
express our appreciation and admiration for the
principled and wise leadership provided by France
during its presidency of the Council last month.
Your prompt response, Sir, to the request made by
the representative of South Africa, on behalf of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement, for the
convening of an open meeting of the Council allowing
all States Members of the Organization to participate,
rather than restricting participation to Council members
only, was an eloquent expression of your recognition of
the fact that questions pertaining to global peace and
security are not the preserve of certain States alone.
Nor do such issues affect the interests of some and not
of others. The situation in Iraq is thus of concern to all,
making an international consensus indispensable.
I am not the first to say that the eyes of the whole
world are on the Council to see how it will deal with
the situation in Iraq. Analysts and observers agree that
the international system is at a crossroads. The
Council’s decision on this question will have enormous
repercussions for international relations in general and
for the future of the United Nations in particular.
Like all the other States of the region, the
Republic of Yemen would like to express profound
concern about the tense situation prevailing in the
region – the massing of troops, the media war and the
constant threat of the use of force against Iraq. In this
regard, we would like to make a number of points.
First, we greatly appreciate the efforts of the
Security Council and the interest shown by the
majority of its members in exhausting all peaceful
means to ensure the implementation of its resolutions
on the disarmament of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction, in particular through the recent resolution
1441 (2002). The implementation of the provisions of
that resolution would be a step towards dealing with
the consequences of the 1991 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
In this context, the Government of the Republic of
Yemen welcomes the cooperation extended by the Iraqi
Government to the international inspection teams in
implementation of the resolution to which I referred.
We reaffirm once again the importance of the
Iraqi Government’s honouring its commitments
regarding the remaining issues raised by the inspectors,

in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legality. At the same time, we believe that
Iraq must honour its commitments with regard to
resolving the issue of Kuwaiti missing persons in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and with
the decisions taken at the Beirut Arab Summit. This is
a humanitarian question that continues to act as a
stumbling block on the road to a rapprochement
between the two countries. It should be resolved in
such a way as to end the estrangement between those
two brotherly peoples and ensure Arab solidarity.
Secondly, we reaffirm the importance of
implementing the remaining relevant Security Council
resolutions setting out the Council’s objectives. In this
regard, we stress that the Security Council is entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security on behalf of the international community. We
would also like to reaffirm the validity of the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, which make
it clear that nothing can justify interference in the
internal affairs of a State. There is no doubt that
interfering in the internal affairs of a given country in
order to bring about change there would constitute a
very serious precedent and would cause confusion and
chaos in international relations. It would take us back
to the era of the League of Nations, which was
followed by a world war, something that would be
unacceptable for human beings in the twenty-first
century.
Thirdly, the Republic of Yemen reaffirms its
support for Security Council resolutions in general and
in particular for those pertaining to the question of Iraq
in particular. However, my country has always stressed
the need for all the members of the Council to act with
a sense of responsibility so that the Council cannot be
accused of selectivity or double standards with regard
to such resolutions. Paragraph 14 of resolution 687
(1991), concerning the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction from all States of the region, including
Israel, must be implemented. Legally binding
international resolutions concerning the Palestinian
question must be implemented with the same zeal that
is shown in the implementation of the resolutions
concerning Iraq.
The Government of the Republic of Yemen has
noted with satisfaction the accurate and responsible
views expressed by some countries, calling for
Members of this Organization to look further than their
noses and to go beyond narrow, immediate self-interest

29

S/PV.4709

so as to lead the international community towards
ensuring security and stability in the Middle East in a
manner that safeguards the interests of all.
Once again, I would like to reiterate my country’s
concern about the ongoing threat to invade the
brotherly country Iraq. My country strongly opposes
any military action outside the framework of
international
legality,
whatever
pretexts
and
justifications are put forward. The drums of war and
the dust raised by the military massing obscure the
truth. It would be both wise and necessary for the
Security Council to give peaceful means a chance, as
they have not yet been exhausted. In this respect, we
support the opinion of the majority of States, which
have called for giving the inspection teams the
necessary time to finish their task without time
pressure or other influence.
Let us not forget that at an earlier stage the
inspection teams destroyed a great deal more than was
destroyed by war in 1991 or by successive aerial
bombardments of Iraq. Continuing the inspection and
monitoring regime is the only way to close this
ominous file. The only cost of peaceful action is
patience and perseverance. Military invasion, however,
would lead to the further destruction of Iraq and the
further destabilization of the region. That would
constitute a threat to peace and security throughout the
world. It would also take international relations back to
the policy of force and the logic of military blocs and
military solutions. That would be inconsistent with the
spirit and the letter of the United Nations Charter.
The President: The next speaker
representative of Greece, on whom I now call.

is

the

Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the
Slovak Republic and Slovenia, as well as the associated
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, declare that
they align themselves with this statement.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
the situation in Iraq, as evidenced by the extraordinary
meeting of the European Council held yesterday to
discuss the ongoing crisis over that country. On that
occasion the members of the European Council also
met with Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the
President of the European Parliament, Mr. Pat Cox.

30

The European Union reaffirms the 27 January
conclusions of its General Affairs and External
Relations Council, as well as the terms of the public
démarche of 4 February 2003 to Iraq, which remain
valid.
The European Union believes that the way the
unfolding of the situation in Iraq is handled will have
an important impact on the world in the coming
decades. We are determined to deal effectively with the
threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.
We are committed to the United Nations
remaining at the centre of the international order. We
recognize that the primary responsibility for dealing
with Iraqi disarmament lies with the Security Council.
We pledge our full support to the Council in
discharging its responsibilities.
The European Union’s objective for Iraq remains
full and effective disarmament from weapons of mass
destruction in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations Security Council, in particular
resolution 1441 (2002). We want to achieve this
peacefully. It is clear that this is what the people of
Europe want. War is not inevitable. Force should be
used only as a last resort. It is for the Iraqi regime to
end this crisis by complying with the demands of the
Security Council.
The European Union reiterates its full support for
the ongoing work of the United Nations inspectors.
They must be given the time and resources that the
Security Council believes they need. However,
inspections cannot continue indefinitely in the absence
of full Iraqi cooperation. This must include the
provision of all additional and specific information on
the issues that have been raised in the inspectors’
reports.
Baghdad should have no illusions. It must disarm
and cooperate immediately and fully. Iraq has a final
opportunity to resolve the crisis peacefully. The Iraqi
regime alone will be responsible for the consequences
if it continues to flout the will of the international
community and does not take this last chance.
The European Union recognizes that the unity
and firmness of the international community, as
expressed in the unanimous adoption of resolution
1441 (2002), and the military build-up have been
essential in obtaining the return of the inspectors.

S/PV.4709

These factors will remain essential if we are to achieve
the full cooperation we seek.
The European Union will work with Arab
countries and the League of Arab States. We will
encourage them, separately and jointly, to bring home
to Saddam Hussain the extreme danger of
miscalculation of the situation and the need for full
compliance with resolution 1441 (2002). We support
Turkey’s regional initiatives with the neighbours of
Iraq and Egypt.
In this regional context, the European Union
reiterates its firm belief in the need to reinvigorate the
peace process in the Middle East and to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We continue to support
early implementation of the roadmap endorsed by the
Quartet. Terror and violence must end; so must
settlement activity. Palestinian reforms must be sped
up. In that respect, President Arafat’s statement that he
will appoint a prime minister is a welcome step in the
right direction.
The unity of the international community is vital
in dealing with these problems. The European Union is
committed to working with all our partners, especially
the United States, for the disarmament of Iraq, for
peace and stability in the region and for a decent future
for all its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I want to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. I also wish to thank the
delegation of South Africa for having requested this
meeting.
I believe we should ask ourselves why we are
gathered here once again today to deal with the
question of Iraq. The answer is simple: on 2 August
1990 Iraq invaded and annexed Kuwait. Once all
peaceful means to resolve the situation had been
exhausted, the Security Council authorized the use of
force to restore the independence and territorial
integrity of Kuwait. In addition, by resolution 687
(1991), which established the terms of the ceasefire,
the Council decided that Iraq had to agree
unconditionally to the elimination of all its weapons of
mass destruction under international supervision. That
is a central aspect of the resolution.

More than 12 years later, Iraq has not complied
with its obligations and continues to defy the will of
the international community and the authority of the
Security Council. That is why we are here today to deal
with this issue. As Argentina’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Carlos Ruckauf, stated in the General
Assembly last September,
“It is not a good thing when some Member
States do not abide by United Nations resolutions.
It is intolerable that these resolutions remain
unimplemented when issues related to the very
existence of mankind on the planet are involved.”
(A/57/PV.12, p. 26)
He went on to say that
“The existence of arsenals with bacteriological,
chemical and other similar weapons that can be
used in a traditional or terrorist war is a matter
that affects all men, women and children of the
world.” (ibid.)
I think it is appropriate to recall those words, which,
despite being obvious, seem to be absent from the
debate on this matter and from the coverage of this
issue in the international press. No one in the Council
has stated that Iraq has complied with its obligations or
that we are dealing with an abusive demand being
made by a State or group of States of a weaker country.
Argentina shares the view that Iraq must be obliged to
fully meet its disarmament obligations. The Iraqi
regime must understand once and for all that the
international community will not accept any other
alternative and that the Security Council is united in
that objective, even though there may be difference of
opinion as regards methods and, in particular, as to the
time frame for achieving the goal.
The Security Council, acting under Chapter VII
of the Charter, has recognized that the behaviour of the
Iraqi regime constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. That is why, on 8 November 2002, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002),
which gave Iraq one last opportunity.
In our opinion, the Council must exert constant
pressure on this stubborn Government to comply with
what the international community has been demanding
for the last 12 years. The international community has
been very patient. It cannot accept a repetition of the
history of concealment and deceit that took place
between 1991 and 1998. Doing so would not only

31

S/PV.4709

affect the credibility of the Security Council; it would
also represent a grave failure to those of us who are
taking part in the struggle against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
The question is how to achieve that objective. In
our opinion, the inspections that resumed last
November have yielded results, and they must
continue. We support Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, who
have an extremely important and difficult task that they
are carrying out with objectivity, professionalism and
efficiency. But in order for the inspections to produce
full results, the Iraqi Government must abandon its
reluctant attitude and provide the active and
substantive cooperation required by resolution 1441
(2002). It is also worth recalling that Iraq must comply
with the other obligations set out in resolution 687
(1991), facilitating the return of Kuwaiti property and
the repatriation of Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.
In the course of the discussion of this issue, there
has been mention of the grave threat to international
peace and security posed by possible links between a
State in possession of weapons of mass destruction and
terrorist organizations, and the Council was given
dramatic examples of the risks of chemical and
biological weapons. My Government shares this
concern and expresses its determination to face the
challenges that the link with terrorism may add to this
issue. At the same time, my Government takes this
opportunity to voice its concern about the continuation
of unjust situations in international economic practice.
Those situations are exploited by terrorism, which
provides an evil opportunity to give voice to the
desperation of vast regions of the developing world.
No sense of urgency should divert us from the
objective of disarming Iraq by peaceful means. All
peaceful options must be explored and exhausted. We
must avoid an avoidable war, in which my country
would not participate.
But once all peaceful means have been exhausted,
if the Iraqi regime persists in its reluctant attitude, and
if the purpose of resolution 1441 (2002), which is none
other than the complete and verifiable disarmament of
Iraq, cannot be fulfilled, then the serious consequences
anticipated in the resolution will take place. But those
serious consequences must not include bombing
defenceless towns and cities. The lives of men, women
and children — who for years have been living under a
genocidal dictatorship and who desire freedom and an

32

end to death and desolation — must be preserved. It is
in the highest interests of Iraq to seize this last chance.
I would not wish to conclude these remarks
without expressing our sympathy and affection for the
Iraqi people, which is enduring a situation of
deprivation and anxiety for its security, the
responsibility for which lies solely with the regime that
oppresses them.
As we have stated to the Secretary-General,
Argentina is ready, within the framework of the United
Nations, to provide humanitarian assistance in order to
help relieve the suffering of that people.
The President: The next speaker is
representative of the Sudan, on whom I now call.

the

Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are also most pleased to thank the
representative of France for his outstanding leadership
of the Council last month.
The holding of this open meeting shows the
extraordinary importance that the international
community attaches to the crisis in international
relations at this critical turning point. We are convinced
that the enormous challenges we face require that the
international community engage in dialogue and
consultation in order to spare the world a war whose
negative repercussions would be long-lasting and
geographically widespread.
It is crucial that we be guided by the principles of
the United Nations Charter, which we all consider as
the ultimate guideposts for sparing the world the agony
and tragedy of war. The Charter guarantees that force
shall be used only as a last resort, after all other
options have been exhausted. The reports delivered by
Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei regarding
the inspections in Iraq convince us that continuing the
inspections and strengthening their effectiveness can,
in fact, achieve the objectives laid down in resolution
1441 (2002).
My country would like to reaffirm the
conclusions of the Arab Summit held in Beirut last
March, relating to the need to implement resolutions of
international legality, including respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of both Iraq and
Kuwait, and to settle the issue of prisoners of war and
missing persons.

S/PV.4709

We are convinced that Iraq is continuing to
cooperate fully with the United Nations inspectors in
settling the crisis in a peaceful manner, which prepares
the way for the lifting of sanctions. This has been
shown by Iraq’s genuine will to cooperate with the
inspectors and by the strong and encouraging measures
undertaken by that country.
Thus, we share the views of several delegations
that options other than war must be found. We support
approaches based on the peaceful settlement of
disputes through the United Nations. We see no
justification for the Security Council to adopt an
additional resolution, and we request that the inspectors
be given the time they need to complete their mission.
Our conviction is based on our unshakeable faith
in shared humanitarian values. Let us reject violence
and destruction and build a world in which a culture of
peace will reign. Let us give peace a chance, and let us
provide the children of Iraq a childhood their memories
of which will not be ones of carnage and destruction,
shelters and orphans.
The President: The next speaker is
representative of Saint Lucia. I give him the floor.

the

Mr. Huntley (Saint Lucia): I have the honour to
present a statement today on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
that is, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.
The heads of Government of the Caribbean
Community, at the end of their fourteenth InterSessional Meeting, which was held in Port-of-Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago, on 14 and 15 February 2003,
issued the following statement on the situation with
regard to Iraq.
“We, the heads of Government of the
Caribbean Community, having considered the
situation developing over Iraq, wish to express
our profound concern at the escalation of global
tensions and their grave implications for the
preservation of international peace and security.
We are deeply troubled over the humanitarian
tragedy that an outbreak of war will bring about
and the disastrous effects which it will have on
global economic stability.

“We emphasize that no State should have
the right to foster the development of weapons of
mass destruction in any form, including chemical
and biological agents. We recall that the Security
Council had compelled Iraq to cease the
development and production of weapons of mass
destruction and has obligated it to give total
access to the United Nations weapons inspectors
to verify its compliance with Security Council
resolutions.
“We appeal to Iraq to cooperate fully with
all the requirements of UNMOVIC and the IAEA
inspectors, and to fulfil its commitments to the
United Nations and the international community
in this regard. We are convinced that Iraq’s full
and transparent implementation of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) will contribute to
the easing of tensions and will strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to bring about a
peaceful resolution of the situation.
“We reiterate that the United Nations,
through its Security Council, has been charged
with
the
responsibility
for
maintaining
international peace and security. We are,
therefore, deeply disturbed at the prospect of the
use of military force in Iraq without the
endorsement of the United Nations Security
Council and in the absence of a final conclusion
by the United Nations weapons inspectors that
Iraq is in material breach of Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002).
“We are in total support of the position
taken by the United Nations Secretary-General
that ‘this is an issue not for any one State alone,
but for the international community as a whole’.
In this connection, we stress that any unilateral
action taken outside a United Nations Security
Council mandate will undermine the integrity of
the United Nations and considerably weaken the
multilateral system and its machinery for
preserving peace and security.
“We are firmly opposed to the use of armed
force at a time when it is clear that diplomatic
efforts have not yet been exhausted and when the
UNMOVIC and IAEA inspectors are reporting
some progress and requesting more time to
complete their work. We believe that it is
essential for all States to support the work of the

33

S/PV.4709

inspectors and to create the conditions to allow
them to fulfil their mandate.

the interests of international peace and security and the
imperatives of international law.

“We urge the Government of the United
States and its military allies on this issue to
exercise restraint in their approach to this
complex international crisis. We wish to express
our particular anxiety at the consequences a war
will have not only for the region of the Middle
East but for the entire world, and at the
disproportionate burden that would be borne by
small developing States, including those in the
Caribbean, which are ill-prepared to cope with
the impact of a global recession provoked by
volatile oil prices, severe dislocation to their vital
tourism and financial services sectors and falling
levels of investment.

The Republic of Belarus favours the continuation
and stepping up of the activities of inspectors in Iraq
and calls on the Government of Iraq to follow
unswervingly the policy of constructive cooperation
with the United Nations and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We find counterproductive
any kind of ultimatum limiting the time frame for the
activities of the inspectors or for the process of Iraq’s
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

“We the Heads of Government of the
Caribbean Community reaffirm the commitment
of the Caribbean Community to a just world order
based on respect for the rule of law and social
justice, and guaranteeing peace, security and
sustainable development for all. We remain
committed to international efforts to combat
terrorism. We also remain convinced that
diplomacy and dialogue present the most
enlightened approach to building understanding
and to resolving conflicts in a modern and
interdependent world.”

Belarus is deeply concerned by the rhetoric in
favour of the use of force as a means of resolving the
problem and by the continuing escalation of tension
around Iraq. We firmly oppose the unilateral use of
force against Iraq in violation of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and the bypassing of the Security
Council.
A solution acceptable to the international
community on the question of Iraq can be found only
within the framework of the competence of the
Security Council and must be strictly complied with by
all members of the international community.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.

The President and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus are convinced that comprehensive
Iraqi cooperation with the United Nations and the
continuing normalization of relations between Iraq and
Kuwait will guarantee a definitive solution to the
problem of Iraq. We also believe that an integral
element of this process is the gradual lifting of the
sanctions on Iraq.

Mr. Ivanov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): First,
allow me to associate myself with the gratitude
expressed by previous speakers for the opportunity
offered by this meeting of the Security Council in the
present format.

The Republic of Belarus calls upon the Security
Council to be guided by the need to maintain peace in
the Middle East and to prevent the unleashing of a
major international conflict with unforeseeable
consequences.

The dynamic of the development of events
concerning Iraq and the consideration of this question
within the Security Council are the focus of the close
attention of the President and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus. Belarus is convinced that the
international community has available to it specific and
practical possibilities for maintaining the process of
Iraq’s disarmament on a political and diplomatic plane.
Shifting the problem of Iraq to a military plane without
making use of those possibilities would run counter to

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

We thank the Council for the opportunity to
present this statement.

34

Mr. Nambiar (India): Since this is the first time
we are making a statement in the Security Council in
the month of February, please allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. I would
also like to thank you for providing the general
membership an opportunity to express itself on this
important issue. Your stewardship of the Security
Council comes at a time when the Council is required

S/PV.4709

to consider some of the most critical and complex
issues to arise before it in recent years. We wish you
the very best in coping with the challenging tasks that
lie ahead of you.
India participated in the last open debate of the
Security Council on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, held on 16 and 17 October 2002. Matters have
evolved considerably since that time. The landmark
resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted unanimously by
the Council on 8 November 2002. The resolution
facilitated the resumption of United Nations
inspections in Iraq after a gap of four years. It has now
been almost three months since the recommencement
of inspections.
The heads of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have briefed the Council with regular
periodicity on the progress of inspections since their
recommencement. We have all had the benefit of
listening to the carefully worded, concise and thorough
briefings by them on 27 January and 14 February. Their
reports constitute the essential basis on which the
Council would be required to take decisions on a
matter of international peace and security. We wish to
convey our appreciation for the work of those two
bodies and their heads.
Resolution 1441 (2002) is the latest in a series of
Security Council resolutions on the disarmament of
Iraq and related subjects. Resolution 1441 (2002)
provides a stringent regime of inspections designed to
accomplish that very task. We call upon Iraq to
cooperate actively with the inspections process and to
comply fully with all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
As many of us understood it, the gist of
UNMOVIC Executive Chairman Mr. Hans Blix’s
message at the briefing of 14 February was that Iraq
had been cooperating on process but had not done as
much on substance as it was required to do under
resolution 1441 (2002). While there is a widespread
feeling that inspections have to be given a chance,
there is also a feeling that the Council cannot be
expected to wait indefinitely to secure immediate,
active and unconditional cooperation. The recent
deliberations in the Security Council over how to deal
with the Iraq issue reflect serious differences in
approach on the subject within the Council itself. The

Council now needs to move forward with unity of
purpose.
India has consistently stood in favour of a
peaceful resolution of the Iraq issue. We believe that
the objective of the international community is to
facilitate the disarmament of Iraq, and that it is
necessary to pursue all available options provided for
under resolution 1441 (2002). Force should be resorted
to only as a last, unavoidable option.
India has also maintained the primacy of the
multilateral route in addressing the issue of Iraq. The
Prime Minister of India, in his address to the fiftyseventh session of the General Assembly last year,
stated the following.
“A common destiny is at stake. The world
needs collective multilateralism. It needs the
United Nations, the coming together and working
together of all its nations in the development of a
common and collective perspective.” (A/57/PV.4,
p. 16)
That is why we applauded the announcement by
President Bush in that very forum to “work with the
Security Council to meet our common challenge”
(A/57/PV.2, p. 9). We continue to believe that the
resolution of this issue is best achieved through the
collective forum of States, represented by the United
Nations.
India is concerned about the difficult
humanitarian situation in Iraq. The Iraqi people have
suffered severe shortages and privations for more than
a decade. Sixty per cent of the Iraqi population
currently relies on the United Nations oil for food
programme. The programme, which has been run in an
exemplary manner by the United Nations, could be
jeopardized by military action in Iraq, leading to a
humanitarian situation that could leave, by some
accounts, as many as 10 million people dependent on
the outside world for food assistance. It is important
that the Council consider the alleviation of the situation
that the Iraqi people find themselves in while
considering the larger picture.
India is vitally interested in the peace and
security of the Gulf region, with which we have had
profound political, cultural, economic and religious ties
spread over centuries. Our special concerns with the
current crisis arise from the presence of millions of our
expatriates who live and work in the Gulf region, from

35

S/PV.4709

threats to the security of oil supplies and the volatility
of oil prices that could follow military action, and from
the build-up of public sentiments in the region.
In a related context, we note that, at the end of
last year, Iraq returned the first batch of documents
belonging to the Kuwaiti archives, and that, at the
beginning of this year, Iraq also handed over some
separate items of Kuwaiti properties. Most important is
the humanitarian issue involving the search for missing
Kuwaitis and other, third- country, nationals. We are
happy to note that it has been agreed to start
discussions on this issue under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
within the context of the Tripartite Commission. We
understand that the second meeting of the newly
established Technical Subcommittee has just taken
place in Amman. We congratulate Ambassador
Vorontsov for his efforts in this direction and would
like to see him continue his good work.
At the same time, we would also like to see
implementation of provisions relating to the
repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and the return of all Kuwaiti property, as stipulated
under resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991) and section B
of resolution 1284 (1999). We hope that Iraq will act in
good faith.
We sense, and the world senses, that the Security
Council is coming close to making a decision between
war and peace. However, we would urge the Council,
before it makes a final determination on the question,
to seriously consider the numerous complex
ramifications that surround any step taken by it. These
include issues such as the dangers posed by the
development of weapons of mass destruction and risks
of their diversion to non-State actors; the credibility of

36

enforcement action under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter and the question of compliance; the
rationale and effectiveness of weapons inspections; and
the continuing pressure of sanctions.
Apart from the immediate consequences of
military action in a region that is already volatile, the
Council will need to take into account the impact of the
possible breakup of the concerned State on
neighbouring States, and its larger implications for
peace, stability and security in the region, as well as
the dangers of radicalization of public opinion around
the world. Yet another set of issues of a different order
of magnitude concern the potential massive internal
displacement of people and possible refugee flows, the
disruption of oil supplies and other such immediate
economic and social repercussions of a possible
outbreak of conflict.
We do not, as yet, have clear answers to these
questions. These are questions that do not have simple
answers, but they are questions that cannot be evaded.
As the multilateral organ of the United Nations charged
with safeguarding international peace and security, the
Security Council must give careful thought to these
questions and issues before it makes an irrevocable
move.
The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, and with the concurrence of the member of the
Council, I would like to suspend the meeting until
tomorrow at 10 a.m. sharp. I would like to make an
appeal to the members to start at 10 sharp, because we
heard 27 speakers this afternoon and another 29 remain
on the list.
The meeting was suspended at 6.40 p.m.
