S/2012/784

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 October 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 23 October 2012 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 12 October 2012 from
Dioncounda Traoré, interim President of Mali. In his letter, the interim President
refers to the human rights violations taking place in the occupied regions of northern
Mali, which have led the Government of Mali to refer this matter to the
International Criminal Court (see annex).
In this regard, the letter of President Traoré conveys his Government’s desire
for the Security Council to support national and international efforts to bring to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against humanity in Mali by including this element
in a Security Council resolution authorizing the intervention, under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, of an international military force in Mali.
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-56638 (E) 241012

*1256638*

S/2012/784

Annex
Letter dated 12 October 2012 from the interim President of Mali to
the Secretary-General
[Original: French]
In my letter No. 200/P-RM of 18 September 2012, I requested the adoption by
the United Nations Security Council of a resolution authorizing the intervention of
an international military force under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to assist the Malian Army in recapturing the occupied northern
regions.
In that letter, I explained that the groups occupying those regions were
violating the most basic rights of the population on a daily basis, including by
carrying out summary executions, looting and rape, as well as destroying historic
monuments in Gao and Timbuktu. This situation has led the Government of Mali to
refer the situation in Mali since January 2012 to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
In that connection, the Government of Mali hopes that the aforementioned
Security Council resolution will request the international military force, to the
extent compatible with its duties and responsibilities, to support national and
international efforts to bring to justice the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in northern Mali, especially those who are eligible for
prosecution by the International Criminal Court. Such an approach would be
consistent with the resolutions adopted by the Security Council under similar
circumstances.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Dioncounda Traoré

2

12-56638
