V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations University and requests the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in consultation with the Rector and the
Council of the University, to study ways and means
of promoting the awareness and understanding of the
programmes and activities of the University with a view
to establishing a more stable financial situation and
thereby strengthening the University, and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Urges the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as
well as the Rector of the United Nations University
to continue to intensify their efforts to obtain financial
support for the University from all possible sources;
6. Appeals to all Member States to take cognizance
of the achievements of the United Nations University,
particularly in relation to the developing countries,
during its first three years and to make substantial
contributions to the Endowment Fund and/ or to specific programmes of the University so that its work can
go forward successfully.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
33/109.

Proposal for the establishment of a
University for Peace

The General Assembly,
Noting that the President of the Republic of Costa
Rica has submitted for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session a proposal for the
establishment of a University for Peace, as a specialized international institute for post-graduate studies
related to peace, within the system of the United
Nations University, and has offered it to the international community through the United Nations, 54
Bearing in mind that the Government of Costa Rica
has not only offered preliminary plans and designs for
the proposed University for Peace and the headquarters
and land for the campus of that institution but has
also made every effort to finance it outside the United
Nations and the United Nations University so that it
will not constitute a financial burden for either the
Organization or the Member States,
Considering that both its resolution 2951 (XXVII)
of 11 December 1972, by which it established the
United Nations University, and the Charter of the
United Nations University, adopted in resolution 3081
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, provided expressly
for the establishment of a decentralized system of
affiliated institutions, integrated into the world university community, devoted to action-oriented research
into the pressing global problems of human survival,
development and welfare that are the concern of the
United Nations and its agencies, and to the postgraduate training of young scholars and research
workers for the benefit of the world community,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the proposal
submitted by the President of the Republic of Costa
Rica for the establishment of a University for Peace
54 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Plenary Meetings, 11th meeting, paras. 106-122.

91

within the system of the United Nations University
and of his offer to the world community;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of that proposal to Member States, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural organization and the Rector and Council of the United Nations
University and to any other agencies he may deem
appropriate, so that they may communicate their views
on it to him;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
those views to the attention of all Member States and
interested specialized agencies and to submit a report
on the matter, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
33/110.

Llving conditions of the Palestinian
people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976,55 and the relevant recommendations
for national action 56 adopted by Habitat: United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
Recalling also resolution 3, entitled "Living conditions of the Palestinians in occupied territories", contained in the recommendations for international cooperation adopted by the Conference, 57 and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 2026 (LXI) of 4
August 1976 and 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 31/110 of
16 December 1976 and 32/171 of 19 December 1977,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Arab territories 58 and notes
that it has not been possible to prepare the full report
called for in General Assembly resolution 32/171 in
time for submission to the Assembly at its thirty-third
session;

2. Requests, therefore, the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with the relevant United Nations organs
and specialized agencies, particularly the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Economic Commission
for Western Asia and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, to
prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session a comprehensive and analytical
report on the social and economic impact of the Israeli
occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Arab territories;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the above-mentioned report, to consult and
co-operate with the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the representative of the Palestinian people;
55 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May-11 June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum),
chap. I.
56 Jbid., chap. II.
111 Ibid., chap. III.
5 8 A/33/354.
