S/PV.7701

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7701st meeting

Friday, 27 May 2016, 3.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/460)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-15148 (E)
*1615148*

S/PV.7701

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

who dream of nothing more than returning to Syria to
live a normal life.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/460)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. O’Brien,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/460, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I returned yesterday from a town
called Reyhanlı, in Turkey, just across the border from
Syria. What I saw there was harrowing — orphaned
Syrian girls and boys ranging from toddlers to young
teens with no family left to look after them. I went to a
hospital and met Syrians who had been injured after the
internally displaced person (IDP) camp they had fled to
in Syria to escape violence was itself recently bombed.
I sat down at Dr. Mazin’s bedside as he struggled for
life with appalling and severe brain, abdominal and
facial wounds, after he was struck by an air strike on
Al-Quds hospital in eastern Aleppo on 27 April, as he
was bravely himself saving lives. A bare whisper was all
he could muster: “Please, peace”. I met refugee families
traumatized by the effects of five years of constant war
2/8

27/05/2016

I promised to carry their stories to the Security
Council. I promised to highlight once more the tragic
and ever-worsening situation in Syria. But truth be told,
I have run out of words to fully explain how the actions
of the parties to the conflict have led to the devastation
of a country and its people. As the war continues, it
is innocent civilians and children who continue to be
subjected to even greater levels of suffering and misery
than could ever have been imagined five years ago.
I remain particularly concerned at the upsurge in
violence across various parts of the country and its
impact on civilians. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including schools
and hospitals, mosques and public markets, continue
with impunity and total disregard for international
humanitarian law. In early May, scores of civilians
were killed and injured by strikes hitting two IDP
settlements in Sarmada, Idlib. These were places
where displaced people had sought sanctuary from the
conflict. One of the strikes reportedly hit a school tent,
resulting in the deaths of eight children. Just this week,
several terrorist attacks claimed the lives of over 100
civilians in the coastal cities of Jableh and Tartous.
Over 40 patients and accompanying family members
were killed and 35 people injured when a suicide
bomber walked into the Jableh hospital and detonated
an explosives belt. An emergency doctor and two nurses
died in that explosion, with another 11 health workers
wounded. Similarly, Ziad Al-Buqaa hospital — Khan
Al-Shih’s last operational hospital serving people in
Khan Al-Shih, Zakia and surrounding areas — was
reportedly struck by barrel bombs on 17 May. This
hospital provided medical services to 4,200 patients
daily and served about 100,000.
The continued use of siege and starvation as a
weapon of war is reprehensible. We are continually
monitoring the situation on the ground throughout Syria
and, based on the latest information, we now estimate
that some 592,700 people are currently living in
besieged areas. This includes 452,700 people besieged
by the Government of Syria in various locations in
rural Damascus, as well as in the Al-Waer area of Homs
city, an area that I visited myself just a few months ago,
but which has been closed off since March. Elsewhere,
110,000 people are besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in Deir ez-Zor city, 20,000 people
by non-State armed groups and the Al-Nusra Front in
16-15148

27/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Foah and Kefraya in Idlib, and 10,000 besieged by the
Government of Syria and non-State armed groups in
Yarmouk, Damascus.
These figures are shocking, as they underscore
the sharply deteriorating situation for civilians, even
while the cessation of hostilities is in place. According
to the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/460), the number of people in besieged areas was
517,700, itself up from 486,7000, due to more accurate
numbers of people emerging from Deir ez-Zor, Foah
and Kefraya, and Yarmouk, as the facts on the ground
have changed. But I must reinforce that these figures
are really shocking. Today, 592,700 people are living
in besieged areas because of the appalling deteriorating
situation in Al-Waer on the other side of the very line
I myself crossed last year, as reported to the Council
in detail.
The punishment of civilians through besiegement
tactics must stop immediately. The primary
responsibility lies with the party that maintains the
siege and routinely and systematically denies people
the basic necessities of life and freedom of movement.
However, other parties that conduct military activities
in or from populated areas, endangering their safety,
also bear their share of responsibility for the immense
suffering in besieged areas. And we cannot ignore the
fact that many on all sides are profiting handsomely
at the expense of innocent civilians from their ability
to control the goods that enter through irregular and
unofficial channels.

S/PV.7701

of heavy fighting between non-State armed groups and
ISIL. That fighting is ongoing as of today and is likely
to fuel further displacement and vulnerability along the
border areas.
In Aleppo city, fighting has continued to affect
civilians over the past few weeks and also had an impact
on humanitarian operations. The United Nations hub
in the western part of the city has repeatedly been hit
by shelling, while access for cross-border aid to assist
300,000 people in eastern Aleppo city, along Castello
road, the last remaining route into the area, has been
repeatedly cut due to air strikes and heavy fighting.
The current reality in Syria is not something that we
should or can accept. There should never be impunity
for behaviour that shows complete disregard for
international humanitarian law, flouts the resolutions
of the Security Council, and causes such immense
human suffering. One day all those responsible must
and will be held to account.
Despite the extremely challenging environment,
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organization partners continue their tireless efforts
to meet the urgent humanitarian needs of the Syrian
population. Millions of people were reached with
assistance in April, while UNICEF and the World
Health Organization began another nationwide
immunization campaign to reach 2 million children.
And cross-border shipments provided food aid to over
a million people, as well as other types of assistance to
tens of thousands more.

The humanitarian and protection situation in many
hard-to-reach areas also remains critical, including in
some that are on the brink of besiegement. I remain
extremely concerned about the conditions for the
hundreds of thousands of civilians in northern rural
Homs, specifically in the towns of Rastan, Talbiseh
and Taldo, as well as in the adjacent area of Habarnafse
in rural Hama. People in these areas have limited
freedom of movement and diminished access to clean
water, medical care and food. The recent humanitarian
convoys to northern rural Homs were vital but must be
followed up by greater access if we are to alleviate the
suffering of civilians.

Cross-line inter-agency operations to besieged,
hard-to-reach and other priority locations have
continued, with over 800,000 people reached this year
in these areas, and many more than once. We have very
recently gained access to besieged eastern Harasta
with food and other humanitarian supplies for 10,000
people — a first since March 2013, over three years ago.
In addition, since 10 April, the World Food Programme
successfully carried out 44 high altitude airdrops over
the besieged city of Deir-ez-Zor. These airdrops mean
that 762 metric tons of urgently needed food assistance,
distributed by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent on the
ground, reached approximately 100,000 people.

The situation across Aleppo governorate also
remains alarming for civilians. In northern Aleppo, just
across the border from Turkey, the situation for tens of
thousands of people is precarious, with many having
been displaced multiple times this year alone as a result

But several weeks of air drops have brought an
amount of food equivalent to only one convoy. Let me
repeat that several weeks of air drops have brought
an amount of food equivalent to only one convoy by
road, and the Council should have no doubt about the

16-151483/8

S/PV.7701

The situation in the Middle East

challenges our partners are facing to deliver assistance
by air. Airdrops are an option of last resort; they are
costly, dangerous and technically very challenging.
However, as I have said before, the gravity and scale of
need means that the United Nations must consider such
options, but only as a last resort, and not forgetting that
the United Nations would require the approval of the
Government of Syria.
Deliberate interference and restrictions by the
parties, notably the Syrian Government, continue to
prevent effective aid delivery. For example, on 20 April,
the United Nations submitted its inter-agency convoy
plan for the month of May, which included requests to
reach 904,750 people across 35 besieged, hard-to-reach
and priority cross-line locations. The Syrian authorities
granted approval in full to only 14 locations, with
224,000 people, and approvals conditional on the type
and amount of assistance to another eight locations, for
some 306,000 people. That effectively left more than
40 per cent of the planned target population, including
in Aleppo, Al-Waer, and Talbiseh, without access to
basic necessities and food. That of course leaves me
extremely concerned. We recently submitted our plan
for June with a request to reach 1.1 million people in
34 besieged, hard-to-reach and other priority cross-line
locations, including all the places we could not reach
in May. I call on the Syrian Government to approve
the plan in full and to remove any and all conditions,
not least regarding the amount or type of aid that can
be delivered.
Even for the locations that were approved for
deliveries in May, the Syrian Government has severely
curtailed the ability of the United Nations to reach
those in need. A convoy and assessment mission to
Darayya, where 4,000 civilians have been besieged
for almost four years, scheduled for 12 May, had to be
aborted due to unconscionable last-minute restrictions
imposed by Government security forces. At the last
checkpoint, Government forces removed all basic
supplies, including nutritional items for infants. No
conclusion can be drawn other than that this was
simply an effort to further punish civilians, and this
time infants. Similarly, an inter-agency convoy that
was supposed to reach Mu‘addamiyah on 14 May was
unable to deploy. Security force representatives never
turned up at the warehouse to monitor the loading of
trucks, as previously agreed, despite constant outreach
at various levels. As a result, the convoy was never
given permission to depart. At the same time, non-State
4/8

27/05/2016

armed groups continue to prevent a United Nations
assessment mission from proceeding to the besieged
towns of Foah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate.
Moreover, the removal of life-saving medicines
and medical supplies such as surgical, midwifery and
emergency kits has continued unabated, with supplies
for an estimated 150,000 treatments removed from
convoys since the beginning of the year. Since the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), medical supplies for
more than 650,000 treatments have been removed from
aid convoys. Such restrictions are not only violations
of earlier guarantees and approvals obtained from
the Syrian Government and other parties, they are
deliberately and cynically designed to inflict more
unnecessary suffering on civilians living in besieged
and hard-to-reach locations.
As the Council knows, the international community
came together in Istanbul earlier this week for the World
Humanitarian Summit, called for by the SecretaryGeneral. I emphasized at the Summit that we must all live
up to our responsibility, collectively and individually,
to meet the needs of the most vulnerable people and
make a real difference for the people who need our help
most. Syria is a stark example of why the SecretaryGeneral called for the Summit. As he has said, we are
one humanity, with a shared responsibility not only to
keep people alive, but to give people a chance at life in
dignity. The bottom line is that, politically, we continue
to fail the people of Syria dismally in that regard.
On 17 May, the International Syria Support Group
called on all parties to the Syrian conflict to immediately
comply with the terms of the cessation of hostilities. It
further called for the lifting of all sieges and urged the
Syrian Government to swiftly approve United Nations
delivery requests in their entirety. Frankly, the parties
to the conflict, and those with influence over them,
urgently need to turn this into decisive, positive action
that can have a direct, positive effect on Syrian lives on
the ground.
However, let me state clearly that protecting
civilians and granting access should never be dependent
on political negotiations or as a bargaining chip for ad
hoc deals on the ground. These are fundamental tenets
of international humanitarian law and must be respected
by the parties and all who support them. There must
be access to those in need, and not just to a third of
those in need, but to all; not just one-off deliveries, but
sustained, immediate and unimpeded humanitarian
16-15148

The situation in the Middle East

27/05/2016

S/PV.7701

access throughout the country; not just access to
deliver vaccines, but the full package of supplies,
including medical and surgical items, delivered on
the basis of the needs assessments made by the United
Nations. The sieges have to be lifted once and for all,
and immediately. They exist today only because of a
lack of will to end them. Millions of women, men and
children and, as I mentioned early in my statement, Dr.
Mazin — struggling for life in that bed in Reyhanli and
all across Syria — each and every one of them depends
on the Council’s action, right now.

make statements and issue communiqués right, left and
centre, as though they were doves of peace and only
worried about the prosperity, stability and peace of the
Syrian people. That is how they present themselves.
However, the reality is very different because anyone
who wants to know can just look at the behaviour of
these States and see that they play a critical role in the
suffering of the Syrian people and the tragedy that has
befallen them, as well as in the way it is being treated, as
recalled in the statements on the protection of civilians
in Syria, Iraq and Libya.

The President (spoke
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.

Some States protect the terrorist entities, including
within the Security Council. That became obvious
when some refused to label Jaysh Al-Islam a terrorist
organization in the Security Council, despite the
request made by the Russian Federation. Those bodies
work in an alliance was with Jabhat Al-Nusra, which
is a terrorist organization, and commit terrorist acts
every day. Jaysh Al-Islam targets civilians in their
shelters in Damascus and Aleppo and other cities.
They perpetrate terrorist acts. Recently such acts were
carried out together with Da’esh in Jabla and Tartus in
Syria, as was just mentioned. This, as I said, resulted
in hundreds of innocent lives lost. Those same States
refused yesterday the request of the Syrian Government
to call Jaish-e-Mohammad a terrorist organization.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I was expecting the Under-Secretary-General
to begin his statement by offering his condolences to the
Government and the people of Syria for the hundreds
of innocent civilian victims in Jableh and Tartus who
perished a few days ago. The Council denounced that
action and express its condolences in a press statement
a couple of days ago.
Like the Council, I was surprised to hear what the
Under-Secretary-General said about his visit to Turkey
and what he saw there — surprising things, as he put it,
in Syrian refugee camps in Turkey. He saw children who
had no food to eat. What I would like to ask him, and
the Council, is what happened to the billions pledged
at various conferences in Kuwait and elsewhere for
the host countries Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon? What
happened with the propaganda being put out in the
countries of the Gulf and elsewhere that talks about the
refugee camps as if they were five-star hotels? Why
does the Under-Secretary-General not know about
the Saudi cleric Abdullah Al-Muhaysini, who recruits
children and acts as a mufti for the terrorist group Ahrar
Al-Sham, which is expanding in northern Aleppo and
Idlib? Those are facts that we have to consider. What
he said about Jableh and Tartus, which were shelled
during a suicide attack by a terrorist, is an incomplete
description, to put it mildly. He knows perfectly well
that Da’esh and Ahrar Al-Sham claimed responsibility
for the terrorist acts there, and the perpetrators’ identity
is therefore very well known to him.
Some Council members claim to be concerned
by the humanitarian situation and the protection of
human rights in Syria. These States hold meetings,

This situation becomes more glaring when these
same States invite these groups to participate in the
Geneva negotiations, as though there were such a thing
as moderate terrorism and as though they would both
allow and not allow terrorism. The same States enable
the access of representatives of these entities into their
countries and allow them access to the media. That was
the case with the head of Jabhat Al-Nusra, who was
received by the Qatari channel Al-Jazeera on several
occasions, and with the representative of foreign
relations of Ahrar Al-Sham, who was in the United
States on a British passport in January. There was an
article about that in the Washington Post, on 18 July
2015, and in the Telegraph. This is an attempt to burnish
the image of that terrorist group, to use terrorist groups
for political blackmail and to implement a particular
agenda.
This has become obvious in the statements made
by the representatives of these States — including
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia
and Turkey, as well as other countries — when they
clearly threaten to maintain their support for terrorism
in Syria unless the leadership is changed. The same

16-151485/8

S/PV.7701

The situation in the Middle East

States impose unilateral illegal economic sanctions
on the Syrian people. That increases the suffering of
the Syrian people and is a huge burden on the public
and private sectors, which are trying to provide food
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and ensure the people’s basic
needs are met. This has forced some sectors of the
population to leave Syria out of a sense of insecurity
and a lack of subsistence, but the Council ignores this
dire humanitarian situation in Syria.
How can we talk about putting an end to the
suffering and tragedy of the Syrian people inside
and outside the country and putting an end to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria? How can we know that the
humanitarian and political situation is uncertain? What
can we do to implement some of our goals? Suffering
should not be used by certain Governments as a tool
for political and other types of blackmail, as President
Erdoğan did a couple of days ago when he threatened to
change the refugee situation if Turkish nationals were
not given a visa exemption for European countries.
How can the humanitarian situation improve when
President Erdoğan uses Turkish territory, including the
United Nations corridors, as a transit area for tens of
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters? Furthermore,
the Turkish regime provides weapons to terrorists and
uses humanitarian convoys as a cover.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria appears not to know about any of this, despite the
fact that I myself told him about it on several occasions.
Furthermore, we have drawm the attention of members
of the Security Council to this matter in detail in
our official communications. The Erdoğan regime
imprisons customs officers, judges and reporters who
describe the situation honestly. Why is it that the
Secretariat rewarded the Erdoğan regime by holding
the first World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul when
the regime allows children to be recruited in refugee
camps?
How can we put an end to the crisis without
addressing the violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions on combating terrorism, in
particular resolution 2253 (2015), which deals with
training for terrorism committed by Israel, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia? This has clear consequences for the
security and stability of the region.
I would like to discuss the way that the issue of
humanitarian access is manipulated. The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/460) presents this
6/8

27/05/2016

inaccurately, and what he describes is very far from
the reality and based on unreliable sources. Two days
ago we sent two identical letters to the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General with
regard to this matter, but I will limit myself to simply
underscoring the following points.
The claim that the Syrian Government prevents
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Darayya is
totally false. In fact, the Syrian Government allowed
the United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) to enter Darayya on 17 May to
provide humanitarian assistance. The representative of
the ICRC informed the Foreign Ministry that it was not
able to enter Darayya owing to logistical administrative
and security reasons. When it comes to the reservations
raised by some with regard to medical supplies, the
Government of Syria agrees to allow medical assistance
to be provided to all regions except for tools that can be
used by terrorists.
The Government of Syria stands ready to cooperate
with the United Nations to address all convoy-related
issues. As regards inter-agency convoy requests, I
recall that the United Nations submitted 26 requests for
inter-agency humanitarian assistance convoys for hot
areas in May, within the framework of the May plan. The
Syrian Government accepted 19 of those 26 requests.
As I said, 19 were accepted, but as of 24 May —two
days ago — the United Nations had sent only three
convoys out of the 26 requested. The Government of
Syria accepted 19 and the United Nations only sent three
inter-agency humanitarian assistance convoys. If there
are sometimes delays when it comes to authorizations
and their implementation, that is a result of our concern
for the safety and security of humanitarian workers,
and the concern that humanitarian assistance reach
those to whom it is destined.
The Government of Syria remains committed to
reducing the humanitarian suffering of our people.
We are ready to implement any national measures
needed in order to attain that objective. We continue
to cooperate with the United Nations and to facilitate
the work, but cooperation is not a one-way street. The
United Nations also has to cooperate, coordinate and
consult with the Syrian Government when it comes
to humanitarian assistance, instead of criticizing it
and calling it into question without result. The United
Nations and other international organizations have, in
the five years of the crisis’ existence, been able to get
16-15148

27/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian assistance to millions of people thanks
only to the cooperation of the Government of Syria.
Lastly, we frequently talk of the danger of terrorism
and the importance of fighting terrorism. That should
not be interpreted to suggest that we do not understand
the depth of the humanitarian crisis in some regions
of Syria or that we do not understand the importance
of improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. On
the contrary, we do. However, we believe that in order
to put a lasting end to the humanitarian crisis, we need
to deal with the issue seriously, and to tackle terrorism
that is supported from the outside and external
interference in our internal affairs, and not through
financial contributions pledged in various conferences
as a matter of form — although those contributions
have their own significance.
The Syrian Government underscores the importance
of the political dimension. We participated in the Geneva
negotiations seriously. The problem was that some
States had imposed the Riyadh delegation as the only
interlocutor. That delegation came with preconditions,
which were to ensure that the negotiations failed.
Indeed, they withdrew on several occasions, following
direct instructions from their sponsors.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I do not
want to take much time here, but I am struck by the
number of factual claims that have been made by the
Ambassador from Syria that impugn the reputation
of the United Nations and the brave humanitarians
who are trying to get food to people who are being
starved — to death, in many cases. I think there is
some irony in a Government that pulls infant formula,
anaesthetics and surgical equipment off of convoys
and that does not even deign to respond to successive
United Nations requests, accusing the United Nations
of not showing up with convoys when there are people
starving. But, I am not the authority on this matter; the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is.
As such, I would like to ask Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien to respond to some of the allegations made by
the Syrian ambassador.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on
Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: As I have said on many occasions
before, my only authority comes from attempts to
ensure that we gather facts from the best sources
possible — both with our own eyes on the ground and
from those we are able to trust to produce the facts — and

S/PV.7701

to relay them to the Security Council in a completely
fair and honest manner. Where there are reports rather
than seen facts, we make judgments about the quality of
those reports. So, having laid out the best information
we have available, I stand by all the facts I outlined in
the statement I just made to the Council.
I can certainly stand by the facts I gave early in my
statement because that was my personal testimony, in
particular my sitting down at the bedside of Dr. Mazin
as he struggled for life, barely able to whisper. All he
could muster to say was “Please, peace”. I think that
sums up precisely why we need to raise ourselves above
the level of disputes on the numbers, which simply
do not pay sufficient respect to the deep needs of the
people who are doing their very best to help or those
who continue to struggle after five years of a fight
that could be brought to an end if there were sufficient
political will — not least from the Government, which
represents an alternative factual base. I stand by the
facts that I presented, and I am more than happy to
write to the Council at a later stage, setting out further
helpful background details.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should simply like to
raise a question with regard to procedure here in the
Council, because it is my understanding that this was to
be a briefing followed by private consultations. Are we
going to be discussing Mr. O’Brien’s briefing in public
meeting or is it going to be in consultations? If it is
public, then we should begin the discussion here, but
I believe that otherwise we should be conducting this
discussion in closed consultations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The President of
the Council cannot prevent anyone from taking the floor,
but I propose that we begin our private consultations so
that we can hear from Mr. O’Brien.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arabic Republic to make a further statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I regret having to take the floor for a second
time. I will be brief. I would like to say that I too
presented irrefutable facts. We are perfectly open to
hearing any explanation that might contradict what I
have stated. We do not wish to harm the reputation of the
United Nations, as we are one of its founding Member
States. I am here as a representative of that Member
State. We are proud of having been a founding Member
State and have always tirelessly defended the United

16-151487/8

S/PV.7701

The situation in the Middle East

Nations. However, the Organization is not composed
exclusively of angels; I wish to combat its demons.
The representative of the United States remarked
that I did not refer to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/460), but that is inaccurate. Everything I said
was with respect to that report. We are not levelling
accusations; rather, we are calling the attention of
Council members to problems related to humanitarian
assistance. On several occasions, we have said that
Turkey is using United Nations corridors to move
weapons. Mr. O’Brien and his colleagues have not
responded to that statement.
A few days ago, it was revealed that the Erdoğan
regime was sending weapons along the corridors.
He has imprisoned customs officers, journalists and
judges. If that was an attack on the United Nations,

8/8

27/05/2016

it would mean that the information about Turkey was
false, and that the statement made by the Ambassador
of the United States proves that it did not occur.
We are familiar with the cases of Libya and Iraq,
and I do not want to add Africa to that. Everyone knows
what is going in Africa. We want the work of the United
Nations to reflect its Charter. We do not want a new
Charter, casually rewritten according to new rules.
We must defend the dignity and sovereignty of States,
not the attacks that are constantly being made on that
dignity and sovereignty, and we must aid their citizens.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

16-15148
