S/2012/135

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 March 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 6 March 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey to you a letter dated 14 February 2012 from the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping (see annex),
forwarding a memorandum of understanding on non-aggression and cooperation,
which was signed by the Governments of South Sudan and the Sudan under the
auspices of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel during the latest
round of talks on 10 February 2012 (see enclosure).
I should be most grateful if you would bring the present letter and its
attachments to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-25383 (E) 090312

*1225383*

S/2012/135

Annex
Letter dated 14 February 2012 from the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
I am writing to formally inform you that, following the second meeting of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism, held in Addis Ababa on 10 February 2012,
under the facilitation of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Government of Republic of South
Sudan have signed a memorandum of understanding on non-aggression and
cooperation.
As you are aware, the Joint Political and Security Mechanism was established
in 2011 as the first intergovernmental mechanism between the Sudan and the newly
independent Republic of South Sudan. Meeting at the ministerial level, it addresses
security concerns between the two countries in order to foster confidence and reduce
the likelihood of security issues escalating into conflict.
The memorandum of understanding on non-aggression and cooperation
includes a commitment by the two States to respect each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, a commitment to non-interference in the internal affairs of the
other and the rejection of the use of force, as well as a commitment to equality and
mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
In addition to the memorandum of understanding, the two States also adopted a
number of other decisions on steps to reduce tension along their common border. In
particular, they agreed to the immediate activation of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mission, which would have the task of monitoring the Secure
Demilitarized Border Zone between the two countries and investigate any
allegations of violation by the two States. They also agreed to the establishment of
mechanisms and procedures to investigate allegations and counter-allegations
against either State in areas beyond the border. The next meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism will be held in Juba on 8 March 2012.
In the context of the heightened tension between the two countries, the speedy
and full implementation of the memorandum of understanding will significantly
contribute to the promotion of peace and the reduction of the likelihood of conflict.
I am attaching, herewith, the memorandum of understanding on
non-aggression and cooperation, as well as the record of decisions of the meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. I would be most grateful if you could
circulate this letter and the attached documents as a Security Council document, for
the information of the members of this organ.
The African Union High-level Implementation Panel is pursuing its efforts to
assist both parties, in the context of the negotiations that started in Addis Ababa on
12 February 2012, to reach an agreement on all outstanding issues. The informal
interactive dialogue with the Security Council scheduled for 27 February 2012 will
provide an opportunity for the Panel to provide an update on the negotiation process
and other aspects of its work.
As we intensify our efforts to resolve the outstanding issues in the relations
between the two countries, it is critical that the international community, including
the Security Council, continue to fully support the efforts of the African Union

2

12-25383

S/2012/135

High-level Implementation Panel. Allow me, in this respect, to reiterate our
appreciation for the invaluable contribution of your Special Envoy, Haile
Menkerios, and his team and their excellent cooperation with the Panel.
(Signed) Jean Ping

12-25383

3

S/2012/135

Enclosure*
Memorandum of Understanding on Non-aggression and
Cooperation
(“this Memorandum”)
between
The Government of the Republic of the Sudan
and
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
(hereinafter “the Parties” or “the two States”)
The Parties:
Recognizing the need to construct, promote and sustain a manually supportive
relationship between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan,
Recalling the agreed principle of promoting the mutual viability of the two States,
and affirming the commitment of the two States to maintain a secure Sudan and
South Sudan,
Further affirming their commitment to implementing the African Union
Constitutive Act, and the United Nations Charter, and relevant principles of
International Law, including the Vienna Convention on the Succession of States in
Respect of Treaties of 1978, and International Humanitarian Law, generally
Welcoming and respecting the admission and recognition of the Republic of South
Sudan as the 193rd member of the United Nations pursuant to General Assembly
Resolution A/RES/65/308 of 14th July 2011
Committed to Implementing
19th September 2011.

the

Khartoum

Consolidation

Document

of

Agree as follows:
Part I
Non-Aggression
Article 1
Definition of Aggression
For purposes of this Memorandum, “aggression” means: “the use of armed force or
the conduct of any other hostile act by a State or other entity against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity or political independence of another State”

* The Memorandum of Understanding received by the Secretariat was initialled on each page.

4

12-25383

S/2012/135

Article 2
Principles of good neighbourliness and non-aggression
The two States agree to abide by the following principles of good neighbourliness
and non-aggression:
1)

Respect for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity

2)

Non-interference in the internal affairs of the other State

3)

Rejection of the use of force in conducting their relations in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the African Union and United Nations charters

4)

Equality and mutual benefit

5)

Peaceful co-existence
Part II
Elaboration of the Principles
Article 3
Respect for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity

1)

Neither State shall violate the territorial integrity of the other State

2)

Each State shall respect the sovereignty of the other State in all respects,
including its political independence
Article 4
Non-interference in the internal affairs of the other State

1)

Each State shall refrain from interfering in the internal governance of the other
State including in legislative, executive functions

2)

Neither State shall support political parties, other political actors, or opposition
armed groups and movements, within the other State

3)

Each State shall refrain from carrying out military acts and espionage activities
against the other State

4)

Neither State shall enter into an alliance with, or provide support to, a third
party for purposes of undermining the integrity and interests of the other State
Article 5
Rejection of the use of force in conducting their relations

12-25383

1)

The two States shall conduct their relations on the basis of mutual
non-aggression and shall resolve any disputes that might arise between them
exclusively through peaceful means

2)

Each State shall refrain from launching any attack including bombardment
against the territory of other State, neither shall the State invade, occupy or
annex, however temporarily, the territory of the other State

3)

Neither State shall conduct overflight of the airspace of the other State without
the prior formal agreement of that State

5

S/2012/135

4)

Neither State shall allow its territory to be used by another State, or by any
armed group or movement to conduct any acts of aggression or to undertake
military acts or other subversive activities against the territory of the other
State

5)

Neither State shall harbour or provide any form of support to armed groups,
mercenaries, terrorist organizations, or other organized transnational criminal
groups which may carry out hostile acts against the other State

6)

Neither State shall provide technological assistance, intelligence or training of
any kind to another State or other entity which may be used in committing acts
of aggression against the other State

7)

The two States undertake to cooperate with each other to combat
trans-boundary crimes and criminal acts
Article 6
Equality and Mutual Benefit

1)

The two States shall conduct their relations, and cooperate on the basis of
equality and the promotion of their mutual benefit

2)

Accordingly, each State shall refrain from blockading agreed corridors of
movement, ports, coastlines, rivers, or airspace of the other State in
accordance with the principles of International Law
Article 7
Peaceful Co-existence

1)

Each State shall maintain diplomatic relations with the other State, including
establishment of diplomatic missions

2)

To ensure peace, stability and security, the two States shall maintain such joint
mechanisms for fostering political and security cooperation between them as
they may agree, including the Joint Political and Security Mechanism (JPSM)
Article 8
Observation of Implementation

1)

The two States hereby authorize the JPSM to oversee their compliance with
this Memorandum. The Parties may adopt further mechanisms and principles
to enable the JPSM to carry out this function

2)

In the event of any dispute arising in the implementation of this Memorandum,
the two States shall seek to resolve the matter amicably through the JPSM
Article 9
Amendment and Termination

6

1)

This Memorandum may be amended by the mutual consent of the Parties

2)

If either State wishes to terminate this Memorandum it shall give the other
State notice of its intention to do so. After the expiry of sixty days from date of
such notification, the Memorandum shall be deemed to be terminated

12-25383

S/2012/135

Done in Addis Ababa, this 10th Day of February, 2012:
(Signed) 1st Lt. Gen. Mohamed Atta
Elmula Abass
Director General for National
Intelligence and Security Services
On behalf of the Republic of the Sudan

(Signed) Maj. Gen. Thomas Duoth Guet
Director General for General
Intelligence Bureau
On behalf of the Republic of South
Sudan

In the presence of:
(Signed) Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki
Chairperson, African Union High Level Implementation Panel
Facilitator of the Negotiations

12-25383

7

S/2012/135

Record of Decisions
Meeting of Joint Political Security Mechanism
Addis Ababa, 10 February 2012
Agenda Item 1
1.
The two States shall respect existing agreements relating to the
composition of the JPSM and therefore in future meetings, each delegation shall be
led by either one of the Ministers of Defence, Interior or Foreign Affairs
2.

Both States adopted the agenda as prepared by the Joint Secretariat

Agenda Item 2
1.

The JBVMM will be immediately established.

2.
The AUHIP will request the two Presidents to allow the JPSM to receive
a briefing on Abyei.
3.
The issue of the map will be addressed by the AUHIP to the two
Presidents.
Agenda Item 3
1.
The JBVMM will address allegations and counter allegations related to
the border area.
2.
The JPSM agreed to address allegations and counter allegations in areas
beyond the border through the Joint Secretariat to ad-hoc sub-committees.
Agenda Item 4
1.
The JPSM discussed and agreed an MOU on Non-Aggression and
Cooperation.
Agenda Item 5
1.
The JPSM agreed that the MOU on Non-Aggression and Cooperation
would come into immediate effect upon signature.
Agenda Item 6
1.
JPSM agreed that the next meeting would be held on 8th March 2012 in
Juba, cost met by the two States.
(Signed) 1st Lt. Gen. Mohamed Atta
Elmula Abass
Director General for National
Intelligence and Security Services
On behalf of the Republic of the Sudan

(Signed) Maj. Gen. Thomas Duoth Guet
Director General for General
Intelligence Bureau
On behalf of the Republic of South
Sudan

In the presence of:
(Signed) Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki
Chairperson, African Union High Level Implementation Panel
Facilitator of the Negotiations

8

12-25383
