S/PV.7260

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7260th meeting

Tuesday, 9 September 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Bante
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Budreckaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-eighth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2014/598)
Letter dated 28 August 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/644)

14-52880 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1452880*

S/PV.7260

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

The spread of the EVD in Liberia has been
merciless. The Ministry of Health puts the number of
reported cases above 2,070, with over 1,200 deaths, but
these numbers understate Ebola’s true toll. The speed
and scale of the loss of lives and the economic, social,
political and security reverberations of the crisis are
affecting Liberia profoundly.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-eighth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2014/598)
Letter dated 28 August 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/644)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Brownie J. Samukai, Minister of National Defense
of Liberia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin
Landgren, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Mårten Grunditz, Chair of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Sweden, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/598, which contains the twenty-eighth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. I also wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2014/644,
which contains a letter dated 28 August 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: The report of the Secretary-General
on Liberia (S/2014/598) that is before the Council has
been overtaken by the Ebola virus disease (EVD)
epidemic. Liberians are facing their gravest threat since
the war and my remarks will focus on that.

2/8

09/09/2014

Unlike an earthquake or a flood, this crisis grows
exponentially, with every fresh infection begetting
others. Caring for the sick and burying the dead are
traditions now freighted with risk. The Liberian health
system was the region’s weakest, despite a decade of
partnership efforts; now, at least 160 health workers
have contracted the disease and 80 have died. Most
health workers have gone long stretches without proper
protective equipment, training or pay. Local funeral
rites that involve the touching and washing of the dead
have led to countless new deaths and will need to be
replaced with safer rituals, requiring the commitment
of religious and traditional leaders. Many communities
denied that Ebola existed at all.
There is no real disagreement among health experts
about what needs to be done. Advocacy and community
mobilization, the prompt removal of suspected EVD
cases from communities to case management centres,
the urgent and safe disposal of bodies, and robust
contact tracing and active case search are the main
elements. That does require going community to
community — and even door to door — to inquire,
inform and support. It requires health workers to staff
Ebola case management centres, while employing
meticulous infection control measures.
For now, patients at advanced stages of EVD
continue to be brought to facilities that cannot admit
them. Four new case management centres will be
established in Monrovia, adding some 500 beds in the
capital alone, but even this may not fully respond to
the needs. We will know this epidemic is being outrun
when we find that there is spare bed capacity.
By late July, the EVD outbreak had triggered
widespread alarm and the Government took several
measures. Borders were closed, other than at a few
strictly controlled crossing points; non-essential
Government workers were sent on mandatory leave;
and most Government travel was restricted. Border
markets, schools and other institutions were ordered to
close, and large gatherings were suspended. But Ebola’s
spread outpaced the Government’s ability to respond.

14-52880

09/09/2014

The situation in Liberia

In several instances, public anger broke out over the
failure to remove the bodies of EVD victims from
streets and houses.
On 6 August, President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf
declared a 90-day state of emergency, stating that the
scale and scope of the epidemic exceeded the response
capacity of national institutions and existing legal
frameworks. Extraordinary measures were required,
the President said, including the suspension of some
constitutionally guaranteed rights. The legislature
endorsed the decision, as required by the Constitution.
Later in the month, a curfew was instituted from
9 p.m. to 6 a.m., since yesterday pushed back to 11 p.m.
Within the context of the state of emergency, the narrow
domestic role of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL)
was broadened and the army deployed, along with the
National Police and the Immigration Service, to isolate
highly Ebola-affected counties and communities and
to protect the less-affected counties. The benefits
of isolating Ebola-affected communities to prevent
disease transmission are not clear. Those operations, to
date, have not always included prior arrangements to
make available food and water, or sufficient supportive
engagement with the communities concerned.
On 20 August, when the Government mounted
an AFL-led operation to isolate the West Point area
of Monrovia, the prices of essential goods within the
cordon skyrocketed within hours. Panicked residents
protested the cordon, and in the confrontation with the
AFL shots were fired and a 15-year old boy was fatally
wounded. Following that incident, President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf made the commitment that there would
be no further use of lethal force, and on 30 August the
West Point cordon was lifted.
Movement restrictions throughout the country
continue, including through operations of the Armed
Forces. Criteria for passage at checkpoints have not
been consistently implemented or clearly communicated
to the public, and opportunities for vigilantism
and profiteering have increased. Although some
coordination has been visible among security agencies
in the EVD response, each agency has planned and
executed its own security operation, with coordination
more visible at the county level. A joint command centre
has been established to oversee nationwide operations.
The halting of cross-border trade, domestic
movement restrictions and general economic
uncertainty have prompted panic buying of food and

S/PV.7260

other goods. Several major concessions have reassured
the Government and their own employees that they
are not planning to close, although many have reduced
operations and repatriated foreign personnel. A number
of forestry concessions have stopped operating and
over 10,000 forestry workers have reportedly been
laid off. With unemployment and underemployment
already high, Ebola has added to Liberia’s economic
uncertainty.
The Ministry of Finance and Development Planning
has announced that the Government already faces a
$57-million revenue shortfall, and informed donors of
preliminary indications of a $116-million budget gap.
Growth projections have been revised downward to
2.9 per cent from 5.9 per cent. The executive is revising
the budget to reflect revenue shortfalls and to assure
that the Government has the resources to operate
while responding to Ebola. The national budget for the
fiscal year beginning 1 July not having been passed,
the Government has been operating on an advance
equivalent to one-twelfth of last year’s budget.
The EVD outbreak has also created uncertainty
around some fundamental democratic processes. Noting
that it would be unable to deliver credible senatorial
elections in October, as scheduled, the National
Elections Commission proposed a postponement until
the second week of December, which would allow the
vote to take place before the 15 incumbent senators
finish their terms on 6 January. The legal framework for
a postponement is being explored by the legislature and
the Law Reform Commission. The National Elections
Commission will need clarity soon. There is growing
recognition that even a December electoral timeline
may be difficult to maintain should the crisis stretch.
The constitutional review process has also suffered.
The national constitutional conference envisaged for
August could not be held, delaying national discussion of
proposed amendments and the legislative consideration
of proposals that was to follow. It pushes the national
referendum on constitutional reforms into at least 2016.
The Government is, by its own admission, extremely
stretched. Several officials have reportedly left the
country or remained abroad, despite the President’s
Office announcing on 11 August that officials who
failed to return to the country within a week would lose
their jobs. A lack of confidence in the Government’s
capacity to address the crisis has contributed to fluid
political dynamics, and it has been widely reported
that some Liberians, including among the diaspora,

14-528803/8

S/PV.7260

The situation in Liberia

have called for an organized transition from the present
Government.
A successful Ebola response will require steady
governance. Since the end of the civil war, Liberia
has made progress in developing basic institutional
capacities while laying the foundations for a transformed
democratic State. However, the Ebola crisis has started
to strip away some of that progress. The enormous task
of addressing Ebola has revealed persistent and profound
institutional weaknesses, including in the security
sector. As demands pile up, the police face monumental
challenges in planning and implementing large-scale
operations due to poor logistics and communications,
an overly centralized command structure and an overconcentration of personnel in Monrovia.
Although the delicate progress achieved in the
security transition may be stalled by Ebola, the
handover of security functions from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to national actors has so
far taken place according to Government and UNMIL
agreed timelines. Since the completion of the second
phase of UNMIL’s military drawdown in June, the
Mission no longer has a fixed military presence in
seven of Liberia’s 15 counties, and four counties have no
presence of UNMIL armed security response capacity.
As increased funding is found to respond to EVD,
it will be important that the Government take full
responsibility for resourcing the Liberia National Police
adequately and holding it accountable for delivery.
Critical to that will be the ability to use the opportunity
to deploy police officers more widely throughout the
country. The Ebola outbreak has halted UNMIL’s joint
border operations with the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire and Ivorian authorities. Other than
incidents within Côte d’Ivoire near the Liberian border
in February and May, the border areas have been
peaceful during 2014. Although Ivorian refugee returns
remain suspended, the situation in the refugee camps
remains calm.
Early on in the crisis, the Government established
a national task force on Ebola, chaired by the President
herself, operating as overall leadership for the response
in Liberia. The structure, which has undergone
adjustments, has been criticized for failing to bring
the epidemic under control. There have been calls in
Liberia for a stronger international role in coordination
structures.

4/8

09/09/2014

As in Guinea and Sierra Leone, discussions are
under way to design an overarching coordination
platform for response efforts in Liberia through a
national and international partnership. Beyond an
initial $20 million of Government funding approved
by the legislature, of which $5 million have been
made available, the related trust fund has not received
significant financial support. Transparent and credible
financial management will be essential, and the World
Bank is working on a modality through its development
trust fund.
Since late July, UNMIL has turned its full focus
on EVD and engaged in supporting the nationally led
response. Given the reduced activity of the Government
and other national actors, some of UNMIL’s work,
as originally conceived, has slowed in the areas of
constitutional reform, national reconciliation, land
reform, the capacity-building of security agencies, and
natural resource management. UNMIL has not ceased
its mandated activities, however, and other work has
intensified with respect to the security sector and the
rule of law, political good offices, the protection of
civilians and human rights monitoring and support.
In the fight against the EVD, the Mission is working
through four pillars of engagement and support:
security and the rule of law, logistics, communications
and outreach, and coordination at both the central and
the county levels. Our military and police continue
to provide operational advice and support to national
counterparts, including embedding liaison officers
within the joint command centre with Liberian military,
police and immigration personnel. UNMIL has worked
closely with the Ministry of Justice and the judiciary to
address the extremely high rates of pre-trial detention,
helping to alleviate some overcrowding in Liberia’s
major prisons, which is an added concern within the
Ebola context.
The Mission is not directly enforcing the
quarantining of communities or counties, but is
monitoring all security operations under the state of
emergency. UNMIL’s own security posture is kept
under constant review to best place the Mission in
its protection-of-civilians mandate. We have played a
large role in the logistics of the EVD response, both in
the planning and the delivery of operations. UNMIL
leads an interagency crisis logistics team comprising
the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Food
Programme, UNICEF and the International Committee
of the Red Cross, which conducts logistics planning,

14-52880

09/09/2014

The situation in Liberia

inventory management, stock control, distribution
and coordination at the Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare. That team links closely with UNMIL logistics
to deliver supplies throughout the country.
In support of Government outreach efforts,
UNMIL has engaged in nationwide communications
on EVD education and prevention measures. That is
done through traditional communicators, UNMIL
radio programming in 17 Liberian languages, and
the printing of over 150,000 flyers, among other
things. UNMIL retains a civilian presence in each of
Liberia’s 15 counties, where we have always worked
closely with local authorities. Since March, when Lofa
county became the epicentre of the outbreak in Liberia,
UNMIL has provided coordination support to county
superintendents, county health teams and county EVD
task forces.
In discussion with several superintendents and
county health teams, I have found insightful thinking,
planning and initiatives around the basic measures of
preventing the spread of Ebola. So far, however, many
superintendents have received only $2,300 from the
central Government. We understand that more funding
may be on the way. Meanwhile, UNMIL has turned its
ever-useful quick impact projects programme towards
rapid Ebola support.
UNMIL and the United Nations country team
partners continue to benefit from a close and consultative
relationship. Five weeks ago, I began bringing together
a few leaders of the international health partner
agencies on the front lines, including Doctors Without
Borders and the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, with a small number of United
Nations colleagues, including the WHO leadership,
to brainstorm around Ebola responses on a scale not
foreseen by any existing protocols. Responding in that
context is beyond any of us acting alone, and we will
do everything we can to maintain those close links on
the ground.
In that connection, let me mention that in addition
to reorienting our activities, UNMIL and the United
Nations more broadly have advocated at the highest
levels to prevent the international isolation of Liberia
and its neighbours affected by the Ebola epidemic.
The Mission is also seeking support arrangements for
front-line international responders and the diplomatic
community to enable them to stay and operate in
Liberia. That includes access to UNMIL’s shuttle
flights between Monrovia and Accra, which were

S/PV.7260

reactivated on 7 September, and access to UNMIL’s
medical facilities for routine medical care.
United Nations Headquarters continues to engage
with Member States to secure an EVD-specific
treatment centre and medical evacuation arrangements
for United Nations personnel, the diplomatic community
and front-line international EVD responders. From our
own organization, we are seeking a decision to provide
danger pay to our personnel in recognition of the severe
stress and uncertainty of the unprecedented situation,
which is, understandably, not captured within the
existing United Nations regulations.
This epidemic of unprecedented scale would
challenge any Government and any society. Even as
Liberia and its partners respond, the disaster continues
to grow — a tragedy for a country that has seen so
much hardship. UNMIL has pledged to provide its full
support and continues to review the range of capabilities
we can bring to ending this latter-day plague, which
must be stopped in its tracks and stopped soon.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing, and particularly for tailoring it to the crisis
at hand.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grunditz.
Mr. Grunditz: Let me begin by expressing my
deepest condolences to the families and friends of all
those who have perished in the Ebola outbreak. I would
like to commend the concerned countries for their
resilience and steadfast determination in these difficult
times. I pay tribute to the many brave health-care
workers engaged in the tireless efforts to counter this
terrible disease. Let me also express appreciation for
the important support provided by the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), members of the United
Nations country team, particularly the World Health
Organization, and other international partners.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has an
important role in raising awareness, mobilizing
resources and encouraging coordinated international
support for a Liberia now facing a merciless epidemic.
Yesterday, the PBC Organizational Committee held a
meeting with Mr. Nabarro, the senior United Nations
system coordinator for the Ebola virus disease, and
decided to issue a statement in support of his efforts. As
Chairs of the PBC configurations for Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, we issued a letter on 6 August
highlighting the need for international support. On
18 August, we also held a joint informal meeting via

14-528805/8

S/PV.7260

The situation in Liberia

video teleconference with the United Nations at the
country level, resulting in the issuance of a statement
stressing the need for resource mobilization and for the
coordination of international efforts. At that meeting,
the Secretary General of the Mano River Union,
Mr. Kaba, also underlined the need for closer regional
coordination. The PBC should be well placed to continue
facilitating a regional perspective, as well as to promote
relevant links between the security, humanitarian and
development aspects of the crisis.
The Ebola epidemic is unprecedented. Liberia
is facing an accelerated and multidimensional crisis.
Humanitarian needs are rising fast. Restrictions on
mobility have already had a serious impact on economic
activity, and economic growth is predicted to slow down
significantly, putting further strain on already scarce
Government finances. In Liberia, the crisis has hit at
a time when growth was already declining and fiscal
constraints had started to affect funding in several
areas, including for important peacebuilding priorities.
Despite significant national and international
efforts, this deadly disease, which transcends national
boarders, is now growing exponentially. The challenges
posed by what has become the worst Ebola epidemic in
history would be overwhelming for any single country
to cope with alone. The well-coordinated support of the
international community and regional cooperation are
absolutely critical.
The outbreak has generated challenges in several
areas and demonstrated that, notwithstanding the
considerable progress made over the past decade, Liberia
remains a fragile country in post-conflict transition. It
is fragile in terms of both resources and resilience to
shocks such as this. We have also witnessed incidents
of unrest, the spread of fear among the population,
and some resistance to Government intervention. It
is evident that sustained international support will
be needed to ensure that the important gains made in
development and stability can be maintained, and to
ensure that Liberia continues on the path towards longterm peace and prosperity.
Our immediate focus should be on supporting
Liberia in combating this deadly virus and coping
with the humanitarian needs it has created. Short-term
interventions, however, need not be short-sighted.
To the extent possible, efforts need to connect with
longer-term objectives. For instance, short-term
health interventions should link up with longer-term

6/8

09/09/2014

strengthening of the health sector. Furthermore, a
comprehensive approach, addressing the broad array
of challenges will be needed. Government efforts to
ensure the rule of law and the protection of civilians,
as well as effective public communication and other
confidence-building measures to prevent further social
unrest should be encouraged and supported.
Another example, highlighted in the report from
my visit to Liberia in early July, is the urgent need
to resource and address the immediate capability and
mobility gaps of the Liberia National Police. A continued
strong international presence on the ground, including
UNMIL, will be important to all these efforts, as will
the provision of adequate, rapid and flexible resources.
Later on, as opportunities again arise and resources
become available, peacebuilding efforts should continue.
While there may well be need for some adjustments
to the agreed peacebuilding programme, national
reconciliation processes and the further strengthening
of national institutions, including the police, justice and
security sectors, will likely remain key priorities. The
decentralization of services and land reform, as well as
the accountable and transparent management of natural
resources, are also fundamental to long-term peace and
stability in the country. As we continue to support these
peacebuilding efforts in Liberia, important lessons
should be drawn from the current crisis, including
with a view to further strengthening resilience and
State-society relations.
Considering the negative impact of the crisis on
the Liberian economy, joint efforts will also be needed
to stimulate future growth and development. The
admission of Liberia to the World Trade Organization
could be important in this regard. While the Liberian
Government will need to provide national resources
for longer-term peacebuilding priorities, the continued
strong support of international partners in this area
will be even more essential during the period of
recovery from the deep crisis Liberia is now facing.
The continuation of work by the Government of Liberia
on a new deal compact could promote streamlined and
simplified donor frameworks for accountability and
the effectiveness of future support. The Peacebuilding
Support Office stands ready to flexibly reorient the
allocation of funds from the Peacebuilding Fund,
should this be needed.
The President: I thank Mr. Grunditz for his
briefing.

14-52880

09/09/2014

The situation in Liberia

I now give the floor to the Minister of National
Defense of Liberia.
Mr. Samukai (Liberia): It is a privilege for me
to participate for the second time in a meeting of the
Council on the activities of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL). Let me begin by expressing the
profound gratitude of President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
and the Government and people of Liberia to the
Council for its continued support of peace and stability
in Liberia. We also want to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month.
We are meeting at a time when Liberia is facing a
serious threat to its national existence. The deadly Ebola
virus has caused a disruption of the normal functioning
of our State. The disease, which early this year was
identified in the remote villages of our country, has now
reached urban centres, including the capital, Monrovia.
It is now spreading like wild fire, devouring everything
in its path. The already weak health infrastructure of
the country has been overwhelmed. Health workers,
including doctors and nurses who are at the front
line of the fight to control the disease, have been
highly affected, with several — including some of the
country’s most prominent doctors and nurses — have
lost their lives.
The rapid spread of this virus has created a health
crisis, requiring the President to institute measures
aimed at containment. These measures include
establishment of the National Task Force on Ebola,
headed by the President herself; the creation of an
incident management team, led by the Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare; and the declaration of a
state of emergency for 90 days. Additional measures
include a one-month compulsory leave for non-essential
Government employees, now extended for a second
month, to limit human to human contact. Communities
with a high incidence of infection have been contained
and, in specific cases, quarantined in order to limit
movement. A nationwide curfew is currently in place,
with adjustments having been made only yesterday.
The Government of Liberia launched an awareness
campaign with the full support of UNMIL, the Liberian
media, civil society organizations, the business
community and other bilateral and international
partners. The Government, through the national
legislature, also provided an initial allocation of
$5 million to support the national strategy against the
spread of the deadly virus. A subsequent appeal was made

S/PV.7260

to the international community to provide financial,
logistical and material support for the implementation
of the national strategy, which prioritizes the following
actions: the personal protection and safety of healthcare workers, providing better health-care services for
all Ebola virus disease cases, and providing general
health care for the population, among other measures.
In spite of all these measures, continued denial,
traditional practices, religious rituals, fear and
community resistance still constitute obstacles to
progress. Government is using all available means to
overcome these obstacles and minimize mob violence
and other infractions of peace and security. From
the few cases registered in March, the pandemic has
mushroomed into a health emergency exceeding the
Government’s response capacity. As we speak, this
deadly disease continues to spread and cause havoc in
many communities. Nine of the 15 counties in Liberia
are currently affected. Liberia lacks the infrastructure,
logistical capacity professional expertise and financial
resources necessary to effectively address this disease.
To be candid, the response of the international
community to the appeal of our Government and
partners, in particular the World Health Organization
and Médecins Sans Frontières, was initially less than
robust. However, we are thankful to the SecretaryGeneral for his leadership and initiative in focusing
global attention on the virus, including his appointment
of a United Nations System Coordinator on Ebola in the
person of Mr. David Nabarro. We are very encouraged
by the current efforts of the United Nations to mobilize
resources and coordinate the scaling up of interventions
to bring surge capacity to bear in response to the tragic
situation. We are equally appreciative of the action
taken by the African Union yesterday in dispatching
a technical team and making funding available to
support national efforts. Even today, the African Union
has issued a call to all its member States to urgently
lift all travel bans imposed on countries affected by the
ebola outbreak in Africa. We ask all Council members
to use their good offices to support that call.
The health emergency is affecting every sector of
our society. Our economy has been seriously disrupted.
Local economic activities such as domestic food
production, mining and transport services, just to name
a few, have been undermined. Moreover, the slowdown
in domestic food production, particularly in affected
areas of the country, has had a negative impact on food
supply, thus triggering increasing demand for imported

14-528807/8

S/PV.7260

The situation in Liberia

commodities at higher prices. The hospitality industry
has also been seriously affected by the epidemic. Today,
only two international airlines — Brussels Airlines and
Royal Air Maroc — are flying to and from Liberia. The
suspension of flights has accentuated the difficulties
we are facing and exacerbated the constraints of
humanitarian delivery.
Until today, there have been no reports of infections
among either national or international UNMIL staff.
The Government is aware that the stakes are high,
as troop- and police-contributing countries harbour
concerns for the health and safety of their citizens. We
extend our appreciation to those countries and appeal
for their solidarity by allowing their forces to continue
their assignment in Liberia. The United Nations plan for
scaling up the international response needs to benefit
from the use of military assets as well. We thank those
countries that have provided these assets and encourage
others to do the same.

8/8

09/09/2014

The Government of Liberia fully supports the
Secretary-General’s request for a technical rollover
of UNMIL’s mandate for the next three months.
Our attention and focus need to be directed towards
containing and eliminating the ebola virus from
Liberia and other countries. We encourage continued
flexibility on the part of the Council in these very
difficult circumstances for Liberia. We also hope that
the deliberations will take into account the imperatives
of protecting the investment and gains made in Liberia
over the years for peace and stability. I thank the
Council for its continued support.
The President: I thank Minister Samukai both for
his briefing and for travelling here to present the facts
of what is happening in his country.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

14-52880
