UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
rd

MEETING: 2 l/22 March 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 403) , . . . , . , . , , , . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . , .

Page

1
1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
fb) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) , . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1403

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

UNDRED
Weld in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Ousmane Sect DIOP (Senegal).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 403)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
la) Latter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
lb) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/6486)

AND TNIRD

MEETING

21. March 1968, at 9.30 p.m.
2.. The PRESIDENT (trarulated from French): We shall
now resume consideration of the item on our agenda. I call
upon the first speaker on my list, the representative of the
United Kingdom.
3. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I have intentionally asked to speak late in this debate. I shall certainly
not compete with others in condemnation and strong
feeling, well justified as I realize that feeling to be. Nor shall
I repeat what others have said. I should like to speak
shortly not only on the dangers which have brought us here
today, but also because I trust that even today we shall not
neglect to think of the future. Even under the cloud of
these dreadful events, we must not lose sight of the hope of
progress towards a settlement.
4. Uppermost in the minds of all of us since news from the
Jordan valley came to us through the night and this
morning must be our realization that, as always, it is the
innocent who suffer first, and it is the innocent who suffer
most. We learn yet again the lesson of the evils of violence.
Violence leaves in its trail a mounting toll of death and
anguish and suffering and bitter dispute and bloody
deadlock.
5. Surely our first demand must be for an end to
violence-all violence. For we know that if violence is to
continue there can be no good prospect for the future, no
prospect except a further descent deep into chaos and
conflict.
6. I trust that the hope of the future will not be destroyed
by the hate and the blood of the past.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In view of
the limited number of places available at the Council table,
and in accordance with the practice sometimes followed by
this Council, I propose to invite the representatives of the
two countries that requested the convening of the Security
Council on this occasion to take places at the Council table
for the duration of the discussion on the question before us
and I ‘also propose to invite the United Arab Republic, Iraq,
Morocco and Syria to take the places reserved for them at
the sides at the Council chamber, on the understanding that
when they wish to speak they will be invited to take places
at the Council table,

7. It was perfectly clear what had to be done today. It was
essential this morning to call immediately for a return to
the cease-fire line of June. My Government made that
public call at once. No one of us could have any reservation
about that. We have consistently urged restraint and strict
observance of the cease-fire on both sides. Eady this
morning we called upon Israel forces to withdraw immediately to their own side of the cease-fire line. But that is not
enough. The return to the cease-fire line of June 1967-this
is what I would wish to emphasize-must lead on to a
return to resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farm
iJordan) and Mr Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table, and Mr, M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco) and Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syrin) took the places
reserved for them

8. Certainly our first duty must be to make it clear that
those who break the United Nations cease-fire forfeit
international sympathy and support. We deplore the acts of
violence which preceded today’s attack. We deplore the
latest deliberate and most serious breach of the cease-fire,
and we agree with those members of the Council who have

condemned the wrong practice of retaliation. Especially we
deplore resort to violence at this time when all of us have
hoped that United Nations action which we put in train in
this Council would lead to progress towards settlement in
peace.

15. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): The reason
for our presence here today is still another act of Israel
banditry in the area. The facts are clear as elaborated by the
representative of Jordan. Israel has once again resorted to
military might to subdue the legitimate discontent of the
indigenous Arab population in the territories occupied by it
as a result of the June 1967 aggression. Israel has invoked as
a pretext for this unwarranted act of aggression on Jordan
the so-called terrorist activities emanating from that country, The official statements of Israel spokesmen time and
again refer to those activities, seemingly in the belief that if
this term is used repeatedly international public opinion
will eventually accept this allegation as fact. But after all no
one can be blind to the reality of the situation. It should be
constantly recalled and repeatedly underlined that Israel is
still occupying vast areas of territories belonging to Arab
States. This is the fact and the real cause for the present
serious situation in the Middle East.

9. Violence solves nothing. Violence does not prevent
violence. Violence breeds more violence.
10. At the same time, let us be clear in our minds that we
stand by our resolution of 22 November 1967, the whole
resolution. We are convinced that there is no other course
to follow if there is to be any hope at all of establishing the
secure settlement and permanent peace which must be our
overriding aim.
11. This is no time to go over the developments since we
unanimously took our decision here in this Council on 22
November 1967. We have no report yet from Mr. Gunnar
Jarring, but the respect and admiration of all sides for his
patience and persistence have increased as we have learned
of his indefatigable endeavours. Progress has obviously been
slow and difficult. It has been bedevilled by continued
suspicion and distrust. Words have become not a means of
conciliation but a barrier against agreement. But we have
also been assured that the provisions of the resolution we
unanimously passedlast November are accepted-that is the
most striking fact: the resolution has been accepted by
everyone mainly concerned. What is more, no one believes
that there is any other way to go. We are all convinced, I
am sure, that what we did together in November wasright,
The road ahead of us is clear. On that we are all agreed.
And what has happened since November makes it not less
necessary but far more necessary to support the efforts of
the Secretary-General’s special representative and to insist
that the framework for a settlement which we drew up
together four months ago must be respected and carried
out-yes, carried out completely. The Council is, I am sure,
in no mood to accept prevarication or obstruction. We are
not prepared to countenance or condone any violent attack
of the kind of which we learned when we awoke today,
Having made that perfectly plain we pray that we can turn
from the cease-fire to the constructive work to which we
are all committed. It is that future task on which we must
concentrate and from which we must insist that there be no
diversion, no going back.

16. Today’s premeditated Israel attack on the east bank of
Jordan is certainly bound to aggravate further the already
inflammable situation existing in the area.
17. I have had occasion in a series of communications to
this organ as well as to the General Assembly to inform the
membership of the United Nations of the multitude of acts
of intimidation
and provocation practised by the Israel
occupying forces in the Arab territories. I do not intend to
repeat the contents of those communications. Suffice it in
the present context to recapitulate certain aspects of Israel
treatment of the civilian population since its aggression of
5 June.
18. On 22 June, while the General Assembly was convened at its fifth emergency special session to discuss the
Israel aggression against the Arab countries, Israel began to
intensify the expelling of the civilian population by forcing
hundreds of Arabs to leave their homes. An Israel spokesman arrogantly stated that this figure was to be compIeted
when, by the end of that day, 2,000 Palestinians would
leave and that they would continue to expel several
thousand Arabs, on the basis of 1,000 per day. By now
hundreds of thousands have taken refuge in other Arab
lands and still there is no end in sight.
19. On several occasions the Security Council was informed that Israel was continuing its policy of repression
against the civilian Arab population of the occupied
territories, and was conducting an organized campaign of
killing and massacre with a view to spreading havoc and
terror among them. The sole purpose seems to be none
other than to bring about a fait acconzpli-in other words,
to reduce the number of Palestinians in the Arab territories
to the lowest possibIe figure. Such aggression and violation
of the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
as well as human and fundamental freedoms of peoples,
especially the refugees who are in the custody of the United
Nations, can neither be condoned nor ignored.

12. I think tonight, as I have been thinking all day, of
Mr. Gunnar Jarring. All his patient work has been put in
jeopardy. Good sense and goodwill have suffered a defeat.
Conciliation must seem to him tonight much further away.
The forces of hate threaten to take over. But it could be,
surely, that tonight we would all draw back from the
precipice of disaster. Perhaps we could suddenly see tonight
the futility of violence. Perhaps in spite of words of fufuly
there could be a new start towards sanity,
13. I trust that whatever we say and do in this debate we
shall keep uppermost in our minds the need not to block
but to open the way for the Secretary-General’s representative to go forward steadily and surely to eventual success.

20. I should like to refer equally to the policy of
harassment and of looting of property which is being
practised by Israel authorities and has been extended to
UNRWA properties. Various United Nations reports con-

14. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the United Arab Republic.
2

tain evidence that such acts as arrest, deportation, physical
torture, looting, humiliation and plundering, as well as
demolition
of houses, have been committed by Israel
authorities in the occupied territories.

28. In this connexion, may I be allowed to remind the
members of the Council that this movement of resistance
by the Arab population is solely aimed at achieving the
worthy cause of liberating their transgressed land, while on
the other hand, the acts of butchery and massacres
committed by the Israelis concentrate on implementing the
Zionist policy of expansion by Ijrolonging their occupation
of Arab territories.

21. The report of Mr. Gussing, as well as the other reports
of the International Red Cross and of the CommissionerGeneral ‘of UNRWA, and the additional information provided during the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly easily substantiate this information.

29. I submit that the Arab peoples in the occupied
territories are just as entitled as all other oppressed peoples
to struggle for freedom. An eminent statesman and a world
leader, General de Gaulle, describes the resistance of the
Arab people in the occupied territories in the following
way:

22. More recently, information has been widely circulating
about the intensification of the cruel practices by the Israel
authorities in the Arab occupied territories. Imposition of
curfews has been resorted to more and more often with no
provision whatsoever for the distribution of food or water
during the extraordinary long hours of the curfews.

“After attacking, in six days of combat, Israel took
possession of the objectives it wanted to acquire. Now it
is setting up, on the territories it has taken, the
occupation that cannot take place without oppression,
repression, deportation, and there is springing up against
it a resistance which in its turn Israel qualifies as
terrorism.”

23. On 26 January 1968, an eye witness account was
published in The Guardian of Manchester, as already
mentioned by the representative of Algeria /1402nd rneetins/. The author of this report stressed two significant
conclusions: first, that the measures which the Israel
authorities are taking against the civilian population in the
Arab occupied territories constitute utter disregard for the
provisions of the Geneva Convention of 1949 for the
protection of civilian persons in time of war; and secondly,
that Nazi Germany during the Second World War never
treated prisoners of war as harshly as the Israelis arc
treating the Arabs of the occupied territories-and the
majority of these Arabs are women and children.

30. To sum up, Israel has just perpetrated another gross
violation! of the cease-fire resolutions which cannot be
justiGI:-ii under the provisions of the United Nations
Cl!a:ter, which clearly proscribes and condemns not only
th\: actual use of force, but even the threat to use it.
31. What we are confronted with now is a premeditated
act of large-scale military reprisal committed in defiance of
the Charter and of previous Security Council decisions.
Suffice it to mention Security Council resolution
228 (1966) of 25 November 1966, by which the Council
resolved to censure Israel for its action and stated the
following:

24. The information has been confirmed by subsequent
reports published about the increasing Israel acts of
intimidation:
terror, collective punishment, etc., pursued
against the civilian population,
25. In view of those reports, it could hardly be expected
that the inhabitants of these areas would resign themselves
to this fate, accept it meekly, letting their fellow men,
women and children suffer this cruel treatment.

“Emphasizes to Israel that actions of military reprisal
cannot be tolerated and that, if they are repeated, the
Security Council will have to consider further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against the repetition of such acts.”

26. In all fairness, the spontaneous reaction, sometimes at
a great cost of life and materia! sacrifice by the Arab
population of the occupied territories, cannot be viewed
but with sympathy and understanding, If nothing else, it
constitutes the manifestation of the collective will of
popular resistance against the presence of an aggressor.

32. Israel has nevertheless repeated such an act and it is
now up to this important body to discharge its responsibilities and apply the full power of Chapter VII in
accordance with its previous decisions regarding the policy
of military reprisals.
33. The responsibility is grave, but the responsibility of
those who condone the continuation of this situation is
graver, especially if and when they are reluctant to
condemn the defiance by the Israelis of the basic principles
of the United Nations Charter.

27. In other parts of the world, and should I also say in
contemporary history, acts of national resistance against
foreign domination have been hailed, and even assisted by
the members of the international community, as the
legitimate desire of people to liberate themselves from the
yoke of the oppressor. The European peoples in countries
occupied by the Nazis rose in heroic resistance to put an
end to the rule of Nazi domination. These uprisings are still
remembered as acts of extreme bravery and patriotism.
Should this not also be the casewhere the Arab population,
whether on the west bank of the Jordan River, the Golan
heights or in the Gaza Strip, or in Sinai, resist the Israel
oppressor?

34. To condemn Israel’s criminal actions would not be
adequate. Israel prides itself on its long list of condemnations. What is necessary now is to consider the further
steps envisaged in the Charter which the Council referred to
in resolution 228 (1966). The Charter meticulously laid
down in no ambiguous terms the modalities for carrying
out the Council’s responsibilities with respect to acts of
3

‘I

44. The supreme need in the Middle East is peace. That
was the objective of Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
and is the acknowledged aim of the parties, But it is not the
language of the resolutions of the Security Council which
will bring peace to this tormented area and its unfortunate
inhabitants; it is the will and action of the. Governments
concerned.

aggression. Articles 41 and 42 give ample latitude for the
Security Council to exercise its authority. It is high time to
face the aggressor and uphold the principles of the Charter.
35. We have proclaimed our peaceful intentions, but let
there be no mistake: peace does not mean surrender, nor
does it mean the legalization of a fait acconzpZi. The Arab
people are determined to recover every inch of their
homeland whatever the cost, whatever the sacrifice.

45. I do not see that a better opportunity is available to
the Governments than the peace mission authorized by the
Council through the Secretary-General’s special representative; and I believe that we have a right in the Council to
request urgently that every effort be made by the Governments concerned to co-operate with the Jarring mission,

36, Let us hope that peace will be achieved, for in peace
we firmly believe, and for peace we shall earnestly
endeavour.
37. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): A tenuous peace in a
troubled area, based on cease-fire arrangements stemming
from resolutions of this Council, has been roughly and
harshly disturbed by the latest developments.

46. In addition to other measures, members of the Council
might therefore consider the possibility of taking this
opportunity: first, to reaffirm Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967; second, to call on the
parties concerned to accept that resolution; third, to call on
the parties concerned to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral’s special representative, Mr. Jarring, in his endeavours-and I quote from the resolution: “to promote
agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and
accepted settlement in accordance with the provisions and
principles in this resolution”.

38. Following a mounting number of incidents, of infiitration and sabotage on the Israel side of the Israel-Jordan
sector, referred to in the Secretary-General’s report of this
day [S/7930/A&64/,
an extensive military action by
Israel in Jordan has brought about a highly dangerous
situation in the Middle East.
39. My country greatly deplores this recourse to violence
in the area. We likewise deplore the loss of life and suffering
and express our heartfelt sympathy with those affected.
The road to a permanent peace in the Middle East cannot
be paved with this type of forceful military action which
has been undertaken during the last twenty-four hours,

47. I would hope, therefore, that whatever else may come
out of this debate, our action here will strengthen the
mission which this Council entrusted to the Secretary.
General’s special representative and the will of the Governmcnts concerned to work for a political solution rather
than have recourse to force.

40. I wish to join with earlier speakers in affirming that
the Security Council, summoned to deal with the present
situation, cannot condone these acts of violence. The
Council must insist on scrupulous observance of the
cease-fire, and a cessation of all military activities as
required by several Security Council resolutions which are
well known.

48. Mr. BORCM (Denmark): My Government has followed
with the utmost concern developments over the last days
and weeks along the cease-fire line between Israel and
Jordan and the increasing number of violent actions across
that cease-fire line, the latest of them being the very serious
large-scale Israel military action against objectives in
Jordan.

41. I would at the same time appeal to both Israel and
Jordan to facilitate the assignment by the Secretary-General
of United Nations observers to supervise the cease-fire, The
need for this action is demonstrated all too clearly in the
information passed on by General Odd Bull and contained
in the report of the Secretary-General to which I have
referred.

49. Those unfortunate incidents have demonstrated once
more the deplorable lack of stability in the area and the
urgent need for a just and lasting peace as called for
unanimously by the Council in its resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967. We supported that resolution as indeed
we have supported all resolutions of the Council since the
outbreak of the war in the Middle East in June 1967. BY
the same token we must deplore all violations of the
cease-fire established and maintained in accordance with
several resolutions of the Security Council.

42. The Council is undoubtedly placed at a disadvantage
by the absence of an impartial source of information which
only United Nations observers can provide. In its absence
we are obliged to rely on ex park statements,

50. We must oppose violence and the resort to force and
insist upon complete compliance with the cease-fire resolutions. Violations of these resolutions are not only
contrary to the specific arrangements in force in the area,
but also cannot but poison the atmosphere and even carry
with them the risk of continued and increased conflict. In
any case they cannot but impede progress towards the
objectives of the above-mentioned resolution.

43. By helping to establish conditions of calm, United
Nations supervision would assist the efforts of the United
Nations special representative to achieve agreement on the
application of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and
hence to remove the circumstances which have led to this
deplorable outbreak of violence. Moreover, we must recog
nize that in addition to imposing suffering on the people in
the countries concerned, such outbreaks seriously endanger
the task undertaken by the United Nations special representative.

51. The task with which the Secretary-General and his
special representative were entrusted, in particular in
4

operative paragraph 3 Of resolution 242 (1967), is immense
and difficult-1 am tempted to say almost beyond description, I therefore wish to take this opportunity to emphasize
the Danish Government’s full confidence in our esteemed
Secretary-General and in his special representative,
Mr. Jarring, and our full support for their efforts, whose
importance cannot be overestimated.

actions that have brought more suffering and misery to the
Jordan valley. Furthermore, all Israel troops should return
forthwith to their positions on the west bank of the Jordan
River.
57. But we may go beyond this and take one more step.
The Secretary-General’s report stated the following in
reference to the events that have brought us here tonight:

52. In this connexion let me say that I feel convinced that
my Government will support the Secretary-General in such
endeavours as he may find it opportune to take for the
strengthening of United Nations supervision in the area. We
do expect that all parties will co-operate fully with the
authorities of the United Nations.

“Unfortunately, little or no verified information on
these developments has been available to the SecretaryGeneral because no United Nations observers are
deployed in the Israel-Jordan sector as has been reported
previously to the Council.” [S/793O/Add. 64, para. 2.1

53. If lasting solutions are to be achieved now it will, in
our view, be only through the mission of the special
representative of the Secretary-General. Therefore, in bur
opinion it is the duty of all members of this Council to
support that mission; indeed that is the duty of all Members
of the United Nations. But above all it is the duty of the
parties concerned to co-operate in good faith with the
special representative, to extend to him all the goodwill to
which he is entitled and to do nothing which may
jeopardize his mission, which is so vitally important to the
peace and well-being of all the nations and peoples of the
Middle East. Therefore, in an otherwise dark and gloomy
situation one might perhaps be allowed to see a small
glimmer of hope in the fact that the representatives of
Israel and Jordan in addressing the Council today both
reaffirmed their positive attitude to the continued mission
of Mr. Jarring,

It is the firm belief of my delegation that, in taking steps to
cope with the present situation in the Middle East, the
Council should take into consideration the point made by
the Secretary-General, giving due attention to the need for
the deployment of United Nations observers in the IsraelJordan sector of the cease-fireline,
58. I cannot emphasize sufficiently what we consider to
be the vital condition for any future progress towards peace
in the Middle East, and that is the maintenance of the
cease-fire. The cease-fire is the fragile thread on which
depend all hopes for a settlement of the Middle East
question. Let us resolve here tonight to strengthen that
thread.
59. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) [translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to thank
you for acting so promptly today to convene these urgent
meetings of the Security Council following upon the very
serious events that have taken place in the troubled land of
Palestine.

54. Mr, DE CARVALHO SILO3 (Brazil): Inasmuch as this
is the first time that I have taken the floor since the arrival
of the new representative of the Soviet Union in the
Council, allow me, Mr. President, to convey to Ambassador
Malik the warm welcome of the Brazilian delegation.

60. Just as, not long ago, my Govermnent and my
delegation deplored the actions and incidents in the
Israel-Jordan’ area, today we deplore the violation of the
cease-fire and the operations carried out in Jordanian
territory east of the Jordan. In a region which has recently
known the turmoil of war and whose wounds from that last
conflict have not yet healed, these new events add a
disturbing and frightening note to an already tense and
precarious situation. We know that violence cannot solve
any of the basic problems of that or any other area; we
cannot therefore condone such acts of violence; still less
can we condone them as retaliatory measures. And if, as
often happens, violence gives rise to renewed violence,
events can but add to the many complex problems that
already exist.

55. My delegation heard with a sense of shock and anxiety
the news of the military bperations carried out today by
Israel forces on the east bank of the Jordan River. On past
occasions I have stated the view that we in this Council
cannot condone the use of force under any form whatsoever. If the use of force is to be deplored in any
circumstance, it must really be condemned in the case of
the Middle East, where peace depends on a precarious
cease-fire. It has been equally with grave concern that we
have been following the series of armed attacks launched
from Jordanian territory through and beyond the cease-fire
line, on the west bank of the Jordan River, now occupied
by Israel forces. Both kinds of action constitute an
unmistakable violation of the cease-fire resolutions adopted
by the Security Council, and both kinds of action worsen
the grave situation in the Middle East and jeopardize the
prospects for peace which have been opened up by Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

61. We all know, moreover, that if we do not take swift
and effective action these latest hostilities may be followed
by others and still others, which could have direct and
indirect consequences not only for the States involved in
the conflict of June 1967, but for other states as well. To
complete this distressing picture I may add that the
incidents have occurred precisely at the moment when, in
ejtecution of resolution 242 (1967) adopted unanimously
by the Security Council on 22 November 1967, the special
representative of the Secreta1y-Genera.l is patiently and

56. We are not here to review history or to passjudgement
on its behalf; we are here to act and to act promptly. My
delegation feels that we should deplore the recent violations
of the cease-fire and that both partics should be warned
against any ,repetition of the regrettable and dangerous
5

sector, relating to terrorist activities on the Israel side and
threats of retaliatory action on its part.” [Ibid.]

untiringly seeking ways and means likely to lead ultimately
to appeasement in the Middle East, a region that has
already taken so much punishment through destruction,
loss of life and decades of human suffering.

But because no United Nations observers have been
deployed in the Israel-Jordan sector, little verified information on these developments has been made available,

62. In view of the bloody events that have just taken
place, we have an absolute and unavoidable duty here and
now to restore the stutus qua. We know of course that the
situation was itself only temporary, but it did at least allow
the Secretary-General’s special representative to carry on
with his task and make the first move towards a just and
therefore stable peace, which is the common aim of us all.

67. There is no doubt, however, that tension has been
building up in the Jordan valley area for some time, The
report of General Bull has confirmed the worst fears
contained in the letter of the representative of Jordan of 19
March 1968, (S/8478/ addressed to the President of the
Council, warning that an armed attack was imminent
against his country.

63. We are confronted with some very serious facts, and
we have before us the basic information we need for
determining their exact nature. This information is to be
found in the letters signed by the representatives of Jordan
and Israel and in the explanatory statements which those
delegations have made to the Council in the course of
today. We have also the supplemental information submitted to us by the Secretary-General, and it is to his report
that I particularly wish to refer; I should like to quote
paragraph 2:

68. On a number of occasions my delegation has in the
Security Council stated its opposition to the doctrine of
retaliation. We believe that no Government, even under
extreme provocation, is justified in taking the law into its
own hands. Retaliation
brings in its train counterretaliation, thus setting in motion a vicious circle of crisis
and bloodshed. My delegation therefore strongly feels that
the mass attack launched by Israel in the name of
retaliation calls for censure, as it has been censured by all :
members of the Council who spoke before me,

“In recent days there have been indications from
various sources of increasing tension in the Israel-Jordan
sector, relating to terrorist activities on the Israel side and
threats of retaliatory action on its part, There have also
been reports of an unusual build-up of Israel military
force in the Jordan valley area. Unfortunately, little or no
verified information on these developments has be&
available to the Secretary-General because no United
Nations observer? are deployed in the Israel-Jordan sector
as has been reported previously to the Council.” (1bid.j

69. In the present circumstances, the first order of
business before the Council is obviously to arrange for a
return to normality-at least, such normality as the resolutions of the Council have sought-to establish since June
1967. Inasmuch as there are no United Nations observersin
the Israel-Jordan sector, it seems to my delegation that the
United Nations should establish its presence in that sector
without further delay,

64. My delegation trusts that at this anxious time, when
international peace and security are in the balance, and
bearing in mind the background information just mentioned, the Security Council will act promptly and effectively to ensure that there are no further dangerous
violations of the cease-fire, to secure the implementation of
its unanimous November 1967 resolution, back up the
peace-making activities of the Secretary-General and his
special representative, and to create an atmosphere conducive to the attainment of the peace so badly needed in
the Middle East.

j
j
;
/
j

70. As Members of the United Nations, both Israel and i
Jordan have firmly committed themselves to the principles i
of the Charter which call upon all Member States to settle ’
their differences bv nebceful means and to refrain from the
threat or use of f&ie against the territorial integrity and
political independence of any State.
71. It is the hope of my delegation that in the aftermath
of a terrible war steps will be taken to resolve the basic
issues that have for so long embittered Arab-Israel relations.
More than ever before, enmity must give way to conciliation and magnanimity so that the efforts of the special
representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jarring, may be
pressed forward in a climate conducive to a peaceful
settlement.

65. These, Mr. President, are preliminary views, and my
delegation may have occasion to speak again later in the
debate.
66. Mr. LIU Chieh (China): The case which now confronts
the Council is by no means unique in the history of the
Middle East. With varying details, this has happened many
times during the past twenty years. It usually starts with
terrorist raids from one side and is followed by retaliatory
action from the other, involving the deployment of regular
troops and heavy armaments and aircraft, The magnitude of
the reprisal is often out of all proportion to the nature of
the provocation. The Chief of Staff of UNTSO, Lieutenant-General Odd Bull, has reported that:

72. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I haveno
further speakers on my list at present. From consuliations I
have held, it appears that certain members of the Council
would like to suspend the meeting for one hour. If there is
no objection, I should like to ask the opinion of the
Council on this suggestion.
73. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I have
no objection to a one-hour suspension if it would servea
constructive purpose tonight. However, I am advisedby the
Secretariat that there are three representatives who would
like to speak tomorrow-the
representatives of Jordan,

“In recent days there have been indications from
various sources of increasing tension in the Israel-Jordan
6

/
1
1
i
E
,
1
1
:
I
I

Syria and Israel. If this is indeed the case, then I wonder
what purpose would be served by our suspending tonight
for an hour when we must resume our meeting tomorrow
to hear the representatives who have requested to speak.
74. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): Since
there is an objection to the one-hour suspension which had
been requested, I shall now pur before the Council the
second suggestion that was made to me-namely, to adjourn
this meeting until 11.30 tomorrow morning.
75,

Mr,

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (trurzslated from
You have made a proposal, Mr. President, and if I
understood correctly, the representative of the United
States did not express a specific objection to the suspension
of the meeting, My deiegation feels, in view of the gravity
of the situation, that consultations lasting one hour, even if
they did not permit us to reach a conclusion, could at all
events enable the Council to make worthwhile progress in
its work, I have just been informed, moreover, that two of
the three speakers mentioned by the representative of the
United States would not insist on speaking. Therefore, in so
far as the Council wishes to show itself equal to its
responsibilities-and I am convinced that such is the feeling
of all members of the Council-my delegation would gladly
accept the first alternative which you put before the
Council, namely to suspend the meeting for one hour.
French):

76. The PRESIDENT (translated fi’om French): I should
like to put a queStion to the representative of the United

States. Since the representative of Algeria considers that his
objection was not a specific one, I should like to ask him
whether he is prepared to withdraw it.
77. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Having
“non-objected”, I have really nothing to withdraw, I have
no objection, as I said, to consulting at any time if it will
forward the work of the Council. I had assumed that those
who made the proposal were not aware, as I was, that there
was a speakers’ list for tomorrow. If it is the desire of the
Council to recessnow for consultations for an hour, or for
any other period of time, I shall be here for those
consultations.
78. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Since
there is no further objection to the first proposal, I shall
now suspend the meeting for one hour.
The meeting wns suspended at II pm; it was resumed on
Friday, 22 March, at 12.35 a.m

79. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with consultations we have held and if there is no objection, I propose
that we adjourn the debate now and resume it at 12 noon
today.

The meeting rose on Fndny, 22 AIarch, nt 12.40 a.m.

-I-

F

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publicationr.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
q nd distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Le.5 publicotionr
der
dCpositoires
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section

KAK

COMO

llOIlYL1MTb

CONSEGUIR

LES PUBLICATIONS

Nations
Unier
sont
entier.
Informez-vous
der ventes, New York

MBAAHMR

PUBLICACIONES

DES NATIONS
en

in U.N.

dans
les libroiries
et les ogences
de votre libroirie
ov odressez-vous
6:

ou Gen&e.

OPrAHH3AUHH

OSbE/JkIHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de 10s Nociones
Unidor
estcin
en todas
partes del mundo.
Consulte
q IU librero
Ventar,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

vente

qupris

UNIES

HAYMti

UNIDAS

en venta en librerior
y corai
distribuidoros
o dirijese
o: Nociones
Unidas,
Secci6n

Price: $U,S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

35951-February

1971-2,100

I
