United Nations

S/PV.4920

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4920

th meeting
Wednesday, 3 March 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Aho-Glele
Mr. Valle
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 19 February 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2004/126)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-25822 (E)

*0425822*

S/PV.4920

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Wang Guangya, Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of February 2004. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Wang
Guangya for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 19 February 2004 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2004/126)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Ireland, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Lord Paddy Ashdown,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Lord Ashdown to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/126, containing a letter dated 19
February 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
twenty-fifth report of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Secretary-General.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Lord Paddy Ashdown, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Lord Ashdown.
Lord Ashdown: Thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing me once again to address the Security
Council. I hope you will not think it an abuse of that
privilege if I draw very brief attention to the sombre
thought that, soon before this meeting, the mortal
remains of President Trajkovski of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and his delegation left Sarajevo
on their last journey home to Macedonia. I wish to take
this opportunity, on behalf of the international

S/PV.4920

community — and perhaps my Bosnian friends in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well — to mark that
sombre occasion, and to pass on our condolences and
our prayers to his family and to the people of
Macedonia on this terrible loss.
I am pleased once again to have the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am particularly pleased to
be doing so alongside my colleague the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister, Adnan
Terzic. I think the innovation of the pair of us
appearing before the Council exemplifies the stage
which Bosnia and Herzegovina has now reached, in
which the international community’s presence in the
country needs to work in increasingly close partnership
with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s elected authorities. I
am happy to confirm that that partnership — both
professional and personal — between myself and Prime
Minister Terzic is close and, in my view, very
constructive. It is therefore a pleasure to see him here
today.
It is almost six months since I last spoke to the
Council. It has been a busy period, and I apologize if
my report to the Secretary-General is a little more
lengthy than I might have wished it to be. But the
period has been extremely busy. In partnership with the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, we have notched
up some real achievements, above all in the fields of
defence, intelligence reform, customs and indirect tax
reform, to which I shall return in a moment.
Crucially, Bosnia and Herzegovina now has two
clear goals to aim for: two clear goals that are within
sight, if it keeps up and indeed steps up the pace of
reform. In the past six months, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) has made it clear that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be eligible to join the
Partnership for Peace (PFP) if a number of clear
conditions relating both to defence reform and to
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) are met. Also in the
last six months, the European Commission has, in its
feasibility study published last November, set 16 clear
and practical areas in which progress needs to be made
in order for Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the next
historic step towards Europe and begin negotiations for
a Stabilization and Association Agreement.
the

Together, these twin objectives — the PFP and
start of negotiations on stabilization and

association — provide a key context in which reform
can take place and an incentive for authorities at every
level to make progress.
The key point, of course, is that both the
European Union and NATO want to see clear, hard
evidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina is making the
necessary reforms to integrate into Euro-Atlantic
structures of its own accord. These reforms cannot
simply be imposed by me using my Bonn powers; they
cannot be imposed by outsiders. Bosnia and
Herzegovina cannot join the European Union or NATO
by fiat of the High Representative; if it could, that
might make life simpler for both the Prime Minister
and myself, but it cannot, and that is only proper. If it
is to join those two structures, it must do so by its own
decision and through its own actions, not through mine.
Time is very short for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the conditions set for membership in the PFP and
to qualify for the launch of a Stabilization and
Association Agreement. NATO has made it clear that it
hopes Bosnia and Herzegovina will be ready for PFP
membership in time for NATO’s summit in Istanbul in
June this year. If that were to happen, nothing would be
more certain to assure every citizen in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that there would be no future war. The
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have set
themselves the target of making sufficient progress on
the European Commission’s parallel 16 key points by
the end of June. Indeed, Prime Minister Terzic has said
that he hopes to do so by the end of May.
Now, these are extremely ambitious targets, but
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs ambitious targets. I
commend the Prime Minister for having set them, and I
especially commend the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government for having, entirely on its own behalf,
negotiated with the European Union 45 key actions that
take them through those gates into the negotiation
process. These constitute our joint action programme.
Let me underline the fact that they were initiated not by
the High Representative but by the Council of
Ministers, under Adnan Terzic’s leadership.
I very much hope these can be met. However, I
must say, since it is my duty to report frankly, that the
rate of reform so far this year is too slow to achieve
those targets. That is not to say that they will not be
achieved, but it is to say that we will need to accelerate
considerably if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to clear
these two crucial historic hurdles. In saying that, I do

3

S/PV.4920

not doubt the personal commitment of Prime Minister
Terzic and that of — at least — most of his colleagues
on the Council of Ministers. I believe that they are
genuinely and powerfully committed to the prospect of
PFP membership and the next stage of European Union
integration this year.
There has also been a change, which I would wish
to mark: the new collegial atmosphere that exists
within the Council of Ministers is a personal
achievement of Prime Minister Terzic, and one for
which I pay him tribute. This has helped enormously in
dealing with the more thorny and difficult issues
through the Bosnia and Herzegovina domestic
institutions rather than at the hands of outsiders. Those
issues, which held up many of his predecessors, have
now been pushed forward.
Nevertheless, the reform process remains
hamstrung, in part by an overburdened agenda, and
sometimes by residual obstructionism or, at best,
lethargy on the part of the entities — as well as, let us
recognize, by the dysfunctional aspects of the Dayton
structures.
These burdens can be overcome and I hope they
will be overcome; but they can only be overcome by a
ruthless focus on the reform agenda. All too often,
recently, this has been subject to the distractions of
inter-coalition or intra-party tensions within Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Bosnia and Herzegovina, at this
crucial and historic moment, simply does not have time
to waste on that kind of activity.
I fear, however, that the process is likely to be
somewhat exacerbated in the coming months, as
Bosnia and Herzegovina slips into election mode prior
to the municipal elections of October 2004. There is
already some evidence that this period will not be
characterized by a renewed focus on reforms, but by a
return to the old practices of competitive claims of
victimization, which offer the nationalist parties in
particular the best opportunity for filling their ballot
box.
These are only worries. Let me sum up simply by
saying that, thanks in very large measure to the high
degree of statesmanship and leadership evidenced
within the Bosnia and Herzegovina political
community, 2003 was a remarkable year of progress in
the reforms that Bosnia and Herzegovina needs. It
remains to be seen whether the same pace can be
matched in the year ahead. I hope so. We stand ready to

4

assist to make it so, and I remain convinced that the
Prime Minister is committed to ensuring that it will be
so.
Allow me now, if I may, to briefly recap some of
the main developments in the period covered by my
latest report to the Secretary-General, that is, from 1
September to 31 December 2003. This will be the basis
for my introduction, before giving my assessment of
prospects for the months ahead.
Our overarching objective, of course, remains
exactly as it was when I took up my post 18 months
ago: to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
peaceful, viable State on course to European
integration. Since I was here last, in October,
substantial progress has been made in several key
areas, based on the work of the four reform
commissions launched last year.
As members may recall, the first commission I
established focused on indirect taxation and customs
reform. The process of setting up and establishing the
State-level indirect tax authority and establishing a
value added tax has already begun. That organization is
far from fully operational at this point, but once it is, it
will go a long way towards providing Bosnia and
Herzegovina with a reliable revenue stream and an
instrument with which to crack down on the fraud and
corruption to which the current fractured and
dysfunctional arrangements are very prone. Once this
is fully established, Bosnia will have, for the first time
in its post-war history, a guaranteed source of income
to the State treasury, based on a value added tax that is
levied nationally.
As the Council knows, a major breakthrough was
achieved last September in the area of defence. I again
pay tribute to the statesmanship of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina
authorities
who
enabled
that
breakthrough. The Defence Reform Commission,
chaired by former United States Assistant Secretary of
Defense James Locher, reached agreement on the
establishment of State-level command and control over
Bosnia’s armed forces, thus using Dayton to amend
Dayton. This includes the creation of a single Statelevel defence ministry, a joint chief of staff, and
collective — not individual — command authority
vested at the State level in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency. These are huge steps forward that, when
implemented, will go a long way towards helping
Bosnia and Herzegovina qualify for the PFP. Progress

S/PV.4920

on this scale simply would not have been conceivable a
few years ago.

questions, such as the election system and the future of
city municipalities, proved elusive.

But alongside the defence reform, let me bring to
the Council’s attention the fact that for the very first
time, article III, paragraph 5 (a) of annex 4 of the
Dayton Agreement, which allows entities to pass
competencies to the State, has been used. For the first
time, Dayton is being reformed by the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the construct of Dayton itself.

At the end of January — something like a year
after the process started — I therefore decided that it
would be appropriate to use my powers to impose, as it
were the keystone in the bridge of the draft statute. My
Senior Deputy, Mr. Werner Wnendt, was appointed as
my Special Envoy to Mostar, and we have established a
small implementation team down in Mostar. I am
happy to report to the Council that, thus far, the new
statute is proceeding on track, and the process of
reunifying at last the great city of Mostar is a reality.
The next key step will be taken on 15 March.

Likewise, on intelligence reform, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has taken a difficult yet decisive step
towards creating a unified State-level intelligence and
security agency, in place of the dysfunctional, corrupt,
fractured and deeply scandalous entity-based
intelligence services. I had to submit a draft law
developed by our expert Commission directly to the
Bosnian and Herzegovina Parliament. But I am pleased
to announce that just last week the lower house of the
Parliament adopted in full a bill establishing that
agency. And we expect the upper house to complete the
process tomorrow.
Another key challenge for us has been the so far
intractable issue of the divided and tragic city of
Mostar and the attempt to provide that city with a
single, permanent statute that will serve the interests of
all its citizens. Divided cities breed resentment and
tension. There were spreading far wider than the city of
Mostar itself. We were clear — as were my colleagues
on the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council — that we could not just allow the issue of
Mostar to sit there and fester. Intractable though the
problems of that city have proved, it was important for
the sake of the future stability and security of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that this most intractable of all the
country’s problems should be tackled and solved.
Last year, a commission was formed by the local
authorities to reform the city of Mostar. Unfortunately,
it failed to make anything but the most minimal
progress. I therefore decided to establish a further
commission in the latter part of last year; it is chaired
very skilfully by Mr. Norbert Winterstein, a former
German mayor, and comprises representatives of the
citizens of Mostar themselves. Mostar citizens made up
99 per cent of the Mostar Commission, and that is as it
should be. The Commission reached agreement on a
wide range of issues — perhaps 90 per cent of the key
issues confronting the reunification of Mostar. But
agreement on a couple of important outstanding

The work of the key reform commissions — on
indirect tax policy, defence, intelligence and Mostar —
has gone well. The commissions are a means to bring
the key players together, under international
community chairmanship, in a relatively non-political,
low-key way. They have more than proved their worth
as a way of finding middle ground among the key
parties and achieving agreements in areas many had
thought impossible.
In the meantime, of course, reform continues in
other areas. The rule of law remains right at the top of
our list of priorities. We are working hard to ensure
that a single, State-level High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council is in place by the end of this
month. It will serve as the foundation for a new
Bosnian and Herzegovina judiciary that is entirely
independent and capable of meeting the highest
European and international standards.
At this point, I must tell the Council that I am
worried about certain moves in Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the moment — partly political and
partly from newspapers — whose aim, it seems to me,
is to undermine the independence of the judiciary. It is
important that we make it clear that that is an issue
upon which there can be no compromise.
The Office of the High Representative has also
continued to oversee the creation of a State information
and protection agency with enforcement powers and
abilities to address money-laundering and other
organized crime. Five of the six main laws on the
agency have now been passed by the Council of
Ministers and sent to Parliament — a welcome sign,
again, of local ownership.

5

S/PV.4920

I am happy to report that since I was last at the
Council, we have seen real, practical progress in
tackling the networks of organized crime that have for
far too long held Bosnia and Herzegovina to ransom.
Almost as we speak, the main defendant in what is
probably the biggest single human trafficking case in
the country’s history has been pleading guilty before
the newly established State Court. More recently, the
one-time Croat member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Ante Jelavic, who was removed by
one of my predecessors, is now in a Sarajevo jail
awaiting trial before the State Court on serious
corruption charges. We are beginning to show that even
the highest in the land must be subject to the rule of
law and may be brought to account before the courts
for crimes that may have been committed in the past.
At the same time, we are continuing our efforts to
crack down on the support networks of indicted war
criminals. On 9 February, in liaison with the
Stabilization Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR)
and the United States Government, I enacted the
necessary legal orders to freeze the bank accounts of
10 individuals supporting Mr. Karadzic and removed
several of them from office, including the VicePresident of the ruling party in the Republika Srpska,
the Serb Democratic Party. That followed similar steps
which we took in March and July last year. I am
determined to make life as difficult as possible for the
indictees who are on the run and for those who support
them, including by tackling the networks that support
those indictees and keep them from justice.
We are also paving the way towards establishing
a domestic capacity to try and prosecute war criminals.
As the Council knows, shortly after I last addressed the
Security Council with Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, we organized a donors conference hosted
with the ICTY in The Hague, which resulted in pledges
amounting to some €16 million to set up a domestic
capacity to try war criminals. My Senior Deputy High
Representative, Bernard Fassier, is now working on the
practical details of establishing a chamber as rapidly as
possible. We hope that chamber will be fully
established by no later than the end of this year.
At the same time, we continue to press the
Republika Srpska authorities to do their part in
establishing exactly what happened at Srebrenica. Last
week, the Srebrenica Commission, created by the
Republika Srpska Government in December upon our

6

urging, was in the process of gathering information on
the massacres committed there in 1995, it is committed
to providing a final report. The Republika Srpska
Government recently paid the first half of its 4 million
konvertibilna marka commitment to the SrebrenicaPotocari Foundation to compensate the families of the
missing persons there for having denied them
information about what happened to their loved ones.
In December, I wrote to the Republika Srpska
President and Prime Minister, stating that any attempt
to obstruct the work of the established Commission
would be regarded as a clear effort to obstruct the rule
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Republika
Srpska authorities owe it to the families of those who
died in Srebrenica to do all in their power to ensure
that the facts are brought to light and that the guilty are
brought to justice. We intend to ensure that they are
held to that.
My main worry — if you like, the source of my
nightmares — remains the economy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Frankly, I have little fear of a return to
ethnic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I do not
think that is the mood of the people. But I worry that if
Bosnia and Herzegovina — a country where in the
region of 50 per cent of citizens live close to or below
the official threshold of poverty — continues in a
parlous economic state or deteriorates further, that
could have implications for the social stability of the
country. The bottom line is that Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to wrestle not just with the
bitter legacy of wartime intolerance but also with its
communist past and its cumbersome Dayton structures
as well. Those three factors combine to make a very
heavy burden on those who wish to see reform,
especially on the economic front.
All that said, some truly significant successes on
the economic front have been achieved over the last six
months, which provide optimism that a brighter
economic future stands within Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s reach, if not yet within its grasp.
As I described, we are concentrating on getting
the indirect taxation authority up and running and the
introduction of a value added tax. Here, I think, things
are moving, but not yet fast enough. A key objective in
stimulating much-needed job creation is to improve the
business environment by introducing a legal and
administrative framework that encourages foreign and
domestic entrepreneurs to invest in Bosnia and

S/PV.4920

Herzegovina. Closely aligned to a number of the
European Commission feasibility study requirements,
this process involves the close cooperation of the
Government, the legislative bodies and the
international community in such areas as business
registration,
accounting,
corporate
governance,
auditing standards and uniform contracts for law, to
mention just a few.
The second phase of the so-called bulldozer
initiative to sweep away some of the restraints to
business has been launched. The innovative programme
is designed to help Bosnia and Herzegovina’s business
community tear down roadblocks and cut through as
much red tape as possible so as to free up the economy
for growth and job creation. It also represents the first
real example of civil society — in this case the
business community — finding its voice in a direct
dialogue with Government.
In the second stage of the bulldozer reform, 50
further reforms have been proposed, with local
entrepreneurs doing the lion's share of the work
lobbying the Government for their acceptance. We
hope to help launch a third and final stage next month,
under full local ownership.
We are also launching a major drive to coordinate
efforts to resolve the problem of internal debt, which
represents a serious threat to the economy and will, I
think, occupy much of our attention in the months
ahead. Taken together, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
wartime debts — including frozen hard currency
deposits, budgetary arrears and legitimate claims for
war damages — amount to, approximately, a massive
€4 billion. The last country that had to cope with
wartime debts of that order was probably the Weimar
Republic, Germany.
We, together with the International Monetary
Fund and local government agencies, are preparing a
strategy to reduce obligations to sustainable levels,
while at the same time respecting the basic rights of
war restitution claimants. I should underline to the
Council, however, that this process is likely to prove
exceptionally painful, very difficult and, politically,
highly contentious in the months ahead.
Other necessary actions include identifying and
removing obstacles to the privatization process —
which came to a virtual standstill earlier this year — as
well as stimulating inward investment and further job
creation.

The lack of jobs is regularly cited as a reason why
many refugees still have not returned to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Despite that situation, however, on the
whole the story of refugee return in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been a remarkably positive one.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the total number of
registered returns had risen to nearly 1 million people
by the end of last year – a miraculous total, following
such a terrible war. Included in that figure were some
430,000 — almost half a million — so-called minority
returns. Meanwhile, the countrywide property
repossession rate rose to more than 90 per cent.
While a few municipalities fell short, those
failures were due, in our view, more to bureaucratic
difficulties than to political or ethnic obstruction —
which is in itself
another promising sign. The
finalization of the property law implementation process
in all Bosnia and Herzegovina municipalities is
expected in the next few months. These are clearly
encouraging developments, beyond what many would
have thought possible only a few years ago.
The main benchmarks for the transfer to domestic
authorities of all annex VII responsibilities have now
been met. At the end of last year, therefore, I was able
to close down the High Representative’s Refugee and
Return Task Force — a major department of the
Office — on schedule, with a complete handover of
duties to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of
Human Rights and Refugees. We have retained a small
annex VII Verification Unit to monitor and assist the
transfer process, as necessary.
That said, however, the story of refugee returns is
as yet far from finished. An estimated 350,000 refugees
and displaced persons have not yet returned to their
pre-war homes, although many among them still
express the desire to do so. While the role of the Office
of the High Representative in this process has thus
altered from one of driving forward refugee return to
one of monitoring the local authorities' efforts, I must
make clear to the Council that this is not an area which
the international community can afford to ignore. We
need to keep a close eye on it and to be ready to
intervene as necessary — particularly since there are
some early signs that some of the things that should
have been done since the handover remain, as yet,
uncompleted.

7

S/PV.4920

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, cooperation within
the international community remains close and
effective. We are operating together well as a team. But
I repeat that the pace of reform must be accelerated.
It was therefore a particular shock to us all to
when our colleague and my close friend, Sven
Frederiksen, the first European Union Police Mission
(EUPM) Police Commissioner, died suddenly in
Sarajevo earlier this year. Sven was a dedicated
policeman in the finest international tradition, and a
fine public servant. He was well known, of course, to
the United Nations, which he served so effectively in a
number of capacities. He will be — he is being —
sorely missed, and I know the Council will join with
me in paying him tribute today.
The work of the EUPM, however, goes on, just as
I know Sven would have wanted it to. The new
Commissioner, Kevin Carty from Ireland, will take up
his post in the next few weeks, and we look forward to
welcoming him, and he and his mission will continue
to have my full and total support.
One of the more worrying problems in the past
six months relevant to policing issues — one that will
command the new Commissioner's attention, as it is,
indeed, commanding mine — is the growing number of
challenges to the United Nations-led police
certification processes within the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
For over a year now I have been in contact with
the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and Mr. Guéhenno in order to try
to identify a solution to the challenges of police
officers to the decisions of the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which wound up at the end of 2002.
There are currently more than 150 non-certified police
officers who have asked the courts to assess the
legality of their employer's decision to dismiss them on
the grounds that they had not been certified under the
IPTF process.
Even though most of those proceedings are
pending, in January the first non-certified police officer
dismissed under ITPF was reinstated following an
order from a domestic court. The situation is
continuing to deteriorate, as the Human Rights
Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina has now decided
that it is competent to examine whether such dismissals

8

were carried out in accordance with the provisions of
the European Convention on Human Rights.
Needless to say, this is a serious matter. The
United Nations will want to protect the Organization’s
valuable legacy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
United Nations de-certification process weeded out
police officers whose past, particularly during the war,
disqualified them from remaining in the police. If we
are to ensure that the past does not return to that tragic
country, that process cannot be allowed to unravel, and
United Nations decisions in this matter must prevail
and continue to stand.
This is a complex legal issue. The problem stems
mainly from the fact that there was a failure to
transpose Security Council resolutions into local law.
The laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina regulating the
dismissal of police officers need to be amended.
We will need the assistance of the members of the
Security Council to make this happen and to ensure
that the legacy of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is preserved. I am happy to report to the
Council that during my meeting with DPKO yesterday,
officials recognized the seriousness of this matter and
made proposals to resolve it. They believe these will
help clarify that complex, but potentially very
damaging matter, and ensure that domestic courts, as
well as other authorities involved, are left in no doubt
as to the scope and the nature of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's international obligations to implement
IPTF decisions.
I would like to make a few remarks in closing. I
hope it is clear from what I have said that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is continuing steadily but surely to make
progress — towards a return to normality, towards
becoming a modern European country and towards
taking the governance of its affairs into its own hands.
It is now more than eight years since the war
ended. Bosnia and Herzegovina has long since slipped
from the headlines. But in its own small way, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is, I believe, on the threshold of
becoming a genuine success story: an example of how
it is possible to pick up the pieces, even after such a
terrible war, and to work together — the international
community and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities — towards a brighter future.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is, I believe, on its way
to becoming one of the modern world’s more

S/PV.4920

successful exercises in peace stabilization, thanks to
the steady, generous commitment of the international
community and, above all, to the ordinary people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who just want to return to
peaceful lives and a decent future for their children.
They, in my view, are the real heroes of this.
The biggest danger now to that future, it seems to
me, is a lack of confidence — a lack of confidence on
the part of some of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities that they really can make their country, one
day, a member of NATO and of the EU. That lack of
confidence does not extend to the Prime Minister or the
Council of Ministers, but it does to others, and perhaps,
if I may say it, there is also a lack of confidence on the
part of some in the international community that this
sort of lasting success can be achieved in a country
with such a history.
My appeal to the Council today is a simple one:
stick with the job and finish it. Maintain that support,
maintain the Council’s commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, even in the face of competing issues
elsewhere in the world. If the Council does so, then I
have every confidence that a much brighter future
awaits that small but important European country than
its tragic past might a few years ago have allowed us to
imagine was even possible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Lord
Ashdown for his very interesting briefing.
I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno.
Mr. Guéhenno: I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for giving me this opportunity to express full
support for what the High Representative just said,
specifically with respect to ongoing efforts by former
police officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
reinstated by the courts. Those police officers had been
deemed unsuitable to serve in the police force of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by the Commissioner of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF).
Let me recall that the Commissioner’s decisions
followed an exhaustive two-year vetting process
undertaken in accordance with the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, resolutions of the Security
Council and the decisions of the Madrid meeting of the
Peace Implementation Council.
It is indeed important to recall that the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina were and remain under an

obligation, which is binding under international law, to
give effect to those decisions.
I would like to take this opportunity to confirm
that the United Nations Secretariat very much shares
Lord Ashdown’s view on the political importance of
the challenges to the outcomes of the vetting process.
We also firmly endorse his view on the need for an
early solution.
To that end, while the United Nations no longer
has a mandate to act in the area of police reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we have sought to provide
every form of assistance to Lord Ashdown since he
first brought those challenges to our attention last year.
Unfortunately, neither our support nor the actions
of the High Representative have been sufficient so far
to resolve that question. The courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as we were just reminded, have ordered
the reinstatement of at least one former officer deemed
unsuitable to serve the people of that country.
As a result, and at the request of the High
Representative, legal experts from the United Nations
and international agencies operating in Sarajevo,
including the Office of the High Representative, have
been engaged in discussions to identify a workable
course of action.
The support of the Council will be of critical
importance in reminding the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the High Representative has just said,
of the scope and nature of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
international obligations to implement the IPTF’s
decisions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr.
Guéhenno for his statement.
I now call on the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan
Terzic.
Mr. Terzic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Bosnian; English text provided by the delegation): It is
a great honour for me to have the opportunity to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina on such an
important issue as the twenty-fifth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and at such an important time for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

9

S/PV.4920

Allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you every success in guiding the
work of the Council this month. I would like also, on
behalf of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as well as personally, to thank Lord Ashdown for his
thorough and eloquent briefing and for the kind words
he addressed to my Government and to me.
Finally, I would like to use this opportunity to
express my deepest condolences to the people of
Macedonia on the tragic loss of their President, Mr.
Boris Trajkovski, and of his entourage, who were killed
in an aircraft accident on their way to an investment
conference in Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina. His
devotion to bringing about peace and prosperity in his
country and in the entire region makes him
irreplaceable and our loss even greater.
Bosnia and Herzegovina today is just another
European country well on its way through the process
of transition. We are no longer the focus of the
international community, as we were several years ago.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a positive example of how
intervention by the international community can be
effective and of how a post-conflict country can
become an active participant in the process of regional
stabilization.
Considerable effort and a great deal of
coordination were required on part of the local
authorities and international representatives in order to
achieve this kind of success. I daresay that we all are
now close to the finish line. Our ultimate goal is, as
stated in the report of the High Representative,
ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina is put
irreversibly on the road to statehood and the European
Union — that is, Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of the
European and Euro-Atlantic integration processes. I
therefore call upon the Council to continue its support
for this joint project.
On a positive note, I have come from Sarajevo to
assure the Council that my Government is not merely
paying lip service to its determination for reform, but
that we are actively, on a daily basis, taking steps that
prove our determination and commitment to reform.
With this in mind, I am here to assure the Council that
we will continue with the entire process of reform,
especially with economic reform, democratic
institution-building, and establishing the rule of law.

10

Bosnia and Herzegovina has gone far beyond the
early stages of its European journey. The positive
assessment of the feasibility study carried out by the
European Commission represents much-needed
encouragement for us, and it acknowledges the results
achieved so far. At the same time, the report requires
that we show substantial progress in 16 areas
recognized by the European Commission as being
crucial. We are determined to show the required
progress by June this year. In order to do so, we have
already adopted and started implementing the action
plan, which involves the adoption of 48 new laws and
the establishment of 25 new institutions at the State
level. We are determined to begin negotiations for the
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union this year.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has already started to
work on the outlined priorities. We have adopted the
Law on Defence, which provides for establishment of
the Ministry of Defence at the State level and for full
civilian control over the armed forces. That was the
key precondition for our joining the Partnership for
Peace, which we expect to do at the forthcoming
meeting in Istanbul in June this year. We have also
started to enforce the Law on Indirect Taxation, which
unifies the three formerly existing customs departments
and introduces a value-added tax. Let me also mention
the set of six laws in the area of public security, which
will establish the State Information and Protection
Agency (SIPA) as a modern, State-level police task
force. The Law on Intelligence and Security Agencies,
whose ratio legis is to put this sector, too, under Statelevel control, is in the final phases of its adoption.
The document entitled “Development Strategy of
Bosnia-Herzegovina
(PRSP-Poverty
Reduction
Strategy Paper)”, prepared entirely by local experts and
recently completed, enables us to make long-term
development plans for the first time ever. We are
determined to accomplish the goals envisaged in that
document, thereby reducing the poverty rate in the
country. However, the ongoing participation of the
international community is absolutely essential to that
end and we therefore expect the Council’s support.
I must emphasize once again our gratitude to the
international community and to High Representative
Lord Ashdown and his Office for their efforts in
achieving countless results together with us. We have
made huge steps towards forming a true partnership
with one another. I call the Council’s attention to the

S/PV.4920

fact that, until recently, all large-scale projects in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were drafted and often
imposed by the High Representative. In 2003, the High
Representative set up several commissions for the
implementation
of
key
reforms.
Although
representatives of the international community chaired
the commissions, its members were local experts. This
yielded good results. What we want in 2004 is to form
our own commissions to address reform issues and for
the Office of the High Representative to be there to
provide expert assistance and logistics and to ensure
that we comply with European standards. In that way,
responsibility will shift to local factors, which I truly
believe are capable of assuming it. In my opinion, that
is the only reasonable way of assuming responsibilities
for the future and of taking the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina into our own hands.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has a prosperous future
and potential economic stability within the European
Union. We are aware of the fact that regional
cooperation is the key element of success in that
regard. Therefore, we have done a great deal to
promote it recently. Our country chairs the South-East
European Cooperation Process, which involves the
countries of the region. The recent statement issued by
the prime ministers of seven countries of the region at
the investment conference in Mostar last week speaks
in favour of my argument that regional cooperation is
headed in the right direction. The statement underlines
the importance of a stronger and more open
cooperation between the countries of South-East
Europe. The economic progress and prosperity of the
region depend upon its stability, which was lacking in
the past, but which we now continue to improve upon.
That can be done only by strengthening neighbourly
and regional relations. We are constantly making
considerable efforts to that end and are determined to
keep improving our bilateral relations with all the
countries of the region.
Another important event will occur in BosniaHerzegovina this year: the replacement of the forces of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization with a task
force of the European Union. We expect the Council’s
full involvement in defining the precise mandate of the
new task force. The security situation in the country is
very good at the moment and we believe that the threat
of the recurrence of conflict no longer exists.
Therefore, I would like to ask the Council, keeping in
mind the vast experience of this body, to contribute

actively to defining the mandate of the European force
in a way that will contribute to the further stabilization
of the country. Cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the arrest
of persons indicted for war crimes and assistance in
enrolling Bosnia and Herzegovina in Euro-Atlantic
security structures are at the very top of our list of
priorities.
A huge job has been done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to date. Enormous progress has been
made. In order to achieve our common goal — full
political stability and economic sustainability — we
have to put in more hard work and make further joint
efforts, both domestically and internationally. A
detailed and impartial analysis of the current situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as an overview of
remaining tasks, are presented in the High
Representative’s report to the Security Council. While
sharing fully the opinion that urgent measures are
required in key development sectors, I wish to assure
the Council that the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will make whatever efforts are necessary
to fulfil that goal. At the same time, I am convinced
that we will continue to receive the support of our dear
friends on this Council, for it is indispensable to us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the comprehensive introduction to the
report on Bosnia and Herzegovina made by Lord
Ashdown, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
pursuant to resolution 1031 (1995). I also thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for the information he has
furnished. We are particularly pleased to welcome
Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As this is the first meeting at which you are
presiding, Sir, we cannot fail to congratulate you and
our Chinese colleague on his conduct of the Council’s
work last month.
We fully agree with the High Representative to
the effect that only through the full rule of law, the
implementation of economic reform and institutionbuilding will Bosnia and Herzegovina be able to
continue to distance itself from the hardships of the
1990s, when the world witnessed one of the bloodiest

11

S/PV.4920

chapters of recent history. The priorities set by Lord
Ashdown are thus sound and deserve our full support.
The current period has been marked by progress
that deserves our recognition. First, it is particularly
heartening to note that the Refugee and Return Task
Force has completed its work. According to the current
report, its efforts led to the return to their homes of
almost 1 million people and to the implementation of
property laws to the satisfaction of most claimants. It is
commendable that the conclusions reached by the
commissions of experts on indirect tax policy, defence
and intelligence have had tangible results, including the
establishment of the Indirect Taxation Authority and
the promulgation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina law
on defence. We also hope that the pending legislative
procedures will be completed, giving Bosnia and
Herzegovina a modern and professionally-run
intelligence service capable of addressing the issues of
international terrorism and organized crime. As to the
certification of local police, we call on the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respect the prevailing
international legislation.
It is worth noting the imminent establishment in
April of a State-level, multi-ethnic high judicial and
prosecutorial council that will serve as the foundation
for a new system of justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also hope that, in the first quarter of this year, the
50 new economic reforms proposed by the Bulldozer
Committee will be adopted.
Despite the progress achieved, political conflict
persists between the Government and the opposition
and within the governing coalition. There is also the
problem of the reunification and subsequent economic
development of the ethnically divided city of Mostar.
In that regard, Lord Ashdown’s remarks on economic
growth identified one of the key issues for the long
term. There is also a need to improve the
administration of the three public telecommunications
companies.
We must continue to thwart those who seek to
undermine the International Tribunal, to prevent it from
completing its mandate and to provide material support
to persons accused of war criminals have yet to be
arrested. For all these pending tasks it is essential that
there be fuller cooperation of all States and
international and regional organizations, particularly
with respect to arresting all those indicted who are still
at large.

12

The recognized progress in implementation of the
Dayton Agreements distances us from the atrocities in
Srebrenica, Sepa and Banja Luka, to name some towns
and localities that stick in our minds.
Lastly, Chile will continue to lend its assistance.
It has provided police officers to UNMIBH and is now
providing officers and troops from the Chilean army so
that Bosnia and Herzegovina can become a country of
peace and progress.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome to this Chamber
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Adnan Terzic, and we
thank him for articulating the position of his
Government.
We express appreciation to the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord
Ashdown, for the report (S/2004/126, annex), which
gives us a comprehensive picture of the Bosnian
settlement process, as well as for his thorough briefing
on the current phase of implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his further
comments.
We are pleased to note the persistent efforts of the
High Representative and his Office in advancing the
programme of scheduled transformations for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Tangible advances have been
achieved in establishing the competent State bodies for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, first and foremost with
respect to strengthening the supremacy of the rule of
law. Significant progress has been made in such
important areas as refugee return and resolving
property rights matters, which has made it possible to
transfer these issues from the Office of the High
Representative
to
the
jurisdiction
of
local
administrative authorities. In particular, we see the
transfer of a fuller range of responsibilities to the
legally elected representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as the strategic task in the further efforts
to implement the Dayton Agreements.
We also favourably assess the results achieved to
date in reforming the military and other areas to which
the High Representative and the head of Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina alluded today. It is
significant that these results were achieved through
adherence to the foundational Dayton principles.

S/PV.4920

The experience of conducting military reform
prompts us to draw two substantive and interrelated
conclusions.

Bosnian settlement within the specific existing
mechanisms and in close contact with the High
Representative.

First, real advances are possible only on the basis
of a clearly expressed consensus of all of the peoples
comprising Bosnia and Herzegovina. The so-called
Bonn Powers must then act through the High
Representative in exceptional cases and with a
mandatory prior agreement with the members of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
glad to welcome the presence here of the Prime
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan
Terzic. I also wish to thank the High Representative for
his outstanding work in Bosnia and Herzegovina since
he took up his tasks, and in particular for the full report
on what was achieved in the last months of 2003
(S/2004/126, annex). Also, I am grateful for Mr.
Guéhenno’s contribution.

Secondly, the Peace Agreement still remains the
optimal basis for a settlement. Modifications to it are
possible only with the consent of all Bosnian parties.
As we understand, this conclusion is shared by all
members of the Steering Board, and therefore we must
rely on them for preparation of the relevant reports, as
well as on the work of the Security Council in further
advancing the Bosnian settlement process.
Today’s report is totally justified in emphasizing
the challenge of countering organized crime and
corruption in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this context,
we note the need to pay constant attention to the issue
of countering international terrorism, a problem that is
topical for the entire Balkan region.
Like the High Representative, we are concerned
by attempts to review the results of officer certification
for Bosnian law enforcement agencies conducted at the
time of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are prepared to take a constructive
look at the proposals of the High Representative in this
regard. We believe that the Security Council must send
a clear signal to the Bosnian authorities on the
inadmissibility of any attempts to disavow the results
of the work done by the international presences in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that Mr. Terzic will
hear this signal and will help correct the situation.
The Office of the High Representative is quite
right in viewing as one of its key priorities helping to
strengthen the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
with neighbouring countries, especially Croatia and
Serbia and Montenegro. This holds the promise of
establishing a climate of harmony and security in the
Balkans, which in turn will help improve the situation
in those very countries.
Russia will continue to play an active and
constructive role in the process of implementing the
international community’s agreed principles for a

Spain fully supports the statement to be made
later by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.
First of all, my country welcomes the
achievements with regard to establishing the rule of
law described in the report, especially with respect to
the progress toward establishing a single State-level
high judicial and prosecutorial council. This will bring
the country closer to a modern and democratic justice
system, one closer to European standards. I would like
to mention the idea of a setting up a chamber in the
International Criminal Court to deal with war
criminals.
We fully support the donors’ conference
organized by the Office of the High Representative,
and we wish to place on record our recognition of such
an opportune initiative, which will contribute to
establishing justice and will make it possible to
establish the bases of national reconciliation.
Secondly, Spain welcomes the closure of the
Refugee and Return Task Force, as scheduled. This is a
recognition of its successes, especially the volume of
returns and more particularly with respect to the
restoration of property.
Thirdly, we think it is important to recognize the
progress represented by the adoption of the law on
defence. It does not simply fill a lacuna; it introduces a
vital element of parliamentary control over the armed
forces and enables the country to come closer to NATO
guidelines so that Bosnia and Herzegovina may in
future succeed in becoming a member of the
Partnership for Peace. We also welcome the efforts to
establish a State information and protection agency.
While there is still a great deal to be done, we feel that

13

S/PV.4920

the activities of the High Representative have been
decisive in this regard by setting the right course.
Fourthly, Spain wishes to express its concern at
the economic stagnation. Although there has been
progress in this area — such as the establishment of a
single Indirect Taxation Authority and the suppression
of interior customs administrations — obviously much
still remains to be done, above all in terms of the low
level of investments and the minimal general economic
activity, which, together with a worsening social
situation where unemployment is at disturbing levels,
could place the country in an explosive situation in the
medium and long term.
Lastly, we followed carefully the problems that
have arisen concerning revision by local authorities of
police certification, which revision the International
Police Task Force refused.
I want to state our concern about this issue,
because it undermines the authority of the High
Representative and violates international commitments
undertaken by Bosnia and Herzegovina. My country
therefore urges local authorities to take the steps
necessary to put an end to this situation. We voice our
support for the High Representative in that regard.
Spain would thus favour the Security Council
considering the issue and giving the High
Representative its public support.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to start,
Sir, by congratulating you as you begin your
presidency for the month of March. I seize this
opportunity also to commend the Permanent
Representative of China for his brilliant presidency
during the very busy month of February.
Today, we have an opportunity to assess the
remarkable progress accomplished in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past year: in national
reconciliation, in peace-building and in laying the
foundations of a modern State. We welcome Mr. Adnan
Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to the Security Council; we are
particularly honoured by his presence. We take this
opportunity to hail the efforts that have been made and
the commitment shown by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a peace-loving country based on
the rule of law.
I would like to extend our sincere appreciation to
Lord Ashdown, the High Representative for the

14

Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We thank Lord Ashdown for his report
(S/2004/126, annex, enclosure) and for his
commendable efforts to assist the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in this special hour of their history.
I also thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for the
comments he made to the Council this morning. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been a
very important building block of the success that we
have achieved so far.
We wish the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
the very best; we reiterate our confidence in their
ability to build a future of peace and progress. We once
again thank Mr. Terzic for articulating to the Security
Council the clear vision of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — a vision, indeed, for the entire Balkan
region.
The commitment of Lord Ashdown to put the
country irreversibly on the road to statehood and the
European Union is indeed a noble one. Reaching those
goals has been made possible only thanks to hard work,
good policies and the steady support of the
international community. The priorities set for the
attainment of those objectives are clear and reasonable,
addressing the three pillars of the modern State:
effective judicial institutions, a modern marketoriented economy and a functioning public
administration working for the common well-being.
The measures adopted on the rule of law, when
fully applied and enforced, will have far-reaching
consequences. The report mentions important reforms
such as the creation of the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council, the State Information and
Protection Agency and the Specialized Department for
Organized Crime, Economic Crime and Corruption; the
new Criminal Procedure Code; the restructuring of
police agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
under way; and completing the far-reaching reforms
related to law enforcement and the rule of law.
The War Crimes Chamber within the State Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important instrument
for achieving the objectives set by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia: making
war criminals accountable and promoting justice and
national reconciliation. This is a crucial contribution to
the establishment of the rule of law in the national
institutions of the country. In that regard, we support
the outlined structure and financing of the War Crimes

S/PV.4920

Chamber with a view to the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1503 (2003).
The economic reforms promoted by the Office of
the High Representative — the so-called bulldozer
initiative — to stimulate economic growth and jobcreation constitute another important component of the
reforms that are under way. The anticipated adoption of
50 new reforms during the first quarter of 2004 may be
fully credited to the “bulldozer initiative”.
Other important pieces of draft legislation, when
enacted and put into force, will have important effects
on the country’s economic life. I am referring to the
law on public enterprises, the law on investment of
public funds and the law on public procurement, along
with measures taken on the agricultural sector,
telecommunications, electric power and transportation.
Of great importance because of their structural
character were the establishment of a single countrywide indirect taxation authority and the adoption of a
law on indirect taxation, which, as the report outlines,
will provide a guaranteed source of income for the
State treasury.
In his report, the High Representative attaches
great importance to three issues of fundamental
importance to the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
First is the law on defence enacted last November,
which opens the way to membership of the Partnership
for Peace within the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Secondly, other very important
reforms deal with intelligence reform, creating a
modern State intelligence agency and empowering the
country to respond to threats to its security. Finally,
there is the need to produce a statute for the city of
Mostar and to ensure the city’s reunification by putting
an end to parallel structures that have divided Mostar
along ethnic lines. The determination of the High
Representative to impose a new statute for Mostar is a
clear demonstration of his commitment to overcome
the divisions and vested interests that hinder the
implementation of fundamental reforms.
The positive picture drawn in the report of
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina is clearly
confirmed by the very positive developments in the
process of reconciliation among the formerly deeply
opposed States of the region: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro. The tripartite
agreement, the simplification of procedures for the
movement of people and the separate bilateral

agreements among the three countries are a matter for
rejoicing and offer real hope for a better future for the
peoples of the region. Also encouraging is the pace of
the return of refugees and displaced persons. The 1
million returns registered by the end of 2003 show how
the many problems of the countries have been
successful tackled.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has the potential to
become a real success story, as Lord Ashdown again
reiterated this morning: a real success story for the
international community and, above all, for all of its
own people. The support of the international
community has been vital in making these
achievements. My delegation is confident that the
European Union in particular will continue to provide
support in promoting nation-building and development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is our hope that the
ambitious benchmarks set for Bosnia and Herzegovina
by the High Representative and by the international
community will be met with success, and in the
shortest possible time.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Ambassador Wang Guangya for the able and
efficient way in which he guided our work last month. I
would also like to welcome Ambassador De La
Sablière to the presidency and to assure him of my
delegation’s full cooperation. It is a great pleasure to
see the High Representative, Lord Ashdown, and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Terzic, at this meeting. I would like
to thank them, as well as Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno, for their informative and comprehensive
briefings.
Germany subscribes to the statement to be made
later by Ireland on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to commend Lord Ashdown for his
work in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We realize it is an
enormous responsibility to be charged with advancing
the difficult, delicate and, at the same time, immensely
important reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Almost eight years after the Dayton Agreement, Bosnia
and Herzegovina still needs help and support from the
international community. I can assure the High
Representative that the German commitment continues
to be strong. In the past two weeks alone, both our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Fischer, and the German Minister
of Defence, Mr. Struck, have been to the country to
gather first-hand impressions of developments.

15

S/PV.4920

As the High Representative pointed out, marked
improvements have been made in recent years, and in
the reporting period, in key areas such as the security
situation, currency stability, the return of refugees and
the constitutional equality of the three ethnic groups.
However, there continue to be shortcomings in other
areas. State structures still do not always perform as
they are supposed to; there still seems to be a
considerable lack of identification on the part of the
main ethnic groups with the joint State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina; time and again, we see political
thinking — as well as day-to-day decisions — based
primarily on ethnic categories. There is still no selfsustaining economy.
Let me make three points. First, the peace process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina now seems to be entering a
decisive phase. The Dayton Agreement, of course,
remains the basis for the time being, but the so-called
European perspective is increasingly gaining in
importance. Both the European Union (EU) and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) have made
clear that they are prepared to open the way to a multiethnic, reform-oriented Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
responsibility for progress on that road now lies with
the political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me comment briefly on the way forward into
European structures. It is the pace of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s reform policy that will determine the
pace of the country’s future integration into EuroAtlantic structures. In the case of European integration,
the EU, as the High Representative stated, has
identified 16 priority areas for further reform.
Successful reform in those areas — including fighting
organized crime, promoting the rule of law and public
administration — is a prerequisite for further progress
towards EU integration.
Concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina’s interest in
joining NATO’s Partnership for Peace, we believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina must now press ahead with
the agreed defence reform. The Agreement was an
important first step in the direction of Partnership for
Peace membership; full implementation is the next
important step to be taken.
Secondly, let me mention in that context an issue
that is of continued concern to us and to other Council
members and that was stressed by Lord Ashdown in his
briefing: the question of war criminals. We believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is now able, with international

16

assistance, to bring war criminals to justice in national
courts. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s acceptance of that
responsibility is an important indicator of its political
will to gain ownership of its domestic affairs. We
consider the establishment of a War Crimes Chamber at
the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina to be urgent
and important. I would like to reiterate the call that the
Council has made to the international community, by
means of resolution 1503 (2003) of August 2003, to
support the establishment of the Special Chamber.
Germany has already pledged support in the form of a
significant financial contribution and the secondment
of an expert. We welcome the information provided by
Lord Ashdown that the Chamber should be established
by the end of this year.
Thirdly, I should like to comment on the issue of
the de-certification of police officers in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which was raised by the High
Representative. We agree with Lord Ashdown that
legal certainty must be established as swiftly as
possible; only then can the process of reforming the
police of Bosnia and Herzegovina be carried forward
without backlash. The overall process of decertification
must not be called into question. We are willing,
together with our partners in the Coordination and
Drafting Group, to look closely into that issue and to
make a proposal to the Council. In that context, we
welcome the engagement of the Secretariat, as
mentioned by Mr. Guéhenno.
In conclusion, I would like to express Germany’s
full support for the course of reform defined by the
Bosnian Government in close consultation with the
Peace Implementation Council and the High
Representative. The focus is rightly placed on the areas
of the rule of law, the economy and the strengthening
of national structures. Reforms in those fields must be
carried forward. The High Representative has provided
important momentum for such reform. However, the
responsibility for implementation lies with the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe
that the Government can assume even greater
responsibility and that it has still not fully assumed
what we call ownership of the process. If it fails to do
so, there is a real danger that ambitious objectives —
particularly EU membership and membership in
NATO’s Partnership for Peace — will remain
unattainable. I would like to make special mention of
the host of reform initiatives over the past year, which

S/PV.4920

seem very promising
implementation.

but

which

still

await

We sincerely hope that we will soon reach a stage
in which the reform process can be carried out in
Bosnia and Herzegovina without the current massive
pressure by the international community. In our view,
what is needed now is the creation of a sustainable,
self-supporting reform process.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to offer you my best wishes, Sir, as you
assume the presidency of the Security Council, and to
express the thanks of the United Kingdom to
Ambassador Wang Guangya for his stewardship of the
Council in the month of February.
I associate myself with the comments that
Ambassador Ryan is soon to make on behalf of the
European Union.
Looking at the darkness which prevailed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina 10 years ago, we can only
reflect today on the very considerable success that has
been achieved. Our thanks go to the High
Representative and his predecessors and to Prime
Minister Terzic for their contributions. In addition, we
express our gratitude for the briefings we have heard
this morning.
It is important to look forward. As others have
said, there are now two clear routes opening up for
Bosnia and Herzegovina that will anchor that State into
Euro-Atlantic structures. The first route — the
prospective Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union — is a substantial prize on
the path towards eventual membership of the European
Union. But, more than covering Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s relations with Brussels, this would also
help to define the country’s relations with its
neighbours in South-Eastern Europe and the relations
of South-Eastern Europe with the European Union. I
very much welcome the increased role of the European
Union and the contributions it is making, particularly
on security and stability.
However, the second route is the Partnership for
Peace (PFP), which is a key goal. The reason why this
is a key goal came out very simply in a phrase Lord
Ashdown used when he said that membership of the
PFP would make war or internal conflict much less
likely. This is because it will require the unified
command of the armed forces and will facilitate a

much-needed reform of the various armed forces
within Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is not only good
for internal stability; crucially, it helps put an end to
the nonsense of the present unsustainable and
indefensible level of gross domestic product currently
spent on defence. In my view, a continuing role by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will also be appropriate, as we go
through the transition in the next months.
Guiding Bosnia and Herzegovina towards
becoming a successful nation-State requires political
leadership, without a doubt, but also requires
increasing the rule of law to what we euphemistically
call international standards and achieving justice and
reconciliation. The Bosnian War Crimes Chamber is
thus a key contribution. I agree with Ambassador
Pleuger on the need for more international support for
the Chamber. The United Kingdom has pledged 10 per
cent of the annual costs for the next five years; that
will be our contribution.
Beyond that, the arrest and delivery to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague of Mr. Karadzic and
Mr. Mladic remains an essential element of
reconciliation and justice. Those currently harbouring
and supporting these two indictees are doing absolutely
no favours for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
While it is right that we should have and promote a
closure strategy for the ICTY, it is also wholly
consistent to say that those two men must be brought to
face justice in The Hague. In the view of the United
Kingdom, without that, there can be no true justice and
no end to the malignant influence of those two. Until
they are in The Hague facing justice, in our view, the
international community will not have finished its job.
Resolution 1503 (2003) sets out very clearly the
obligations of all of us in this connection.
Lord Ashdown focused on the economic issues,
and it is right to underline their importance and the
scale of the challenge. Economic reform with the
sustained support of the international financial
institutions and the European Union is absolutely
essential. We were encouraged by the discussions in
the margins of the most recent Peace Implementation
Conference, and we hope very much that that process
will continue.
Alongside the need for economic development is
the need to prevail over organized crime, not just

17

S/PV.4920

because of the loss of revenue to the Government, but
because of the pernicious influence exerted on the
region and, indeed, beyond the region.
In conclusion, I would like to make one
observation and pose two questions. First, the High
Representative raised the issue of the de-certification
process for some 800 policemen and the 150 of them
who have already appealed. The International Police
Task Force (IPTF) appears to have taken proper
decisions, but the implementation of those decisions, at
the time, within Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
technically flawed. The United Kingdom thinks it is
right that we should ask the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to regularize the situation and to do so
according to the terms that they were obliged to follow
at the time, but did not. This point was emphasized by
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno earlier. I think the
Security Council should support that, but it should also
say that a fair, defensible review procedure should
apply to those who are appealing their dismissal. In our
view, very tough criteria need to be applied to any such
procedure. The last thing we want is for the system to
be capricious or to open the way for the unacceptable
return of individuals who were rightly excluded. We
think there will need to be appropriate and close
international involvement in that process. Like the
representative of Germany, I very much welcome the
willingness of the Secretariat to take part in some form
of process.
I conclude with two questions. First, the case of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be approached only in its
regional context. We have not said very much this
morning about cooperation with Belgrade. Could I ask
what the High Representative sees as the impact on
Bosnia and Herzegovina of developments both in
Serbia and Montenegro and, perhaps, more widely?
Secondly, we always talk about the dependency
culture. Are we getting to a stage in which we can
detect signs of much less dependency? I thought there
were some encouraging prospects in what the Prime
Minister said, but what is the exit strategy — and its
timescale — for Bosnia and Herzegovina to move into
a normal relationship with the international
community?
Mr. Baja (Philippines): At the outset, Sir, allow
us to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for March and to commit to
you our full cooperation. We also congratulate

18

Ambassador Wang Guangya of China on a successful
presidency last month. We thank the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, and the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Terzic, for their comprehensive briefings.
Given the steady progress being made in the
country, of which we have heard this morning, the
debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
not as sexy this morning as it was seven or eight years
ago. That is good for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
European Union (EU), for the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). It is good
for the international community and for the Security
Council, and I suppose Lord Ashdown welcomes this
also. It means that the effort of the international
community to build a self-sustaining State in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is nearing its terminal phase. It means
also that quite soon our dilemma will become when
and how to disengage from Bosnia.
As indicated in the report of the High
Representative, the number of core tasks for his Office
has been reduced from six to the following four:
entrenching the rule of law; reforming the economy;
strengthening the capacity of the governing
institutions; and establishing, at the State level, civilian
command and control over the armed forces. Still,
these are formidable tasks of nation-building, in which
the country’s foreign guardians will have to engage
themselves more deeply.
We take note of the fact that, as stated in the
briefing given by Lord Ashdown, the reform process —
a difficult task indeed — is driven by the international
community but carried out by the national
Governments. We endorse the High Representative’s
approach of mobilizing a popular constituency for his
reforms — that is, the people themselves. We believe
that people who have a past and who know where they
come from will know where they are and where they
are going. Having a past means having a sense of
history. I hope Lord Ashdown’s approach has a
significant impact on this process, since having a sense
of history also means having a sense of country.
If one can see the past, one can ask questions
about the present. We can ask questions such as
whether reform should be carried out within existing
bodies or by institutions restructured from within or
from without. We have observed from the report

S/PV.4920

(S/2004/126, annex, enclosure) that the people and the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina are still relying
on the international community to make tough
decisions: drafting key laws and regulations and, in
most instances, paying the bills. However, we are
gratified to note that progress has been made in the
mission implementation plan setting out the specific
goals and the points at which the handover to domestic
institutions will take place.
If one can see the past, one can also demand a
future. We take note of Lord Ashdown’s concern,
described in paragraphs 66 and 67 of the report, at the
growing challenges to the police certification process
conducted by the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) during its mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is unfortunate that police officers who were denied
certification by the IPTF — most because of their
involvement in war crimes, the abuse of authority or
criminal activities — have taken advantage of a legal
loophole to get themselves reinstated. We were
gratified to hear this morning that Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno has recognized the
seriousness of the matter and is making proposals to
resolve it.
Another concern is the fact that those behind the
slaughter of civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to evade justice. We join other countries in
expressing our desire to see indicted war criminals
brought before the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war crimes and
other crimes against humanity. We call on the
concerned authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
extend their full cooperation to see to it that those
indictees are turned over and brought to justice. We
expect the relevant authorities in the country to
appropriately investigate and prosecute war crimes
cases that have been referred by the ICTY to local law
enforcement and prosecutorial agencies.
In the present situation, the national Governments
appear to have retained a veto capacity, to have a large
say or even to obstruct the reforms of the High
Commissioner. We are gratified to note the assurance
by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers this
morning about the Government’s commitment to
coordinate on those reforms.
It is incumbent upon the international community
to be strong and to know what it is doing — and to
ensure that all know that it is strong and knows what it

is doing. We congratulate Lord Ashdown on his
intrusive approach to nation-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on his mediation efforts among the
political actors in that country. I wish him well in what
he called the irreversible road to statehood and
European integration for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): First, I
congratulate you, Sir, and wish you every success
during your presidency of the Council, which you have
just assumed. I also commend the Chinese presidency
and Ambassador Wang Guangya on their wise and
effective management of the Council during the month
of February.
Allow me to welcome the presence before the
Council of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. His participation attests to the
interest he shares with the international community in
consolidating the stabilization process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also thank the High Representative,
Lord Paddy Ashdown, for his very interesting briefing,
which
accompanied
his
illuminating
and
comprehensive report (S/2004/146, annex, enclosure),
and I take this opportunity to assure him of our full
support in his future activities.
I shall be brief because Romania aligns itself with
the statement to be made shortly by the Irish
presidency of the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
for Romania, which attaches the greatest importance to
its stability and development and to the full
implementation of the Dayton Agreement and of the
reforms necessary for its integration into Europe.
We welcome the good news from Sarajevo
concerning the progress made on the ground, which is
to a large extent the result of the remarkable work of
Lord Ashdown and his Office. His contribution
towards positive developments has truly been decisive.
At the same time, we are convinced that Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s goal of becoming a member of the
European Union and of NATO also plays a key role in
the progress that has been made.
In that context, we can see that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is making tangible progress in all areas
important for State cohesion, be it through the
establishment of a High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council, the creation of a single body responsible for
indirect taxation or the adoption of a law on defence.

19

S/PV.4920

Those actions bear witness to the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains on the right course. We hope that
this conduct will serve as a model for the entire
western Balkan region.
Of course, much remains to be done.
Accordingly, we are in complete agreement with the
Office of the High Representative’s four-point strategy,
whose goals are to strengthen the rule of law, to
implement economic reform, to strengthen the capacity
of State institutions and to establish civilian control
over the armed forces at the State level. All those
measures are essential to encouraging the country’s
rapprochement vis-à-vis the European Union and
NATO.
The European Commission feasibility study and
the membership requirements of NATO’s Partnership
for Peace provide the clearest indication of what
priorities Bosnia and Herzegovina must pursue to
advance its aspiration to join the European Union and
NATO. We encourage the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to expedite the necessary reforms to that
end, especially with respect to strengthening economic
reform and improving administrative capacity, which
are fundamental conditions for building a State that is
stable, effective and capable of integration into
European structures.
Recent measures taken by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities with respect to the
appointment of military leaders constitute a significant
advance in the efforts for armed forces reform
requested by the international community. We welcome
the progress made by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the return of refugees, reconstruction
and the restoration of property, which could serve as a
model for the entire region. In that connection, I stress
that full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia would be the
clearest way of signalling a break from the past
thinking and demonstrating a desire to move towards a
more stable and honest future.
Romania takes great interest in progress in
strengthening the police and the fight against organized
crime. In that connection, we would like to be assured
that the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, the High
Representative
and
the
other
international
organizations active on the ground will take all
necessary measures to resolve the questions Lord
Ashdown raised concerning the police certification

20

process. We are thankful for the clarifications on that
point made by Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno.
I take this opportunity to welcome Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s
substantial
regional
cooperation
activities as current Chairman of the South-East
European Cooperation Process. We are convinced that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue its active
involvement when the chairmanship passes to Romania
at the beginning of April. Furthermore, Romania is
working with Bosnia and Herzegovina to develop
sound cooperation at the political and economic levels.
We also have a presence in the country, with our troops
and police officers taking part in international forces
there.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the cooperation between NATO and the
European Union with a view to transferring the
Stabilization Force mission to the European Union — a
sign of the emergence of a common vision of the two
pillars of stability in the Balkans that is encouraging
for the future of the region.
Romania fervently hopes that for Bosnia and
Herzegovina 2004 will be marked by substantial
progress in establishing the rule of law, political and
social consolidation, inter-ethnic coexistence and
economic development.
Mr. Valle (Brazil) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to wish you every success,
Mr. President, as you guide the work of the Council for
the month of March. The delegation of Brazil assures
you of its full cooperation.
We are also grateful to Ambassador Wang,
Permanent Representative of China, who guided the
work of the Council last month with such great skill.
My delegation is also pleased that Mr. Adnan
Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina; Lord Paddy Ashdown, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina; and Mr. JeanMarie
Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations, are with us today.
Given the presence of Mr. Terzic, we would like
to take this opportunity to say how pleased we are with
the progress made by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the signing of the Dayton
Agreement in 1995. Lord Ashdown’s thorough

S/PV.4920

briefing, as well as his personal testimony, enable us
clearly to identify those areas where tangible progress
has been made and to better understand those
developments that are less positive, with regard to
which improvements will have to be made.
(spoke in English)
It is rewarding to note the three priorities to
which Lord Ashdown is committed: consolidating the
rule of law, advancing economic reform and further
improving the functioning and effectiveness of the key
governing institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina —
key areas of effective progress. We welcome the
adoption by the Federation Parliament of the Civil
Procedure Code, and the establishment of a State-level
high judicial and prosecutorial council. Those are just
two examples of what it has been possible to do
through dialogue and cooperation. Multi-ethnic
structures at the State level are being created or are
already in place, showing that ethnic barriers can be
surmounted through dialogue and joint political and
economic endeavours.
We also take note of the progress made
concerning the implementation of the War Crimes
Chamber project, the State information and protection
agency and the completion of the mandates of three
commissions created to promote important reforms in
the State, as well as programmes for the return of
refugees and displaced persons in sustainable
conditions.
Apart from that, the Council is aware of some
challenges that still need to be addressed. The Statelevel joint command and control of the armed forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the statute for the city of
Mostar are just two examples. Nevertheless, the
environment, including relations with neighbours, is
positive and encouraging.
I would also like to refer to the important role
played by the constructive engagement of other
partners, especially the European Commission and the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), a multinational force
deployed under NATO, in providing sound assistance
and support to this process. I also stress the sizeable
contribution provided by the European Union Police
Mission to the stabilization of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is encouraging to note that peace is within reach, as
proper international collaboration and cooperation is
part and parcel of the peace process.

In this particular case, the European environment
and the real prospects of participation in the political
and economic structures of the European Union are
important elements in stimulating the engagement of
all concerned parties in fulfilling their commitments to
the peace process. European standards, as mentioned
several times by Lord Ashdown, are being met, and we
should commend all parties for the good results of their
efforts.
Finally, we are encouraged by the fact that the
Governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia and Montenegro are taking further steps to build
better neighbourly relations and to consolidate peace.
My delegation commends them for making such
important gestures, and we invite them to convey a
message of goodwill and confidence to all their citizens
and peoples.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I am confident that under your outstanding
leadership, the work of the Council this month will be
very productive. I would also like to thank the
members of the Council for the support and
cooperation they extended to me during China’s
presidency of the Council last month.
I welcome Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who
has come to New York to attend today’s meeting and
has made an important statement. The issues he raised
and the recommendations he made should be carefully
studied by the Council.
I would like to thank the High Representative,
Lord Ashdown, for his detailed briefing, and to say
how much we appreciate his tireless efforts to assist in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and help
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their task of
nation-building.
We were pleased to learn that the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is stabilizing. Ethnic relations
are improving, the economic reconstruction effort is
beginning to yield results, the process of refugee return
is nearing completion and relations with neighbouring
countries are improving daily. Such progress in the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina — which has
not come easily — is encouraging. We would like to
congratulate the Government and the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we sincerely hope that the

21

S/PV.4920

Bosnian parties will continue their efforts in this
respect by further improving mutual trust and
cooperation and continuing to forge ahead with the
peace process.
At the same time, we have taken note of the fact
that building the capacity of the governing institutions
at the State level in Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
be further improved. In particular, the police and
judicial reform process still faces certain challenges.
We are of the view that it would be appropriate for the
High Representative to make that process a priority in
his work for the first half of the year.
We support the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s active cooperation with the High
Representative in carrying out his work. We are
confident that with the help of the international
community, the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to make progress in nation-building, embark
on the road towards independent development at an
early date and eventually become integrated into
Europe.
Peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will have an significant impact on the lasting peace and
development of the region as a whole. China has
always closely followed developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We will continue to work with the
international community in making a contribution to
the achievement of lasting peace and stability and
economic development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of France,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month, which promises to be one of intensive
and successful work. I would like also to convey the
Pakistan delegation’s high appreciation for the skilful
guidance of the Council by Ambassador Wang of China
last month. Ambassador Wang kept our business and
burdens light until the last day, when he called us for a
late Sunday meeting.
I wish also to take this opportunity to convey our
condolences to the people and the Government of
Macedonia on the untimely demise of President
Trajkovski in a plane crash in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Today we warmly welcome the presence in the
Council of Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Earlier this
week, on 1 March, Bosnia and Herzegovina celebrated

22

the twelfth anniversary of its independence. President
Musharraf and Prime Minister Jamali both sent warm
messages of congratulations to the brotherly
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and I wish to take this opportunity to once again
express our fraternal sentiments to Prime Minister
Terzic today. I also assure him of Pakistan’s continued
and unwavering commitment to his country and his
people on their path to peace and prosperity.
As a member of the Council, we will continue to
support the requests that have been made by Mr. Terzic
here today with regard to assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to achieve the goals that have
been outlined.
I wish also to welcome Lord Paddy Ashdown, the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
the Security Council and to thank him for his very
informative briefing, as well as to thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his remarks.
Today, 12 years after a tragic war, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a more peaceful and stable country, a
far cry from the killing fields and ethnic cleansing of
the past decade. That is in considerable measure a
testament to the sustained commitment of the
international community to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But, even more so, the credit for progress must go in
the largest measure to the resilient and resourceful
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to their
leadership. They have demonstrated a determination to
rebuild a nation torn apart by hate, aggression and
international intrigue.
We appreciate Lord Ashdown’s efforts in
promoting the rule of law, facilitating the return of
refugees, supporting efforts for reconstruction and
economic
reforms,
overhauling
administrative
structures and building the country’s capacity for
production and employment. Those efforts have helped
to move Bosnia and Herzegovina further towards the
goals of durable peace and national integration.
However, Lord Ashdown has conveyed here
today that, as yet, all is not completely well in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, that the restoration of Bosnia’s prewar tapestry of coexistence remains an aspiration, not a
reality. He has mentioned the slow pace of reforms,
which undermines national integration. We note that
the success achieved in Brcko has yet to be replicated
in Mostar. Moreover, the peace process remains under
threat from organized criminal networks, extreme

S/PV.4920

nationalists and war criminals who remain at large. It is
amazing that Karadjic and Mladic cannot be found in
an area which is much smaller than, say, the AfghanPakistan border, where Osama bin Laden is presumed
to be hiding. Lord Ashdown has also spoken of his
concern regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economic
recovery.

He can continue to count on the United States as he
addresses remaining challenges. Regarding the issue
with the police that he raised, we agree fully that
United Nations decisions regarding police force
members must be respected and maintained, and we
call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
immediately to take the steps required to that end.

We note Prime Minister Terzic’s remark that
today Bosnia and Herzegovina is “just another
European country well on its way through the process
of transition”. The people of Pakistan enjoy historical
links with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina —
links which were reinforced during Bosnia’s recent
tragic and violent history. We are deeply committed,
therefore, to the goals of peace, harmony and
prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to its
emergence, as Lord Ashdown has stated, as a success
story and as a modern European country.

I want also to commend the High Representative
for taking action against those who provide financial
and logistical support to persons indicted for war
crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The move to block the
assets of 10 individuals implicated in supporting
fugitive war criminals and the removal of Mirko
Sarovic from his position as Vice-President of the Serb
Democratic Party send a clear message. The
international community is determined to see indicted
war criminals — especially Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic — face justice before the ICTY.

Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
would like to join my colleagues in extending a warm
welcome to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers,
Mr. Terzic, and to his colleagues, and in thanking High
Representative Ashdown for the excellent briefing he
gave us today, and, indeed, for all of his efforts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As we have heard in the reports today, we can see
real progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
important steps in defence reform; a single countrywide value-added tax enacted along with a nationwide
customs service; progress in the strengthening of the
rule of law and in promoting the continued return of
refugees and displaced persons, which has placed
within reach the completion of the property law
implementation
programme;
and
the
High
Representative’s decision to enact the new statute for
Mostar.
These are all significant accomplishments. They
reflect the desire of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move beyond the division and
destruction of war towards a more prosperous future as
a fully contributing member of the international
community. The United States welcomes that and will
continue to encourage and support that endeavour.
In guiding this transition, High Representative
Ashdown has proved to be an effective leader, and I
would like to thank him for the excellent job he and his
team are doing on behalf of the international
community and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The failure of local authorities, particularly those
in Republika Srpska, to fulfil commitments they made
at Dayton to hand over persons indicted by the ICTY is
retarding Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards
normalcy and prosperity. International pressure and
demands for accountability from those individuals and
organizations that support fugitive war-crimes indictees
will only increase. Those who shelter indictees hold
back all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
mostly those in Republika Srpska, from achieving
greater security and prosperity through integration into
Euro-Atlantic institutions. It is long past time to
resolve this issue.
While the ICTY will try Karadzic, Mladic and
other senior officials most responsible for crimes
within the ICTY’s jurisdiction, it is important that
justice for other cases be transferred to a competent
national jurisdiction. Establishing a domestic War
Crimes Chamber is a key element in the ICTY’s
completion strategy and for strengthening the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note the High
Representative’s comments about re-energizing that
effort and hope that we will see results soon.
The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
numerous challenges still before them. To continue to
be full a partner in the international war on terrorism,
Bosnia and Herzegovina should act quickly to
complete the reforms of the intelligence sector,
including passage of the draft law creating a single

23

S/PV.4920

intelligence agency under State control. Authorities
need to pass amendments to the State Information and
Protection Agency law, providing that Agency with full
State-level investigative and enforcement authority.
We commend entity and State legislatures for
acting courageously to adopt legislation establishing
State-level command and control of the armed forces.
However, slow implementation of the Defence Law
jeopardizes Bosnia and Herzegovina’s desire to be
invited by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to join the Partnership for Peace at the end of
June. A capable and authoritative defence minister
should be appointed as soon as possible to oversee the
creation of the State Ministry of Defence, which is a
condition for Partnership for Peace membership.
NATO-endorsed defence reform benchmarks also must
be fulfilled.
We applaud the many heartening developments
reported by the High Representative. Nonetheless, we
echo Lord Ashdown’s call for faster progress on
critical issues and reform and I welcome the words of
commitment of the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers. In concert with the High Representative and
many other supportive nations, the United States stands
ready to assist those in Bosnia and Herzegovina who
want to move their country towards a stable future as a
modern democracy and a strong Euro-Atlantic partner.
Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates you, Sir, on France’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We pledge you our full cooperation in the
search for appropriate solutions to the problems and
challenges before the international community. We also
express our full appreciation to the delegation of China
for the skill with which it led the work of the Council
in February.
We welcome the presence among us of the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We stand with his country in support of
the considerable progress accomplished towards
achieving peace and solidarity, which he has done an
excellent job in outlining today.
We note with great interest of the latest report of
the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
report gives a cogent account of the progress made by
that country in the past few years and of the relevant
actions under way to consolidate those gains. We also

24

note the very relevant observations made by Mr. JeanMarie Guéhenno.
We note that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
resolutely committed to the path of national
reconciliation and reconstruction. Institutions are
gradually being established and efforts made on behalf
of all those who suffered in the war and expect justice
and reparations. A large number of refugees and
displaced persons have returned home. Moreover,
many of the reforms undertaken are helping in the
country’s gradual economic recovery. We believe that,
if Bosnia and Herzegovina continues on this path, it
will be able to overcome its tragic past once and for all.
We urge the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seek appropriate solutions to the
country’s institutional problems, particularly with
respect to the police and to the establishment of the war
crimes chamber.
At the political level, we are concerned to note
the difficulties that have been referred to, such as
ethnic divisions and tension between the two main
parties. We earnestly encourage the two parties to
pursue dialogue in a constructive spirit and in
conformity with democratic norms. We hope that the
municipal elections scheduled for October 2004 will
create optimal conditions for entrenching democracy
throughout the country.
Given that the maintenance of the status quo in
Mostar poses a genuine threat to the stabilization of the
country, it is urgent to solve the problem of the city’s
status. We therefore welcome the strategy that has been
adopted to reunify the city. We encourage the High
Representative to pursue dialogue with the various
ethnic groups concerned to achieve the best possible
solution to the problem.
With respect to Srebrenica, my delegation
reiterates its compassion for the parents of the victims
of war. We hope that the painful issue of missing or
deceased persons can soon be resolved so that the city
may find the renewed strength to meet its future.
We welcome the harmonious relationships that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has established with its
neighbours. The tripartite agreement between Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro
on the demarcation and inviolability of the borders
between those countries will guarantee peace and
stability in the region.

S/PV.4920

We also welcome the High Representative’s
updated mission implementation plan. We reiterate our
firm support for him as he undertakes the main tasks
pending, which he has identified as necessary to the
completion of his mandate: entrenching the rule of law,
reforming
the
economy,
strengthening
good
governance and establishing political authority and
civilian control over the armed forces. Those tasks are
of critical importance to the future of the country.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to convey our gratitude
to Ambassador Wang and his delegation for their
effective and competent guidance of our work last
month.
I wish also to thank High Representative
Lord Paddy Ashdown for his comprehensive briefing
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Adnan Terzic,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
As is highlighted in Lord Ashdown’s report,
significant progress has been achieved in the
entrenchment of the rule of law, economic recovery
and the strengthening of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
institutional capacities with a view to enabling it fully
to play its role as a sovereign State. Clearly, my
delegation can only welcome those developments.
The results achieved in the reform process during
the period under consideration serve to bolster our
common objective of making Bosnia and Herzegovina
a strong and stable State and of ending the
fragmentation of its powers and prerogatives. In that
respect, my delegation welcomes the fact that certain
powers have been transferred from the two entities to
the central State through the launching of an integrated
defence policy with the establishment of joint
command and control of the armed forces and a Statelevel Ministry of Defence for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Another element of the substantial progress made
towards strengthening the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is undoubtedly the adoption of the Law on
Indirect Taxation, the abolition of the entities’ customs
administrations and the creation of a State-wide,
unified indirect taxation system.
Bosnia and Herzegovina will surely be able to
consolidate those precious achievements further by

adopting a law on intelligence reform with a view to
addressing effectively the threats of terrorism and
organized crime, to the benefit of all the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the same vein, we believe
that Lord Ashdown’s decision to reunify the city of
Mostar will put an end to 12 years of division and offer
all inhabitants the opportunity to participate
collectively and equitably in the management of their
city’s affairs. The reunification of Mostar, in addition
to being highly symbolic, is clearly helping to bring
about the consolidation of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the establishment of unified
structures and of a tolerant, multi-ethnic society that
will overcome the ethnic divisions that have prevailed
in that city.
The actions recently undertaken in the area of
judicial reform have also enabled us to assess the
progress made in building the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in recognizing the primacy of law and
justice. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s new judicial system
intends both to guarantee respect for the law and to
create a national system capable of taking over from
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and of ensuring the success of its work
completion strategy. In that regard, it is absolutely
imperative that war criminals still at large be actively
sought out, arrested and prosecuted.
That said, the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina also requires the development of an
economic and social development strategy based on
economic recovery and the promotion of foreign
investment. We hope that the Bulldozer Initiative will
be able to overcome the obstacles to liberalization of
the economy and economic growth and to ensure job
creation.
Furthermore, the reconstruction and consolidation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina require genuine
reconciliation and coexistence among the country’s
various communities. In that regard, it is essential that
mutual understanding and trust be developed among all
the components of Bosnia and Herzegovina and that
ethnic resentments and reflexes be overcome. From
that perspective, it is encouraging to note that nearly 1
million refugees and displaced persons had returned to
their places of origin by the end of 2003. We hope that
the 350,000 remaining refugees will be able to do so
swiftly.

25

S/PV.4920

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
transcend their differences and must prepare to take
sole responsibility for their future. In that context, the
joint declaration made recently by all parties
represented within Bosnia and Herzegovina’s House of
Representatives — in which they announced their
readiness to find a consensus to attain the objectives set
out by Lord Ashdown — is a very strong positive sign
that we should support.
Finally, my country wishes every success to the
High Representative in his efforts. We encourage him
to continue to implement his programme.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
thank members of the Council for the kind words they
addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of France.
At the outset, I very much welcome the presence
of Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We listened to
him attentively. I thank Lord Ashdown and Mr.
Guéhenno for their briefings.
I associate myself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I shall
confine myself to two comments.
First, I wish to reaffirm France’s support for the
actions undertaken by Lord Ashdown in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — actions that we very much appreciate.
The priorities he has set for his mission are also ours:
the rule of law and justice, economic reform and
development, the fight against organized crime,
structural reforms, returns. His determination has
enabled us to make further significant progress on
those issues. I would note in particular the creation of a
national high judicial and prosecutorial council, the
reorganization of the defence sector at the national
level and the introduction of a national Indirect
Taxation Authority. That progress will assist in
building a modern State compatible with the deepening
relationship with the European Union, as affirmed at
the Thessaloniki Summit last June. In that regard, I
wish to thank the High Representative for his role in
leading Bosnia and Herzegovina towards a stabilization
and association agreement.
Secondly, I wish to emphasize our great vigilance
in the concrete implementation of the reforms achieved

26

by the High Representative. Indeed, we note that local
resistance sometimes interferes with the adoption and
implementation of certain reforms. With respect to the
specific issue of the certification of local police
officers, we appeal to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities to respect international law. We have noted
well the observations of Lord Ashdown and Mr.
Guéhenno on that point.
We also attach great
importance to the cooperation by all of the country’s
authorities with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia. In that regard, we note that
more progress is needed.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.
As this is the first time that I have taken the floor
under your presidency of the Security Council, please
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption of
your duties. I would also like to express my
congratulations to the previous President, Ambassador
Wang Guangya of China, for the excellent manner in
which he steered the Council’s deliberations in
February.
I would first like to thank Lord Ashdown for his
comprehensive and informative report. Secondly, it is a
great pleasure to acknowledge the presence of Mr.
Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his very
helpful contribution this morning.
The work of the High Representative and of his
Office is of great importance to the full implementation
of the Dayton Agreement and to the consolidation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union (EU)
underscores its support for High Representative
Ashdown — who is also the European Union’s Special

S/PV.4920

Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina — and in
particular for his focus on promoting the rule of law
and on encouraging economic growth and the creation
of employment through reforms.
The EU-Western Balkans Summit, held in
Thessaloniki last June, confirmed clearly that the
shared objective of the European Union and of the
countries of the region is their integration into
European structures. That will be achieved through the
implementation of the strengthened Stabilization and
Association Process. The rate at which the countries of
the region make further progress towards the EU is
now effectively in their own hands. It will depend on
their individual performance in implementing reforms,
with the full support of the European Union.
The EU has been actively involved in the reform
process. In November 2003, the European Commission
presented its feasibility study on the preparedness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to negotiate a stabilization and
association agreement. The EU calls on the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to strengthen
its efforts to meet 16 wide-ranging priorities —
including improving governance and administration,
cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, strengthening the fight
against organized crime and corruption, improvements
in the rule of law, human rights reform and economic
reforms — which the feasibility study identified as
being essential for making any decision on the opening
of negotiations on a stabilization and association
agreement. The Commission hopes that it can make a
recommendation on the opening of such negotiations in
the latter half of 2004. The EU is already assisting with
those reforms, including through targeted support
under the Community Assistance for Reconstruction,
Development and Stabilization assistance programme.
The European partnership with Bosnia and
Herzegovina will see the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina agree with the European Union on overall
priorities for action. This partnership is being
elaborated by the European Commission in the context
of the 16 reforms identified in its feasibility study. The
European Council has also decided that one of the four
initial priorities for the European security strategy is
the elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent policy
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There has been important progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in such areas as the reform of the

judiciary and defence. However, the pace of reform has
slowed. Much remains to be done to reinvigorate the
economy and consolidate the central structures of the
State. This responsibility lies in the hands of the local
authorities, who need to engage fully in the reform
process. Their cooperation with the international
community is also essential. The European Union fully
supports the recent decision by Lord Ashdown to enact
a new statute for the city of Mostar.
The European Union strongly supports the clear
message set out in Security Council resolution 1503
(2003), which expresses the need for the countries in
the region to improve and intensify their cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Full cooperation with the Tribunal,
especially improved cooperation in arresting and
transferring indictees to The Hague, is vital for further
movement towards the European Union, as is
compliance with the Tribunal’s requests for documents,
access to archives and availability of witnesses. We
reiterate the need to intensify efforts to bring Radovan
Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina before the
ICTY.
The European Union supports the ongoing work
of High Representative Ashdown to establish a special
War Crimes Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This is an important step in the
building of institutions of justice in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It will contribute to the significant
progress being made in Bosnia and Herzegovina
towards the creation of a society based on the rule of
law and respect for human rights.
The European Union is closely involved in
ensuring security in Bosnia and Herzegovina through
the European Union Police Mission (EUPM). I would
like to take this opportunity to express our profound
sadness at the recent and untimely death of the head of
the EUPM in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Commissioner
Sven Frederiksen. We offer our full support to his
successor, Commissioner Kevin Carty, as he takes up
the challenging tasks that lie ahead. It is important also
to make progress in resolving the legal problems
arising from the police certification procedure, and we
look forward to a renewed cooperative effort with the
United Nations in addressing this matter.
The European Union has also confirmed its
readiness to undertake a follow-on mission to the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) within the context of

27

S/PV.4920

European integration and a comprehensive and
coherent approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, we have put in hand preparatory work in close
consultation with NATO, while keeping the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities fully involved.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Croatia, and I give him the floor.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I will deliver a
shortened statement, the full version of which is being
circulated and is available on the Croatian Mission’s
web site. Let me begin by joining others in thanking
Lord Ashdown for his comprehensive, substantive and
encouraging briefing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been on the Security
Council’s agenda for years now, and I would be remiss
not to recognize the significant successes achieved
under the aegis of the United Nations, ranging from the
military stabilization by the Implementation Force and
the Stabilization Force to police reform through the
International Police Task Force and refugee return.
This exemplary record of the international
community’s achievements in stability, confidencebuilding and post-conflict reconciliation has to be
followed by a similar effort in the field of economic
opportunities.
As a country irreversibly committed to the
European integration process, Croatia understands that
a clear and unambiguous prospect of European Union
membership for all the countries of South-East Europe
is the best incentive for the reform processes in each of
those countries and in the region in general. The direct
result of this is the extension of democratic stability
and the expansion of the European zone of peace,
cooperation and development to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the rest of Croatia’s broader
neighbourhood. We are aware of the opportunity
unfolding before us and of the responsibility that
comes with it, and we stand ready to act on both.
Croatia wishes to have an integral and unified
Bosnia and Herzegovina for its neighbour and partner:
a stable and prosperous State, with strong institutions
and uniform economic mechanisms, that successfully
cooperates with all other States in the region. Mutual
political relations between our two countries open
promising prospects for the advancement of economic
cooperation. The bilateral free trade agreement
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
applied since 2001. Since then, trade exchange has

28

grown by 30 per cent annually; it totalled $1billion last
year. Croatia is among the largest investors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is one
of Croatia’s most important markets. Croatia and its
institutions, notably the Croatian Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, will continue to
encourage private-sector investments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to strengthen development and to
increase mutual exchange.
Investments in Bosnia and Herzegovina are much
more than a mere financial operation or the targeted
implementation of a profitable economic strategy. They
are also high-return investments in the stability,
cooperation, development and democracy of SouthEast Europe.
Croatia strongly supports the reforms that have
been initiated, particularly in the strengthening of the
judiciary system, reform of the military sector and
creation of a single market.
A new dynamic seems to be emerging within
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political body, one that is
ready to embrace ownership of the reform process.
That is a positive development, which Croatia fully
supports. The process of assuming ownership of one’s
own future is a daunting task, but it is the only way to
move forward and create a viable State ready to
perform successfully in the European and global
arenas.
The political commitment of the leaders of all
three constituent nations of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the implementation of the Dayton Agreement and to
institution-building remains essential. In that respect,
Croatia believes that the issue of constitutional change
through the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
legitimate interest and the genuine right of key political
actors.
Croatia’s assistance to the Croatian people in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is transparent and is primarily
oriented towards economic, cultural and social
programmes. The well-being of Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the full protection of all of their rights
remain a strategic interest for the Republic of Croatia.
When it comes to the current position of Croats within
Bosnia in Herzegovina, one must say that there is
considerable room for improvement. In that context,
we hope that the international community will act even
more effectively to ensure the equality of all
constituent peoples. While lending its strong support to

S/PV.4920

the Croatian people in this neighbouring State, Croatia
will simultaneously continue to support the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the efforts to
pursue all required economic, legal and political
reforms.
Furthermore, Croatia is ready to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina to succeed in seizing the historic
opportunity of membership in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Partnership for Peace in the near
future. Croatia is equally prepared to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina fulfil its ambitions regarding membership
of the European Union. We are confident that Croatia’s
own advancement towards the European Union, about
which we feel optimistic, will benefit the well-being of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well.

Thirdly, the Council should support the High
Representative in his intention to transfer his
competencies to local governments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Fourthly, the Council should support my
Government in structural and economic reforms and in
the fight against organized crime.
Together, let us create in Bosnia and Herzegovina
a positive environment for the implementation of those
measures. The High Representative and I wish to
dramatically change the role of the Office of the High
Representative in decision-making in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through the elections in 2006. I would
like the Council to support us in that.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a neighbouring and partner State,
remains high on Croatia’s list of priorities. The
strengthening of the conditions for further economic
development, full respect for the rule of law, attracting
foreign investment and the build-up of civil services
and State institutions are the clear path that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has to follow. Croatia is ready to extend
all available help to make that difficult road as short as
possible for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Very briefly, with respect to the de-certification
of police officers, it is truly a priority to uphold the
legal instruments of the United Nations. Bosnia and
Herzegovina accepts its international obligations. Yet,
like any other country, it is committed to international
legal instruments, including the European Convention
on Human Rights, which forms part of our
Constitution. Therefore, the issue is rather complex.
For our part, we will try to meet our obligations
towards international law. At the same time, we hope to
maintain a procedure that addresses all aspects.

The President (spoke in French): The Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has asked to make a further statement, and I give him
the floor.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Lord Ashdown to respond to comments made
and questions raised.

Mr. Terzic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation):
Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor
again.
The Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom asked about the international community’s
exit strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As far as we
are concerned, the exit strategy is clear. First, a time
frame and deadlines have been provided for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s membership in the European Union and
NATO. It is to join the European Union by 2009. We
would like the Council to support us and give us
encouragement in that endeavour.
Secondly, I would like the Council to start
promoting Bosnia and Herzegovina as a success story
of the international community because that is really
what it is.

Lord Ashdown: Seeing the lateness of the hour, I
am reminded of when I was first elected as a young
member of the British Parliament. I think, as something
of a surprise, I defeated a rather older Member of
Parliament from another party, who had held the seat.
He came to me afterwards when the results had been
announced and said “My boy, I give you one piece of
advice: never stand long between an audience and its
meal”. I am rather conscious that I am standing
between Council members and theirs. So, I think I had
better be fairly swift.
I will try to respond to the particular points made
to me. But I want briefly to express my thanks to those
countries whose interventions were dedicated to
offering us expressions of support. If I touch on them
quickly that is not in any sense to underestimate the
gratitude which I know my colleagues in the
international community, and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities too, feel for those expressions

29

S/PV.4920

of support, which range from the verbal ones in the
Council — as valuable as they are — to the practical
ones in terms of police and troops on the ground. I
would like to thank especially Chile, Spain, Angola,
the Philippines, Romania, Brazil, China, Pakistan,
Benin and France. Their representatives have expressed
their support, and I am very grateful for that. Others
had specific points that I will touch on in what I hope
is a brief response.
I shall first touch on this very delicate and, as
Prime Minister Terzic has quite rightly said, very
complex issue on the de-registration of police, on
which Mr. Guéhenno made an extremely important and
useful contribution earlier on. I am grateful to him for
his cooperation and for the work that we have been
doing together for some time.
The position is up to the Council to decide. It is
not my responsibility. It is the Council’s responsibility.
This was a United Nations-mandated area under annex
11 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My mandate is under annex
10. So, I hope the Council will now address this along
the lines that Mr. Guéhenno has suggested. I stand read
to help in that process, but action on that lies with the
Council.
Incidentally, let me make the point that just as my
mandate does not currently extend to an area which is
related to annex 11 — rather than to my mandate,
under annex 10 — that also applies to the European
Union Police Mission, whose mandate is being
carefully negotiated and does not include — at least at
the moment — involvement in carrying out decisions
issued with the full authority of the Security Council.
Its mandate would have to be changed for it to become
involved in that process. That is a legal point, but I
think it is an important one to make to the Council.
As the Council has heard in what Prime Minister
Terzic said, this is going to be very, very difficult for
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to carry out.
There are 150 appeals in place, affecting people’s
livelihoods, before the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is true to say that it was Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s responsibility to pass the appropriate
legislation a year ago. That is the truth, but it is not the
whole truth. Others are also involved. At that stage,
Bosnia and Herzegovina was doing what it was told to
do on all matters related to police. I just think it is
important that I should register with the Council that,

30

although this must be done in the way that Mr.
Guéhenno has suggested that all members have
confirmed, it needs to be done with sensitivity and
concern.
I make only two appeals to the Council. The first
is to reinforce the appeal made by the representative of
the United Kingdom: some kind of review process is
necessary here in order not only that justice should be
done but that it should be seen to be done.
And secondly, in view of the extreme difficulties
that this may put on Prime Minister Terzic’s
Government, I hope it will be done in a manner in
which I know Mr. Guéhenno is intending to act
anyway: in consultation with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities. I think they need to be
brought into the process of how we put this right. In
my judgement, it would be wrong for us simply to act
without consulting with them. The Council has heard
Prime Minister Terzic’s commitment to do what is
necessary. I think it is necessary to bring them into the
circle of consultation when the Council decides how to
proceed. However, there can be no doubt that the
authority of the United Nations and the Security
Council must be fully exercised in this matter, and
there can be no doubt about what the outcome should
be.
May I briefly comment on some other points. The
representative of Russia mentioned that all these
reforms have taken place within Dayton, and he is
right. I think it may well be that in the past we allowed
the Dayton Agreement to be exploited for its
opportunities for obstructionism. What we have learned
in the past year or 18 months — and I express my
gratitude for the support of the Russian Federation in
this respect — is that we have begun to exploit the
Dayton framework for its opportunities for reform.
I am firmly of the view that my powers rest at the
limits of Dayton; I cannot go beyond Dayton. What we
need to do to reform Bosnia and Herzegovina will have
to be done within Dayton, using the procedures of
Dayton to amend itself.
On the issue of the Bonn Powers, it has been my
practice — and it will continue to be so — to
coordinate in the closest way possible with my Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board
colleagues, among the ambassadors of the Steering
Board in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, more formally,
in our regular meetings throughout the year. We do not

S/PV.4920

always agree about how to proceed. But I am grateful,
indeed, for the support from PIC members, especially
sometimes when they do not necessarily agree with
everything that I am doing. That cohesion is very
important to us.
Germany talked about identity with the State.
What I think we are looking at in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and what is being seen now, is the
advantage of looking at things as a process, not as an
event. What we need is processes that lead us from
where we are to where we want to be. It is true, as
Germany says, that there are many in Herzegovina —
Croats — who do not have a sense of identity with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also true that there are
many Serbs in Republika Srpska that do not have a
sense of identity with the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But I cannot pass a law that commands
them to love their State, however much some might
require me to do so.
What we can do — what is practically possible —
is to build an efficient, functioning State that serves its
citizens. Then, when the State serves its citizens by
providing them with the rule of law, the opportunity of
a job, a chance to educate their children and a decent
health service, over time, citizens will first trust their
State, and then have a sense of identity with it. The
establishment of a citizen’s identity in the State is not
an event, it is a process. And that process begins with
providing good governance for citizens, something to
which I know the Prime Minister is committed, as,
indeed, am I.
The United Kingdom asked about the regional
context. This is vital to us. We can make no progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina except — as the
representative of Croatia said — in concert with our
neighbours. The Balkans either moves ahead in
concert, or it does not move ahead. And we have seen
in the past how much that can affect, in a malevolent
way, the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I was asked to make a judgement about how the
regional relationships stand. After a recent visit to
Zagreb, I remain convinced and reassured — and I
warmly welcome this — that the constructive policy
followed by the Government of Croatia will continue
and may even accelerate under the new Government.
This is a great asset to us in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
is too early for us to say what the situation will be in
Belgrade, because that Government is hardly formed,

and its nature and characteristics we do not know.
Although it may be undiplomatic of me to do so, Mr.
President, I think I should share with you the thought
that while we look to Zagreb with confidence about the
future, we look with some nervousness to see what will
happen in Belgrade. We hope that that will continue, as
in the past.
One question touched on the exit strategy. It is
right and proper that we should begin to address this.
Next year will be the tenth anniversary of Dayton. It is
important that we start thinking about this. In my view,
the international community cannot exist in Bosnia on
one day, and no longer exist the next. It is a transitional
process. It may well pass from a High Representative
to a European special representative. There are issues
about the use of the Bonn Powers. All of these have to
be addressed. But Prime Minister Terzic is correct in
saying two things, to which I would draw attention.
The first is that this is not an exit strategy for the
international community; it is an entry strategy for
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
into
Euro-Atlantic
institutions. That is the context in which it will be
taking place. Secondly, the changed relationship
reflected by the Prime Minister’s presence here today
is very much part of the beginning of a process to alter
the nature of the international community’s
engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina as we
progressively hand things over to our colleagues.
My penultimate point is this: Algeria mentioned
the emphasis on the judiciary, and I very much
welcome that. It is very important. I want to underline
again that one current cause for nervousness on my part
relates to the fact that the independence of the judiciary
in Bosnia and Herzegovina — which ought to be an
issue upon which we cannot and must not compromise
if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to achieve statehood as a
modern European State — both in terms of
appointments and the decision-making process, is
currently under pressure. I cannot hide that from the
Council. I believe that in the next two to three weeks
we will see that pressure mounting. It must be resisted;
there can be no compromise on the question of
independent appointments to and the action of the
judiciary.
My last point is simply to say that the
representative of Ireland, speaking on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union, expressed a view
which I hold very strongly. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
passing out of the era of Dayton and into the era of

31

S/PV.4920

Brussels. More and more, the pull of Brussels and
Atlantic relationships is taking over from the push of
the Bonn Powers. The magnetic draw of Europe and
the Atlantic institutions is now the driving force for
reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that alters the
context of our engagement.
I will sum up simply by saying that if I have
given an optimistic report, it is because I feel
optimistic about the steps that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has, remarkably, been able to make. I do not believe
any country — any country — that I know of in
history, and certainly none within my experience, has
come so far, so fast, from such a terrible war as Bosnia
and Herzegovina has managed to do, with the
assistance of the international community.
We are making progress, but we still have a long
way to go. Pakistan is correct in saying that the breakup of those criminal networks is a job yet to be
completed. But Bosnia and Herzegovina is now
palpably and definitely passing out of the dark tunnel

32

of conflict and embarking on the bright road that leads
to Europe and the Atlantic institutions. That road is
long. It is going to be tough. And we could still fail.
We need two things. We need from the international
community what has been expressed so powerfully —
and I am grateful for it — today around the room:
continued support to see this thing through to success.
And from the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities and
my colleagues within those authorities, we need an
accelerated process of reform.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Lord
Ashdown for the clarifications he provided.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish, on behalf of the Security Council, to thank
Lord Ashdown and Mr. Adnan Terzic for having taken
the time to meet with the Council.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
