S/2012/905

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 December 2012
English
Original: French

Letter dated 5 December 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 2 December 2012 from
Mr. Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) (see annex), in which he informed
me of a meeting of the Council of Ministers of ECOWAS, held in Abidjan from
30 November to 2 December 2012. The letter is accompanied by a communiqué
issued by the Council of Ministers after the meeting, in which it sets out its position
concerning the content of my report to the Security Council on the situation in Mali.
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-62964 (E) 061212 071212

*1262964*

S/2012/905

Annex
[Original: English]

Letter dated 2 December 2012 from the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West African States
addressed to the Secretary-General
Transmission of the communiqué of the Council of Ministers of the
Economic Community of West African States
I have the honour to inform Your Excellency that the Council of Ministers of
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) held its sixty-ninth
Ordinary Session from 30 November to 2 December 2012 in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire.
During the said meeting, the Council reviewed the report transmitted by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Security Council on the situation in
Mali, in line with resolution 2071 (2012).
After due deliberations, the ECOWAS Council issued the attached
communiqué stating its position on some of the contents of the report.
In line with the Council of Ministers directive, it is my honour to forward to
you the communiqué for your necessary action, and to request your kind support in
forwarding same to all members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo
President of the Commission

2

12-62964

S/2012/905

Enclosure
[Original: English]

Economic Community of West African States
Communiqué of the Council of Ministers on the report of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
1.
The ECOWAS Council of Ministers, meeting at its 69th Ordinary Session in
Abidjan from 30 November to 2 December 2012, took note of the Report of the
United Nations Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, which has been
transmitted to the Security Council. The Council of Ministers fully appreciates the
efforts made for a comprehensive analysis of the context and challenges.
2.
Council is however disturbed by the seeming lack of urgency in the
recommendations of the report with regard to authorization to deploy an African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) as requested by ECOWAS and the
African Union (AU) after series of consultations with all international partners.
3.
Council recalls that, in line with United Nations Security Council resolution
2071, the Strategic Concept and the harmonized Concept of Operations (CONOPS)
forwarded to the Secretary-General by AU were developed, in collaboration with the
Malian Government and in close cooperation with military and security experts
from the United Nations system and other key partners, including France, the United
States of America, Canada, the neighbouring countries of Mali and the European
Union (EU).
4.
It is the view of ECOWAS that the situation in the north of Mali calls for
urgent action and proactive measures to restore the territorial integrity of the
country and dismantle the terrorist and criminal networks which have continued to
bring untold hardship and human rights abuses and violations not only in Mali but
across the ECOWAS region and beyond.
5.
Council considers the assertion that the populations of Northern Mali,
especially the Touaregs, are marginalized does not reflect the reality on the ground.
Council therefore expresses its highest reservations on this assertion.
6.
Council reaffirms ECOWAS’ determination to pursue the political dialogue
between the Transitional Government in Mali and the armed groups in the North
that are willing to give up terrorism and violence.
7.
Non-intervention in Northern Mali or any hesitation in the face of the
expeditious need to deploy the force may result in the worsening of the
humanitarian and security in the region and Africa. It would be tantamount to failure
to assist the Malian people and encourage further entrenchment of the terrorist and
criminal groups with far-reaching threats for regional and international security.
8.
The Council of Ministers urges the African Union to direct the African Group
in New York to expedite diplomatic efforts with the United Nations SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council Members on this matter.

12-62964

3

S/2012/905

9.
Council further urges the African Union and ECOWAS to expeditiously
dispatch a joint high-level mission to the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Security Council members on the situation in Mali.
10. The ECOWAS Council of Ministers urges the United Nations Security Council
to take into account, in considering the report, the urgent need of adopting a
resolution authorizing the use of force and the deployment of AFISMA in Mali,
under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter.

4

12-62964
