VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Mindful of the significant contribution to international
co-operation in the humanitarian field made by organizations and agencies of the United Nations system,
Recognizing the positive role played by the lndependent
Commission on International Humanitarian Issues,
Recognizing, in this connection, the 1mportance of the
contribution of governmental and non-governmental organizations, including the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies,
Recognizing the significance of the existing workable
system to promote, facilitate and co-ordinate
humanitarian activities carried out by Governments, the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,
Mindful of the importance of promoting universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and of
international co-operation in the humanitarian field for
improving relations among States and peoples,
Stressing the need for the international community to
continue its efforts in the field of humanitarian activities
and to provide the resources to develop further activities
in the humanitarian field,
Conscious that people want to live in a better, ~afer and
more just world,
1. Encourages the international community to develop
further its co-operation in the field of international
humanitarian activities;
2. Calls upan ali States to co-operate for the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and to work
together to promote international co-operation in order to
solve existing humanitarian problem-; of international
concern;
3. Encourages the international community to contribute substantially and regularly to international
humanitarian activities;
4. Considers that international co-operation in the
humanitarian field will facilitate better understanding,
mutual respect, confidence and tolerance among States
and peoples, thus contributing to a more just and nonviolent world;
5. Invites Governments, the United Nations system
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to develop international co-operation in the
humanitarian field on the basis of relevan! international
instruments;
6. Decides to consider the question of international cooperation in the humanitarian field under the item entitled
"New international humanitarian order"
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/122.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 which states that no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,137
13 7 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

219

Noting with satisfaction the entry into force on 26 June
1987 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Recalling its resolution 36/151 of 16 December 1981, in
which it noted with deep concern that acts of torture took
place m various countries, recognized the need to provide
assistance to the victims of torture in a purely
humanitarian spirit and established the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes
the provision of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the
victims and members of their families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 138
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have already
contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture;
2. Calls upan ali Governments, organizations and individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to requests for initial as well as further contributions to the
Fund;
3. invites Governments to make contributions to the
Fund, if possible on a regular basis, in order to enable the
Fund to provide continuous support to projects that depend on recurrent grants;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Board ofTrustees of
the Fund for the work it has carried out;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the support given to the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials, to assist
the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund in its efforts to make the
Fund and its humanitarian work better known and in its
appeal for contributions.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/123.

Status of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 and article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Política! Rights, 13 both of which provide that
no one shall be subjected to torture orto cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling further its resolution 39/46 of 10 December
1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratifi.cation and accession the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and called upon all Governments to consider
signing and ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority, as well as its resolutions 40/128 of 13 December
1985 and 41/134 of 4 December 1986,

I.IM

A/42/701.
