UNITED NATIONS

TY COUNCIL ’
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

4

YEAR

th
MEETING:

15 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2354)

. . . , , . ,, . .. ,. .. .. ... .. .. ... ., .. .. ... .

of the agenda .,.,..,..,............I........

,..,,.......I....

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14969) . . . . . . . , , . , , . . . , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1
1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .> are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date,

2354th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
Pwsidenf:

Mr. KAWANDA
(Zaire).

15 April

1982, at 4 p.m.

wa KAMANDA

Pse.scnf: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2354)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Chargi
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/14969)

2. The PRESIDENT
(irzfclpl,ctrrfion
fiorn
Fwwh):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received from the representatives of the Niger
and Senegal letters in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT
(intop,,efclficlr?
,fiom Fwnvh):
The first speaker is the representative
of Senegal.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the ChargC d’affaires
a.i. of the President Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14969)

4. Mr. DJIGO (Senegal)(ir~terp~cf~,tion~fr’orn Fwnc~h):
Mr. President, you will easily understand why the
representative
of Senegal comes to take part in a
meeting of the Council on the question of Palestine,
convened at the request of His Majesty the King of
Morocco and presided over by the representative of
Zaire.

1. The PRESIDENT
(infe~p,Efcrfion~~oIn
Fwwh):
In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings
on this item [2352nd rind 235.+d mwings],
I invite the
representatives of Israel and Morocco to take places at
the Council table, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh, Guinea, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Malaysia,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkey to take the places reserved fol
them at the side of the Council chamber. I invite the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber,

5. Need we indeed mention the traditional bonds of
co-operation and respect for the sovereignty of others
which have always characterized the relations of my
country with Morocco and Zaire?
6. Or need we recall that my Government
is determined to work towards a just solution of the Palestinian problem, or that Senegal will continue to denounce all crimes against the brother Palestinian
people?

I

7. 1 should like to congratulate you. Mr. President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Council at
this time when it is seized of this matter of such great
concern and to state that, for all of us who know how
experienced and skilful a diplomat you are, your presidency guarantees the success of our work.

tinian Arabs, has changed in its favour the demographic, cultural and religious nature of the Holy City.
Thus, many historical and religious sites have been
continuously violated and destroyed. Mosques have
been turned into synagogues-the
Al-Hal-am Allbrahimi Mosque in Hebron, to mention but one.

8. I wish also to convey to the members of the Council my delegation’s gratitude for allowing it to take part
in this debate.

16. Pursuing its determination to Judaize Jerusalem,
the Government of Israel prepared a draft law on the
transfer of foreign diplomatic
missions from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem, in disregard of international
sentiments and public opinion.

9. The Council is meeting now at the request of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and its Al-Quds
Committee to examine the very grave situation caused
by the wanton, indiscriminate
and deliberate armed
attack against the sacred AI-Aqsa Mosque and the
Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, This situation obviously results from the unilateral decision of the
Israeli Government
illegally to annex the Holy City
of Jerusalem by declaring it the capital of Israel-a
decision which we denounced right here on 27 June
1980 and which is part of a process begun a long time
ago by the Israeli Government.
Actually, since 1967
we have witnessed a wide movement of illicit occupation and expropriation
of Arab lands on the West
Bank of the Jordan. That measure of annexation was
nothing but a further step in Israel’s escalating consolidation of its illegal occupation of the Arab territories.

17. The Council,
465 ( 1980), stated:

in paragraph

5 of its resolution

“that all measures taken by Israel to change the
physical
character,
demographic
composition,
institutional
structure or status of the Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, or any part thereof have no
legal validity and that Israel’s policy and practices
of settling parts of its population and new immigrants
in those territories constitute a flagrant violation of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War’ and also constitute a serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.”
18. The event which brings us together today is a
result of that act of annexation, which we condemn
because of the threats that it entails for international
peace and security.

10. Since 1967, 87 settlements have been established
and the process, far from slowing down, has continued
to move forward with the advent of the Likhud to
power.

19. The Council will therefore understand our surprise at hearing the representative of Israel describe
in a very simplistic fashion the act of soldier Alan
Harry Goodman as the act of a “mentally deranged”
man [2352nd /nPcting, pura. k?], to use his own words,
to which we should not attach disproportionate importance,

l I. Israel’s intention was very clear from the outset:
purely and simply, it intends to ensure its permanence
on the West Bank on the basis of alleged security
reasons and in disregard of the aspirations of the
Palestinian people, which, under the leadership of the
PLO, is trying to regain its legitimate rights.
12. The question of Jerusalem cannot be separated
from the Palestinian problem as a whole, although it
has specific elements,
Indeed, the Holy City of
Jerusalem, since it contains the Holy Places of the
three revealed religions-Judaism,
Christianity
and
Islam-which
group together more than I.2 billion
worshippers, has a privileged place in the hearts of
hundreds of millions of believers.

20. It is a strange coincidence indeed that at the
moment when the Israeli representative was making
that statement before the Council another Israeli Soldier, as if to confirm the fact that the Israeli army is
truly an army of “mentally deranged” persons, killed
an 8-year-old Palestinian in Caza.
21. In his statement before the Council on I3 April,
the representative of Israel said: “What we are confronted with here is not merely intolerance and prejudice, but also bigotry, bigotry of the highest degree”
[ibid., POI’N. 4.31. Indeed, there is no other explanation for the act of Alan Harry Goodman, who really
must have acted in the grip of religious hatred.

13. Jerusalem represents and embodies the greatest
spiritual tradition of the world and the continuity of
the divine word proclaimed
by the three revealed
religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
14. In 1948, the Palestinian Arabs had approximately
two thirds of the western part of Jerusalem, claimed
as so-called Israeli Jerusalem.

22. The facts could not be clearer: on Sunday,
I I April, at 9.20 a.m., an Israeli soldier, rifle in hand,
entered the sacred Al-Aqsa Mosque and in cold blood
killed Haj Saleh Yaman and Yihad Badr. The Israeli
authorities believe that it was the isolated act of 3
mentally deranged soldier.

IS. Today, they have practically nothing left. Israel,
in pursuing its policy of confiscation of land in the
eastern part of the City till then occupied by the Pales2

23. The Islamic Council of Jerusalem, in its telegram
of 14 April, which was read out yesterday by the
representative of Jordan [2353rd muting, pc~cr. 631,
gives irrefutable proof of the development of events,
proving that this was a sacrilegious crime, and, what
is more, was perpetrated on an Easter Sunday in one
of the holiest sanctuaries, Haram al-Sharif, the sacred
Al-Aqsa Mosque-a crime in which the Israeli army is
implicated. That bloody and sacrilegious act, as His
Majesty King Hassan II said in his message, “has
rendered more dangerous a situation that already
endangered international
peace” 12.752~’ !neetin~,
ptrra. 151.

28. Mr. OUMAROU
(Niger) (iillr,p~rtotion
,fi.om
Frrnch): Mr. President, the personal links between us,
your experience and your qualities as a jurist and
distinguished diplomat, as well as the excellent relations between Zaire and the Niger within the Organization of African Unity and the Movement of NonAligned Countries,
all contribute
to my immense
pleasure today at seeing you guiding the work of the
Council during this particularly busy month of April.
I have no doubt that you will continue to discharge
your important and delicate functions with competence, wisdom and devotion. Through you, I should
also like to thank all the members of the Council for
having permitted my delegation to take part in this
debate, and I wish to congratulate
most warmly
Mrs. Kirkpatrick
for the remarkable work she did
during the month of March.

24. It does not suffice to claim that “the people of
Israel and the Jewish people around the world share
the sense of revulsion at this despicable act” [ikin.,
pnlvr. 421. as the representative of Israel claimed, in an
attempt to shed responsibility for this act. It is above
all strange that there has been an effort to associate
this act with the assassination attempt on Pope John
Paul II, as if Saint Peter’s Square were in occupied
Palestine. The event which we are denouncing took
place in occupied Jerusalem, and that act was inspired
by and is part and parcel of Israel’s methods and practices in the occupied Palestinian territories. In fact,
Israel, with contempt for United Nations resolutions,
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and, I would
even say, international
law, is deliberately pursuing
in the occupied Arab territories a policy that breeds
tension of incalculable consequences.

29. Once again, the Council is meeting to examine
the question of Jerusalem, and once again the Council
is dealing with some extremely tragic and bloody
events which, unfortunately,
serve to remind international public opinion of the state of violence and
intolerance that for too long now has been constantly
besetting the life of the occupied Arab territories.
30. Thus the barbarous act of desecration perpetrated on I I April last outside the two largest mosques
of the Holy City of Jerusalem is but another link
in the long chain of harassment, common crimes and
provocations of all kinds, the ultimate and unavowed
aim of which is to bring to a head the exasperation of
the Islamic community, which is of one mind in working
for the liberation of Al-Quds and which is lending its
massive support and solidarity to the just and heroic
struggle of the Palestinian people. By maintaining this
cynical atmosphere, the Israeli fanatics and hawks
are hoping, in fact, to maintain indefinitely
in the
region, and thereby justify, a state of repeated crises
in order to vindicate the Israeli policy of repression,
aggression, war and domination.

2s. As long as a peaceful settlement based on recognition of the Palestinian people’s inalienable national
right to self-determination
and independence is ignored
or disregarded by the Israeli Government, there will
be no peace in that region, and its professed desire
to achieve tolerance and coexistence in a climate of
peace and reconciliation in Jerusalem will not change
anything. To be sure, neither this Goodman nor other
Goodmans will ever bend the will of the Palestinian
people to claim its basic right to life, To pursue peace
and reconciliation
in Jerusalem is to concede the
legitimacy of the aspirations of the Palestinian people,
which are the concerns of the PLO.

31. But-and
the gravity of the matter before us
prevents me from entering into detail-it
is an act of
defiance of a world thirsting for justice; it is an act of
defiance of the determination
of the Islamic world,
which is resolved, if need be, to fight to the end; it is
an act of defiance of the international
community’s
increasingly firm rejection of any policy of arrogance,
fcrits (rwomplis and occupation of land by force.

26. I would say, in conclusion, that the debate which
brings us together today is of exceptional and historical
significance, and we wish to believe that the Council
will be able to find the right asylum for that army
of “mentally
deranged” persons so that there will
be an end to provocations, hatred and violence, a
birth of peace in that sorely-tried region, and a strengthening of the international
community’s
faith in the,
effectiveness and ability of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

32. In these dark days through which the Middle
East is now passing, in the face of the wave of violence
which has once again engulfed the occupied Arab
territories, and particularly in the face of the attempts
to mutilate and destroy the holiest sanctuaries of
Islam, located in Al-Quds, the Council must unequivocally condemn the barbarous acts of sacrilege against
the Holy Places of Jerusalem-acts
for which Israel,
as the occupying military Power, must assume responsibility under the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
But the Council should also take this occasion to

27. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtotion
jkorn Fwnch):
The next speaker is the representative of the Niger.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
3

4

repeat its demand for Israel’s unconditional withdrawal
from all the Arab territories occupied since 1967; it
should demand the cessation of the repeated desecration of the Holy City of Jerusalem by restoring that
city to its international
status of a c*o,puu separcrtrrin,
as desired by Muslims, Christians and the vast majority of the international
community.
It should also
proclaim the right of the Palestinian refugees to return
freely to their lands in order to set up there their own
homeland. This would entail recognition of the right
of the thus rehabilitated
Palestinian people to selfdetermination
and independence; it would also entail
the quest for peace talks between the parties in conflict-talks
in which the PLO, the sole and authentic
representative
of the Palestinian
people, must be
equitably associated.

38. It will be recalled that since last summer alone
the Council has been convened several times to deat
with developments in the Middle East resulting from
Israel’s policies in the area. These include Israel’s
bombing of a densely populated area of Beirut, Israel’s
unprovoked attack on Iraq’s nuclear reactor, Israel’s
annexation of the Golan Heights and Israel’s arbitrary
dismissal of duly elected Arab officials following the
imposition of civilian rule in the occupied West Bank
and Gaza Strip.
39. Today the Council is meeting again to deal with
yet another situation, namely, the desecration of one of
the most holy places of Islam, the first Kiblah of
Islam: the Dome of the Rock Mosque in Jerusalem.
It is known to all that the perpetrator of this incident
is an Israeli soldier, who was in uniform when carrying
out the attack, openly carried arms when entering the
Mosque, shot randomly at Muslim worshippers and
was finally captured only after having spent all his
ammunition.
Furthermore,
this so-called deranged
soldier was supposed to have undergone extensive
routine examinations
at the time of his recruitment
into the Israeli army.

33. For its part, the Niger has stated so often, here
and throughout the world, how much it longs for the
triumph of justice and right. It has thus more than once
proclaimed its support for the Islamic, Palestinian and
Arab cause in the affairs of the Middle East. As an
Islamic country, it has just observed 14 April as a day
of solidarity with the Palestinian
people who are
struggling in the occupied territories and a day of
national protest against the act of sacrilege committed
at AI-Quds. That is a sign of the impatience and concern with which we await the end of intolerance and
the triumph of the healthy and fruitful coexistence
of the peoples and the cultures of the Middle East.

40, My delegation views this heinous act as a direct
consequence of Israeli policy, which is based on contempt for the rights of the Palestinian people. What
is more, this is not the first attempt to destroy this
holy site of Islam. The attack by an arsonist on the
Mosque in 1969 provoked condemnation not only from
Muslim countries, but from all corners of the world,
Subsequently there have been further attempts to
destroy the Mosque, As recently as 1980, high explosives were located and defused in the Dome of the
Rock Mosque. Today the systematic desecration of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Holy Places as a whole
continues in the form of excavations that threaten
their structural integrity. Indeed, the international
community cannot but view this latest attack as an
outcome of the growing belligerent attitude by Israeli
settlers towards the Arab people.

34. The PRESIDENT
(inferpr’cfrrfion
fm77
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
35. Mr. DJALAL
(Indonesia): Sir, since this is my
first statement before the Council this month, I should
like to extend my warm congratulations
to you upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of April. As the Council faces yet another
grave development
in the occupied Arab territories
I am confident that with your able guidance it will
conclude its deliberations successfully.

41. In recent months, the world has witnessed an
unprecedented
escalation of violence against the
Arab population in the occupied territories. This can be
traced back to Israel’s expansionist policies of annexing the Golan Heights and imposing civilian Israeli
rule in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and to the
earlier act by Israel of proclaiming the occupied Holy
City of Jerusalem as its capital, Each of those actions
has been condemned by an overwhelming majority
of Member States.

36. I should also like to pay a tribute to Mrs. Jeane
Kirkpatrick,
the Permanent
Representative
of the
United States of America, for the skilful manner in
which she conducted the Council’s business during bet
term as its President in March.
37. I am grateful to you and to the members of the
Council for having given us the opportunity
to participate in the debate on a matter of serious concern to
all Member States and of exceptional concern to my
country. As members of the Council know, Indonesia
is a member of the AI-Quds Committee of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Our special interest in the Holy City of Jerusalem reflects the fact that
more than 130 million people in Indonesia are Muslims
and are living in harmony and mutual respect with
their fellow Indonesians of other religious beliefs.

42. The heroic resistance of the Arab population in
the occupied territories underscores its determiaation to oppose the oppressive and repressive policies
of the Israeli occupying forces. Since December last
year numerous unarmed Palestinians in the occupied
territories have been killed, hundreds have heen
arrested or detained, collective punishment--in
the
form of the demolition of homes and reprisals against
4

whole villages and towns-has
become commonplace, schools and universities have been closed
indefinitely,
elected Arab officials have been arbitrarily
dismissed and vigilante squads made up of Israeli
settlers have had a free hand in their campaign against
the Arab population. On the basis of the aforementioned facts, my delegation considers the attack on
the Dome of the Rock Mosque as another reflection of
the policy against the Arab population in the occupied
territories.

47. This incident further demonstrates
the Israeli
rCgime’s inability to maintain order and to safeguard
the Holy Places in Jerusalem. It is in this connection
that my delegation would like to reiterate the position of my Government
that sovereignty over the
Holy City of Jerusalem must be returned to Arab
custody. Therefore, my delegation urges the Council
to take appropriate steps in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations and its own resolutions, including
resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).
We must be able to force Israel to cease the Judaization of the Holy City of Jerusalem. We must be able
to compel Israel to revoke its “basic law on JeruSalem”, to discontinue the diggings and other acts of
desecration of Islamic Holy Places and to stop immediately the campaign of terror against the Arab population. My delegation is prepared, as always, to support
all efforts of the international
community
to bring
justice and peace to the region by securing the complete
and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli occupation
forces from all occupied territories,
including the
return of the Holy City of Jerusalem to Arab custody.

A mere two days before the desecration of the
Dome of the Rock Mosque, my Minister for Foreign
Affairs was in Kuwait attending the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned
Countries on the question of Palestine,
held from 5 to 8 April 1982. In his statement to the
Meeting, Mr. Mochtar Kusumantmadja
said:
43.

“The situation of late in the Arab occupied territories has become very tense due to a reign of terror
instituted by the occupying authorities against the
population
of the West Bank and Gaza. Elected
mayors and village leaders have been dismissed
while the number of those killed and maimed increases every day.”

48. The PRESIDENT
(irzr~~rp~c~talior? ,fiom Fwnrh):
The next speaker is the representative
of Guinea.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

The final communiqui
of the Meeting took special
note of and expressed deep concern with regard to the
desecration of Holy Places in the occupied territories,
specifically mentioning the Dome of the Rock Mosque.

49.

Mr. COUMBASSA
(Guinea) (inrclprc~ttrtion,~on?
Mr. President, first of all I should like to
thank you and the members of the Council for having
permitted me to participate in this debate. I take this
opportunity also to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month of
April. Having personally had the honour and benefit
of knowing you and being able to appreciate your
eminent diplomatic
qualities, my delegation is convinced that under your presidency the Council will
discharge its important duties.
Fwnch):

44. As reports of the attack and further details become known, the international community is outraged
not only at the desecration of this most holy shrine
but also at the conduct of Israeli forces, who shot and
wounded numerous Arabs at the site of the attack.
45. The intensification
of intimidation
and oppression of the Arab population in the occupied territories
by Israeli authorities as well as by Israeli settlers underscores the seriousness of the rapidly deteriorating
situation. It seems clear that Israel intends to complete
the absorption of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in
the near future, which could result in yet another war
in the region and a world-wide threat to peace. This
situation
has been further aggravated by Israel’s
deployment
of troops which have been massed on the
Lebanese border and which are waiting for the order
to unleash a new wave of destruction on that longsuffering country. Therefore, the international
community must act to defuse this dangerous situation
before the region is engulfed in a new wave of hostilities.

50. I also take this opportunity to convey the warmest congratulations
of my delegation to Mrs. Kirkpatrick of the United States on the remarkable mannet
in which she presided over the Council in March.
51. Once again we are meeting to examine the situation in the occupied Arab territories, a situation which
is becoming ever more alarming because of the militarist, police and annexationist
policy of the State of
Israel.
52, The grave events which have been taking place
in the occupied Arab territories,
particularly
in the
Holy City of Jerusalem, pose a dangerous threat to
international
peace and security.

46. The attack on the Dome of the Rock Mosque
is particularly
repugnant to the Indonesian people,
90 per cent of whom are Muslims, constituting the
largest Muslim population in the world. We view this
desecration not only in the context of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, but also as a direct attack on our faith.

53. Indeed, although we know the designs harboured
by the Zionist camp ever since it prepared its expansionist plan in 1919, we may wkll wonder exactly where
the Zionists think they are heading in their relations
with their Arab neighbours.
5

54. Less than two months ago, the Council dealt with
the question of the Arab territories occupied by Israel,
which had just purely and simply annexed the Syrian
Golan Heights.

current month. The times are difficult and the problems we confront in very different parts of the world
are most serious. We wish you continued success in
your formidable task.

55. Less than two weeks ago the arbitrary decision
of the Israeli administration
to dismiss the Arab
mayors democratically
elected by the Palestinian
people of the major towns in occupied Palestine
alarmed the international community about the increasingly explosive nature of the situation in the region.

64. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessc )r,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick
of the United States of Amcye !
ica, who so effectively conducted the deliberations of i
the Council during a particularly
sensitive and dif- /
ficult period.
1

56. And only last 11 April one of the holiest places of
Islam was desecrated by a Zionist horde sowing death
and destruction among scores of people, some of the
Muslim faithful actually inside the Al-Aqsa Mosque
being seriously wounded.

65. A sacrilegious crime was committed last Sund;
in Jerusalem against one of the holiest sanctuaries,
mankind. Most deplorably, it is not the first time th
such criminal profanity has been perpetrated again
the Holy Places in the City. Israel, as the occupyil
Power since 1967, has the responsibility of helping I
protect and safeguard the sanctity of all the religion
sites in Al-Quds. Yet Israel has persistently failed I
live up to its responsibilities
as the occupying Powc
in Jerusalem, as elsewhere. That is the reason why H
are engaged in the present discussion. It is our earnc
hope that at the end of this debate, the Council w
find it possible to take a unanimous and resolute stan
on the issue, because only a united call by the Count
can help to alleviate and soothe the explosive tensio
in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories. espc
cially in Jerusalem.

57. Indeed, the acts of repression against the civilian Palestinian population
committed
by the Israeli
occupying forces are common coin. The Government of Israel has full responsibility
for the recent
acts of desecration of the Holy Places of Islam in occupied Palestine. One would have to be ndive not to
believe in the premeditated
nature of these acts of
Zionist desecration committed
against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, which
are venerated by millions of Muslims,
58. My delegation strongly condemns this latest crime
of the Zionists against the Holy Places of Islam in
occupied Palestine.

66. The incident that took place on 11 April in th
Dome of the Rock and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as we
as the events that immediately
followed it, hav
shocked the entire world. The Government of Israr
has also expressed its condemnation. The issue, ho\\
ever, is not whether the Israeli soldier involved in th
incident is insane and whether he acted alone. Whal
ever the case, Israel cannot be absolved of its obliga
tions towards the Holy Places in Jerusalem. Under tl~
Geneva Conventions
of 1949, Israeli occupation
authorities bear the full responsibility
for helping tl
protect the religious sanctuaries in Al-Quds. In OLI
view, therefore, to argue that the deplorable situatiol
is the product of the lunacy of a single, derangel
person and to condemn the crime within that frame
work is not credible, nor is it sufficient to disposl
finally of the issue.

59. We venture to hope that those, who support
Israel in its repressive acts against the Arab people of
occupied Palestine will finally succeed in making Israel
heed to voice of reason and prevail upon it to put an
end to these damaging blows to universal values and
to respect human dignity.
60. We therefore would express the hope that, for
just once, the Council will be given the opportunity to
discharge freely its obligations for the preservation of
peace in that area by adopting appropriate measures
to respond to the situation prevailing there. If the
Council wants to see international peace and security
in the Middle East, it can do no less.
6 I. We wish to express again to the heroic people of
Palestine the whole-hearted and complete solidarity of
the people and Government
of Guinea in their just
national liberation struggle, under the leadership of
their sole and authentic representative, the PLO.

67, What happened in Jerusalem last Sunday, what,
ever its particular dimensions, was no ordinary crimt
committed
under otherwise ordinary circumstance!
and at an ordinary site, in what might be considered
normal times for the people and the area involved,
The true significance of the events of last Sunday ii
that a new sacrilege was perpetrated against the
legacy of one of the great religions of mankind at fl
time when the whole region is experiencing extremely
demanding and volatile tension. Israel, the occupying
Power, should know better than anyone else that
events that serve to increase tension in the area,
particularly acts of desecration and destruction aimed
at holy sanctuaries, must be prevented.

62. The PRESIDENT
(irzterplctcrtion
jhrn
French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Turkey.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
63. Mr. KIR(?A (Turkey): At the outset, Sir, I should
like to extend our congratulations
to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
6

68. Israel ought to demonstrate by its deeds that it
accepts, assumes and in good faith carries out the
responsibilities and obligations as the occupying Powel
which are incumbent upon it under the principles of
international law and, in particular, the Geneva Conventions of 1949. That is, Israel must act as the occupying Power even if that may not be how Israel
views-indeed
illegally views-its
presence in the
Palestinian and Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
which it occupied in 1967. Yet it is abundantly clear
that Israel’s performance in the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories has been a very poor one, consisting of a long history of failures in regard to its
obligations and responsibilities,
Rather, Israel has
followed a policy of illegal settlements and of annexation in the territories it has occupied since 1967. Turkey
has always vigorously condemned Israel’s policy
towards the lands under its occupation, has never
recognized any of Israel’s acts that purport to change
the status of Jerusalem and has regarded all such acts
relating to the occupied territories as null and void.

scribed, it will be giving a glimmer of hope to the Arab
Palestinian people in their just struggle and will thus
have taken a much-needed step, conducive to the
reduction of intolerable tension in the area. This would
also be a demonstration that the Council shares the
strong sentiments felt by all Muslims in the world.
73. The PRESIDENT
(interpwt(ltim .fiotn Fwr~c~h):
The next speaker is the representative of Iran. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
a statement.
74. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Iran): I sincerely
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.
75. I should like at the outset to remind the members
of the Council, and indeed all the audience, that everybody in this chamber is certainly very sad and unhappy
that a large number of innocent people, including
children and persons of various ages, have been
murdered in a very sacred place. Some other good
Muslims have lost their lives on the way of God and
for the cause of the Palestinian people. They were
executed yesterday, in Egypt.

69. One rule of wisdom that has applicability in the
realm of international
relations, particularly in reference to the behaviour of nation-States, is that one
cannot make a wrong right by pointing at other wrongs
which are not one’s own. Injustice and crime anywhere
are repulsive and must be eradicated. All of us have
first to ask ourselves whether we are behaving responsibly and in accordance with reason and justice. Israel
too should first scrutinize its own actions before
pointing the finger at others.

76. For the peace and tranquillity of the souls of all
those martyrs, I shall begin my statement by reciting
a few verses from Sura II, verses 153 to 157, of the
Holy Koran that are very appropriate:
“Oh ye who believe! Seek help in steadfastness
and prayer. Lo! Allah is with the steadfast.
“And call not those who are slain in the way of
Allah ‘dead’. Nay, they are living, only ye perceive
not.
“And surely we shall try you with something
of fear and hunger, and loss of wealth and lives and
crops; but give glad tidings to the steadfast,
“Who say, when a misfortune striketh them:
Lo! we are Allah’s and lo! unto Him we are returning.
“Such are they on whom are blessings from their
Lord, and mercy. Such are the rightly guided.”

70. We are confident that the Council will strongly
condemn the criminal sacrilege recently perpetrated
in Jerusalem. We hope that the Council will also
remind Israel of its responsibilities
and obligations
as the occupying Power, particularly towards the protection and preservation of all the Holy Places in AlQuds, Anything less from the Council may invite more
violence and greater tension in the area.
7 I. The Arab Palestinian people in the West Bank and
Gaza continue to be engaged in a struggle of national
liberation. The Government of Turkey believes, as it
has reiterated on numerous occasions, that until
Israel withdraws from all the Palestinian and Arab
territories it occupied in 1967, including Jerusalem,
and until the Arab Palestinian people, represented
by the PLO, exercise their inalienable rights-in
particular their right to self-determination,
including
the right to establish their own independent Statethere can be no just, lasting and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East: only such a solution would
ensure the existence and the security of the boundaries
of all the States in the region, Failure to restore the
inalienable rights of the Arab Palestinian people is
the ultimate reason underlying the smouldering tension in the West Bank and Gaza, and indeed in the
whole region,

77. Today our brothers and sisters, including many
old men, women and children, are in grief and mourning
because they have lost members of their families.
Today many unarmed civilians have lost their fathers
and are now orphans. Women are widows and parents
are burying their beloved children.
78. Their only fault was that they went to pray in
the Mosque and to perform their religious duties.
Where are those secular anti-religious materialist
merchants who were pouring out sentimental statements about religious tolerance? Where are they?
Where are the supporters of religious tolerance? Are
they going to exercise their veto “wrong” again and
prevent even the adoption of a so-called resolution
against the criminals. 9 I shall not be amazed if they
do so again,

72. If the Council is able to adopt a united stand on
this particular item along the lines I have just de7

79. The issue of AI-Quds is not a private one, nor
does it concern a single country or only the Muslims
of the world. It is an issue for all the monotheistic
peoples of the whole world. It has been so since the
beginning of the building of AI-Aqsa and it will continue to be so as long as the world exists. It must
therefore be of great concern to the Council.

Palestine open a new front inside the occupied land.
The holy nature of their struggle is understood from the
Holy Koran in their hands,
84. My delegation reminded the Council at a previous
meeting on Palestine that the moment of victory was
approaching; it is now approaching even closer. My
delegation further reminded the Council that the blood
of the Palestinian martyrs would be boiling until the
criminal received due justice: the members of the
Council can now see that it is boiling.

80. Many speakers have already reviewed the details
of the latest and most serious acts of aggression by the
racist forces occupying
AI-Quds upon the Holy
Mosque of AI-Aqsa and the serious implications
and
consequences. My delegation shares the view that we
are not dealing with an isolated event but rather with
another manifestation
of a general policy of the occupying forces to change the historic and Islamic
character of Al-Quds. It is common knowledge that
scores of Council resolutions have not brought justice
to the Palestinian people nor safety to the Islamic
sanctuaries in AI-Quds. It is time for all Muslims to
accept the bitter realities of international
relations
manifested in the impotence of the Council and finally
to stop hoping that those same Powers thanks to
whose vital support and unjustified use of their veto
in the Council the usurping regime survives will win
their rights for them.

85. The concept of shahadat is not apparently ap.
preciated by many. Shahadat means witness, prototype, archetype, omnipresence: and when we achieve
shahadat we set the optimum, the criterion of truth,
86. The Council may also know that a prophetic’
tradition tells us: he who is martyred in defence of his
dignity or property is a shahid-or a martyr. That is to
say, when a Muslim achieves martyrdom in defence of
Al-Quds he is a shahid. Muslims are therefore determined to defend it and go to paradise.
87. I should like to quote a passage from my previous statement on this subject:
“the Palestinians will definitely sort out their problem with reference to divine law, which is: ‘If,
then, anyone attacks you, attack him in like manner as he attacked you: fear Allah, and know that
Allah is with those who restrain themselves’ ”
[234&h meeting, pc/~vi , 161.

81. The racist forces occupying Al-Quds have during
the past 15 years demonstrated not only that they are
incapable of safeguarding the Islamic sanctuaries but
that, on the contrary, they are determined gradually
to destroy them, The efforts of Muslims shouId not
be wasted on trying to extract resolutions condemning
the usurping regime for its policies. Rather, the potentialities of all Muslim nations should be mobilized to
establish Islamic control over the Islamic shrines and
sanctuaries in Al-Quds as well as over the Islamic and
Arab territories under occupation.

88. To that fact we must add that today many more
millions of Muslims all over the world are demonstrating in solidarity with and support for the Palestinians. The waves of human oceans are rolling against
the oppressive racists and the high tide is going to
drown the imperialist Powers which are supporting
the enemy.

82. This requires serious sacrifices on the part of
all Muslims: politically on the part of States, economically on the part of peoples and militarily on the part
of all those Mojahedin
of Sabilillah, who are all over
the Muslim world and are ready to accept martyrdom
for the sake of Islam. The Islamic Republic of Iran
and the revolutionary
people of Iran are prepared
to make these sacrifices, In the circumstances this
seems to be, as we believe, the only practical way to
achieve justice. This is the path that AIlah has dictated to all believers. Muslims all over the world are
today clearly indicating that they are serious about
defending their sanctuaries and are demonstrating
to the big Powers which support the usurper’s acts of
aggression that they stand to lose against Islamic unity
if they do not stop their support of their unholy war
against Muslims.

89. Last time I predicted that the Council would not
take any serious measures, and we saw that, thanks te
the veto right, the consultations
and deliberations
resulted in nothing. My delegation again requests the
Council to act responsibly. If it had done so at that
time, the recent loss of lives would probably have been
prevented. My delegation is absolutely sure that if the
Council does not appreciate the gravity of the situation today, the international body will be more sorry
very soon.
90. The solution to the problem today, as the Council
knows very well, is no longer to be sought in producing
mild resolutions. The world community-all
these
countries which envisage maintaining good relations
with the Muslim world and, indeed, those which claim
to care for international
peace and security-must
face the truth that Palestine belongs to the Palestinians,
The sooner the Palestinians go back to their homeland the less tension and the more international Peace
and security there will be in the area.

83. Yesterday hundreds of millions were on strike all
over the world. The Security Council must respond
to this global protest constructively,
if it is not to be
considered an *‘insecurity
council”. This misfortune
has fortunately
culminated
in making the people of
8

9 I, Compensation for the losses and damage inflicted
upon the Palestinians inside and outside the occupied
lands, as well as for the losses inflicted upon the
Lebanese and other peoples, must inevitably be paid.

major aggression, if you really wish to prevent the
consequential ones. Only by doing so will the United
Nations be saved. It is a great challenge for the Council to establish the credibility of the United Nations
and to restore the confidence of the Member States
in it.

92. Foreign subjects who under the fake claim of
dual nationality have moved to Palestine to kill innocent local people must return to their countries of
origin where street murder does not yield national
demonstrations
and protests. Palestine, apparently,
is not a safe place for the murderers.

98. Why should the whole world believe that the
United Nations is simply a show-a
platform-fool
justifying the inhuman acts of a few influential Members? Is it not really outrageous to have a charter. a
declaration of human rights, so many conventions,
rules and regulations, so many standing and rr~l hoc*
committees,
thousands of highly-educated
people,
so much paper-work here, without a single nation
having the slightest confidence in the United Nations?
Is it not contrary to the whole philosophy of the creation of this international body? If we cannot count on
the authority and even the relative independence of
the United Nations, what is the point of everybody’s
presence here?

93. My delegation does not wish any discrimination or injustice for the native Jews of Palestine. Those
Jews, like the Christians and Muslims, must have
full freedom to administer their sanctuaries, to preach
and practise their faith fully and comprehensively,
as
well as the chance to participate in the administration
of the country without any discrimination,
94. Please remember that Islam, Christianity
and
Judaism are the three greatest divine faiths advocating submission to God. According to tradition, the
Holy Prophet mentions “my brother Moses . , . and
my brother Jesus . . .” This means that Muslims, Jews
and Christians have enough ideological grounds to
live together in peace and fraternity-of
course, when
Palestinian sovereignty is restored to their homeland.
The Holy Koran states, in Sura III, verse 64:

99. The racist usurpers have been murdering, trcspassing and aggressing from the very beginning and at
the same time playing semantics, polemics and rhetorical tricks to prove that right is wrong and wrong is
right. It seems that the United Nations is taking one of
its crucial tests now. After our Islamic revolution we
frankly said we did not have much hope in it. Now
others are joining us. The Council needs to show the
rest of the world that the United Nations is not a
private international
club, deceiving the small nations
of the world, which come here with so much goodwill
and sincerity.

“Say: 0 people of the Scripture! Come to an
agreement between us and you: that we shall worship none but Allah, and that we shall ascribe no
partner unto Him, and that none of us shall take
others for lords beside Allah, And if they turn away,
then say: Bear witness that we are they who have
surrendered [unto Allah, not to the enemy].”

100. Fortunately,
the course of events is in yout
favour and in favour of the oppressed, Today the most
reactionary Idgimes are no longer in a position to keep
silent. This means that the Palestinian cause is automatically giving direction to many rkgimes, and at this
stage the Council has the direct backing of hundreds
of millions of people, and not simply a few Government representatives.

95. My delegation reiterates: Please wake up, and
awaken the wisdom of those who support the racist
aggression unnecessarily, before it is too late.
94. The imposition
of an illegitimate
rkgime upon
the people of Palestine is the greatest mistake of this
international
body. The fact is that whatever the illicit
rkgime achieves in the occupied land has no legitimacy
and is nothing but usurpation and trespassing, whether
it be the destruction of religious centres, the murder
of worshippers or the building of schools or churches.
From the legal point of view, contruction and destruction by the usurping body are equally contrary to
principle.

101. Therefore, vote for the oppressed and let yout
resolutions be vetoed again and again, because only
then will you have many more strikes and demonstrations in your favour and in support of you. Please
be firm and do not negotiate or moderate. Truth is with
you;
the masses are with you, God is with you and you
will soon be the winner.
102. The PRESIDENT
(iniPt’PI’LJt(!fiotl~fj’ot71 Fwtwl~):
The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

97, Once illegitimacy
and aggression are tolerated
and recognized by this international body, the destruction of schools and sanctuaries and homicide automatically
become permissible. It is the root of all the
contingencies,
aggression, annexation and destruction that is to be cut, not the fruit. The major original
aggression is to be abolished: the consequential problems would be solved automatically.
It is necessary,
therefore,
to concentrate on the elimination
of the

103. Mr. ABDALLA
(Sudan): Sir, we are very happy
to see you presiding over the arduous work of the
Security Council during this month of April, when the
Council is seized of very serious problems that endanger world peace and security. Our knowledge of
9

your talents, wide experience and devotion makes us
confident that under your leadership and guidance
this body will shoulder its responsibilities
effectively.

the sabotage of Muslim and Christian Holy Places,
and through the intimidation
and harassment of Palestinians and the confiscation and blowing up of their
homes in the Holy City.

104. We should like also to express our appreciation and gratitude for the very capable and ob.jective
manner in which your predecessor, the representative of the United States of America, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
conducted the work of the Council at an equally
difficult time.

108. The question under consideration
is of gre;lt
magnitude and. in our view, threatens the peace and
security of the region and the world at large. It constitutes a flagrant violation of principles of international
law and of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. Furthermore, it proves beyond any doubt the
unwillingness
of Israel, the occupying Power, to
observe and apply the provisions of the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949’ or to heed and implement the relevant Council resolutions on the occupied Arab [erritories and on the status and character of Jerusalem.

10.5. Once more, and in a period of less than two
weeks, the Council is faced with another criminal,
provocative and, this time, sacrilegious act of aggression perpetrated by Israel in the occupied Arab territories, I am not going to burden the Council with all
the details of this latest episode, as they have already
been dealt with at length by many of the speakers who
have preceded me in this debate, as well as by the
message of the Islamic Higher Council conveyed to the
Council yesterday by the representative
of Jordan
[2353d

109. The people and Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Sudan strongly condemn this barbaric
Israeli act of aggression and call upon the Council to
take all appropriate measures under the Charter to
protect the Holy Places and shrines in the occupied
Arab territories.

meefing, ~CII’N. 631.

106. The Easter Sunday massacre of the Muslim
worshippers, the attack on the venerated holy shrines
and places of Haram al-Sharif and the Dome of the
Rock by the Israelis is a provocative affront deeply
resented not only by Muslims but also by all people
the world over. The massacre, we must not forget,
took place on a day holy to Christians, in a shrine
holy to Muslims and in a city holy to Jews, Christians
and Muslims. The concerted attempts by the Zionist
authorities and organizations
to construe and interpret it as an act of lunacy committed by a mentally
deranged soldier will certainly fool nobody. Israeli
aggressive and expansionist
designs regarding the
future of the occupied Arab territories,
their Arab
owners and inhabitants,
their culture, religion and
Holy Places are common knowledge. The condemned
Israeli Zionist ideology, policies and practices in all
occupied Arab territories, as reflected in the records
of the United Nations alone, are enough testimony in
this respect. This latest Israeli crime, therefore, is by
no means an isolated incident detached from other
atrocious and repressive Israeli measures and policies
of occupation and colonization aimed at terrorizing the
Palestinian Arabs and forcing them to flee their homes,
lands and belongings to accommodate
the imported
Zionist settlers.

110. Yesterday, 14 April, was solemnly observed in
the Democratic Republic of the Sudan as a day of
solidarity with the heroic Arab and Palestinian people
in the occupied Arab territories.
President Jaafar
Mohammed Nemery addressed the nation on that sad
occasion and all services, in both the public and the
private sectors, were closed throughout the country.
Moreover, the Sudanese People’s National Assembly
held a special session at which it condemned lhe
brutal attack on the Holy Places and on the worshippers
inside the Al-Aqsa and the Dome of the Rock mosques,
and called upon all parliaments of the world to condemn
this act of aggression and support the just cause of the
Arab and Palestinian people under Israeli occupation.
I I I. We fully support our Palestinian brethren in
the occupied territories and salute their heroic struggle
for liberation and freedom under one of the most
repressive and oppressive racial rCgimes ever known.
Their courageous demonstrations
and their fighting
in self-defence are clear testimony of their determination and will to regain their inalienable rights to S&
determination
and to return to their homes, and their
right to establish their own independent State.
112. The frequency with which the Council meets
to consider Israeli violations of the Charter of the
United Nations, international
law and conventions,
and the norms of basic human decency is indeed
alarming. That frequency should not lull the Council
and the international
community into a sense of cornplacency or casualness; rather it should lead to sOme
soul-searching and serious reflection on the role the
Council should play,

107. The Easter Sunday massacre and the indiscriminate shooting of unarmed demonstrators that followed
are serious in their own right, but are far more serious
when viewed against the total context in which they
took place. What happened on Easter Sunday, as we
have said, is no isolated incident: it is part and parcel
of a sinister, brutal and deliberate Israeli plan to
depopulate
the occupied
Arab territories
through
intimidation and physical liquidation of the Palestinians
and other Arabs under Israeli occupation. The sinister
Israeli plan aims also at transforming Jerusalem into
an exclusively Zionist city through excavations and

113. Mere condemnation of Israel will lead US nowhere except to more and more of these criminal acts
of aggression. The Council must use its mandate under
IO

the Charter to bring about Israeli withdrawal from all
occupied Arab territories, No action short of that can
put an end to the continuing Israeli acts of aggression
against the Palestinians and other Arabs in the occupied territories,

“This denial of justice, coupled with their illegal
annexation of Al-Quds al-Sharif. constitutes
an
affront to the sentiments of our Muslim and Christian
brethren everywhere. The barbaric oppression and
terror unleashed by Israel upon the innocent inhabitants of the West Bank is another proof of its total
disregard for all norms of international
law and
civilized behaviour. These wanton acts of Israeli
aggression constitute a grave challenge to the international community and the United Nations and a
threat to international peace and security.

I 14. The PRESIDENT
(intop~ctrrtion.fi.o177
Fwwh):
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
I IS. Mr. SOBHAN (Bangladesh): Sir, my delegation
is very pleased to see you presiding over the Council
and we are confident that the deliberations
of the
Council will benefit immensely from your proven
wisdom and leadership.

“It is our deep conviction that there can be no
fair and lasting solution to the problem ofthe Middle
East without a total withdrawal of Israeli forces from
all occupied Arab lands and without the restoration
of the inalienable national right of the Palestinians
to have a State in what has always been, and still
is, their own homeland. We join our fellow Muslims
and peace-loving
peoples around the world in
pledging our full support to the glorious struggle of
our Arab brethren. May Allah, the Beneficent and
Merciful, help us all.”

I 16. The Council, within a short span of two weeks,
is again seized of a crisis threatening international
peace and security arising out of the Israeli aggression in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories.
The sacrilegious acts perpetrated against the sanctity
of Haram al-Sharif in the Holy City of Jerusalem on
Sunday, I1 April, and the criminal act of shooting at
worshippers inside the sanctuary of the Dome of the
Rock and the Al-Aqsa mosques have provoked a feeling
of shock and indignation throughout the Islamic world.
This reprehensible and condemnable action prompted
the member States of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to call for this meeting of the Council
[s/14969].
The preceding speakers-and
I refer to
the representatives of Morocco, Jordan, the Palestine
Liberation
Organization,
the Kingdom
of Saudi
Arabia, and Syria-have
already given the Council
A detailed account of this gruesome and tragic incident.

I 18. As preceding speakers have pointed out, the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock constitute
one of the holiest shrines of the 900 million Muslims
throughout the world. Precisely for that reason, the
entire Islamic world reacted with revulsion and horror
over the incident of last Sunday, just as we reacted
nearly 13 years ago when a part of the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque was demolished as a result of an equally senseless act. The criminal act of shooting at worshippers,
particularly inside the Dome of the Rock and the AlAqsa Mosque, should be a source of concern not only
to Muslims but to all those who seek to p~*rsu~‘ve
the
peace and sanctity of the Holy City ofJerusalem, which
represents a unique confluence of the three principal
monotheistic religions of the world.

117. In response to the call issued by His Majesty
King Khaled Ibn Abdul Aziz of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in his capacity as the Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the entire Islamic
world observed Wednesday, 14 April, as a day of
solidarity
with the Palestinian people. The 90 million
people of Bangladesh observed the day with due
solemnity
and all Government
and private offices
were closed. Special prayers were held for the restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
and for the safety and sanctity of the Holy City of
Jerusalem.
In his message to the nation, General
Et-shad, the head of Government and the Chief Martial
Law Administrator
of Bangladesh, reaffirmed our firm
support for our Palestinian brethren in their valiant
struggle
against Israeli terrorism,
oppression and
bigotry. General Ershad stated in his message that

119. The sacrilegious act perpetrated
against the
sanctity of Haram al-Sharif in Jerusalem on Easter
Sunday is not an insane act of a deranged individual,
as the Israeli authorities would like us to believe. On
the contrary, the successive acts of arson of t969,
the sustained digging underneath the ancient structures
and the frequent discoveries of explosives in the
vicinity of the Holy Sanctuary are an integral part of
a systematic move to destroy the Islamic holy shrines
in Jerusalem, in particular the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the Dome of the Rock. The Israeli authorities not
only encourage extremist Zionist organizations,
but
are themselves engaged in a move to obliterate the
unique historical and spiritual character of the Holy
City, The Council for that reason has adopted a number
of resolutions over the years to censure Israeli acts
aimed at altering the character and status of the Holy
City. Israel, the occupying Power, not only refused to
comply with those Council resolutions but, in Bagrant
defiance of those resolutions and others related to the
occupied territories, made the heinous move of permanently annexing Jerusalem by declaring the Holy

“We view with the deepest concern the continued
intransigence
of Israel, The flagrant injustice and
naked aggression being perpetrated with impunity
by the Zionist entity against our Palestinian brethren
have led to an alarming situation in the Middle
East, The just and legitimate causes of the people
of Palestine continue to be denied.
II

City as its “capital” through the enactment of a socalled basic law. The Council, through its resolution
478 (1980), determined that all legislative and administrative measures taken by Israel which have altered
or purport to alter the status and character of the Holy
City of Jerusalem were without any legal validity and
that they should be rescinded forthwith. Israel, however, made yet another attempt and annexed the
Syrian Golan Heights. The Israeli moves were in flagrant contravention
of the Charter of the United
Nations, the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,’ the
Supplementary Hague Convention of 1969 and Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which clearly
underline the inadmissibility
of acquisition of territory
by the use of force.

123. I ask the Council: Is this just another case of
simple hyperbole? Is this debate really unnecessary.
as we are told: another routine exercise where the
poor, helpless State of Israel will yet again be treated in
a cavalier manner by the international community? Are
all the speeches that were made on Tuesday, Wednesday and today no more than speeches prompted by
a sense of bigotry and intolerance-as
the Israeli
representative would have us believe? Or were these
speeches reflective of an international community in
a state of great anguish-anguish
because a Member
State of the United Nations could treat its fellowmen
with such contempt? Is it not indeed ironic that all the
acts of oppression, intolerance, injustice and persecution to which the Jews were subjected during the first
half of this century-not
only in Germany, but also
in various other parts of Europe-should
during the
second half of the same century be practised by the
very survivors of the Holocaust against the people in
whose land they took refuge and shelter?

120. The act of sacrilege, the violation of the sanctity of the Holy Places in Jerusalem, has direct and
immediate implications
for international peace and
security. The member States of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference firmly believe that unless
effective remedial actions are taken forthwith to guarantee respect for the sanctity of the Holy Places in
Jerusalem the highly explosive situation will burst
into open and catastrophic conflict.

124. Each succeeding day bring new tales of horror,
oppression, brutality,
injustice
in the occupied
territories. We occasionally hear the word “autonomy” escape from the lips of the Israeli Government
and its representatives. Yes, indeed, we should applaud
the Israeli occupation forces for their magnanimity, for
their generosity in granting autonomy which results
in the dismissal of mayors and in the closing of schools
and in the shooting of innocent women and children.

121. The international
press and news media, in
particular l’l7e Nell! York Times, have been giving us
a vivid description of the reign of terror which the
Israeli authorities have unleashed on the civilian Arab
population. The Palestinians under Israeli occupation
are being killed indiscriminately,
their religious leaders
apprehended, and hundreds arrested, their only crime
being that they have brought out processions to
express their outrage at this act of sacrilege committed inside the sanctuary of the Dome of the Rock
and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. These brutal repressive
measures against unarmed civilians defy all norms of
civilized behaviour and Israel must be asked to put an
end to this policy.

125. Some of us, perhaps innocently, believe that we
are living in the twentieth century and in an age of
enlightenment,
where colonialism,
authoritarianism
and totalitarianism
have been vanquished and obliterated once and for all. Yet we are told that while the
rest of mankind can live with one definition of the
principle of self-determination,
in the case of Israel
we must concede to it the right to define, dilute and
ultimately mock this principle and to deny to the
Arab population its legitimate rights, which are universally acknowledged and accepted. How much
longer can we close our eyes to the fact that what we
are witnessing in the case of Israel and in the occupied
territories is nothing other than a case of open and
flagrant discrimination
against the Arab population?
What Israel in fact means by autonomy is that there
will be two categories of persons: those with rights
and those without rights. They would like to consign
the Arab population to a state of indefinite servitude
-the kind of servitude where we could not even be
permitted the polite euphemism of referring to them
as second-class citizens. Does this not also remind US
of another part of the world? Does it not remind us of
the hated and contemptible policy of ccprrrtheid practised in South Africa?

122. What is happening today in Israel and in the
occupied Arab territories, in the West Bank and in
the Golan Heights is perfectly clear for everyone to see.
The intolerance, the bigotry, the persecution, the
injustice, the gross and persistent discrimination
practised by Israel-by
the Government and by its
army-against
the Arab population
is apparent.
What we are witnessing is a Government in a state of
hysteria, where criminal acts are being openly condoned, where new settlements are being established
on Arab land on a daily basis and where Israeli settlers
are being encouraged to terrorize the local Arab
population in a manner reminiscent of the genocide
with which we are all painfully familiar and which
was practised against the Jews in Nazi Germany. The
Arab population in Israel, in the Arab territories, is
being systematically
crushed. The Arab institutions
are being trampled upon; Arab homes are being destroyed: Arab blood is being spilt with a sense of reckless abandon and mosques and shrines sacred to
900 million Muslims are being desecrated.

126. We are asked by Israel to believe that the tragic
shooting incident of 1 I April was a momentary lapse,
an isolated act of madness-in
effect, something
which could happen anywhere in the world. And yet
some of us, perhaps many of us. see it for what it is:
I2

a logical and inevitable outcome of a society and Government which breed terrorism, oppression and intolerance: the outcome of a society and Government which
are following a deliberate policy of trying to terrorize,
subjugate, expel and demoralize the Arab population.

Begin in Tel Aviv accused those who have spoken
before this body of being bigots and said that he himself
and his Government have respect for Muslims and, in
fact, for all f;iiths. He added: 600,000 of our citizens
are Muslims [235S/-cl tncrting, pclrtr. Y2j.

127. The word “exodus” is today very much a part
of the lexicon of contemporary society. Yet this word
of great biblical significance, which was first used in
the context of the expulsion of the Jews, is a word
which is today more relevant in the Arab context.
It is the Palestinians who are today dispersed throughout the world as a result of the creation of the State of
Israel and as a consequence of the policies of persecution and terrorism practised by it against the Arab
population. We are today witnessing, as it were, the
grand finale, where State terrorism gives way to
State hysteria, and in one final act of collective madness, the remaining Arab population will be either
destroyed or driven out. It is this frame of mind-it
is this society and the hatred and terrorism that it
breeds-that
caused the shooting incident.

132. I wonder whether he was referring to those
600,000 Palestinians that Mr. Cohen, the adviser on
Arab affairs to former Prime Minister Rabin, called
“the cancer in the Israeli body”. I want to know-if
he can tell us-what rights those 600,000 Palestinians
have. Is he referring to the villagers of Krit and Kafr
Burum, the two villages of Palestinian
Maronites
-not only Muslims-who
have been expelled from
their homes and properties and, though they live only
about 200 yards away, are not allowed to return to their
homes, and whose churches were destroyed by the
Israeli soldiers? When their case was brought before
the Israeli Court, the Court decided that it should not
and could not allow them to return to their homes
because that would constitute a precedent that would
endanger the whole concept of Zionism-which
means
that Zionism cannot coexist with any other nationality
or with any other group.

128. In conclusion, we urge the Council to condemn
in clear and unambiguous language the appalling act
of sacrilege perpetrated within the precincts of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and to deplore once again the failure
of Israel, the occupying Power, to protect and safeguard the sanctity of the Holy Shrines in accordance
with its obligations under the relevant provisions of the
fourth Geneva Convention.
The Council must also
re-emphasize that any act of profanation or desecration of the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites
in Jerusalem or any encouragement of or connivance
at any such act would endanger international peace
and security. Israel, the occupying Power, must also be
called upon in clear and firm terms scrupulously to
observe and apply the provisions of the Geneva Conventions and the principles of international law governing military occupation and to refrain from causing
any hindrance to the discharge of the established functions of the Supreme Muslim Council of Jerusalem.

133. What is bigotry if it is not institutionalized
discrimination
based on religion? It is not only a question of the 600,000 Palestinians who live as thirdclass citizens in their own homeland: there are secondclass citizens in Israel and they are the oriental Jews.
134. What is bigotry if it is not the fact that t.here
are 2 million Palestinians who have been uprooted from
their homes and properties in Palestine and are not
allowed to return because they happen not to be
Jewish, while he himself, born in Czechoslovakia, can
become representative
of occupied Palestine to the
United Nations, and a former corporal in the Polish
army can become Prime Minister, while I, a son of
Palestine, born in Palestine, raised in Palestine. and
2 million others like me are not allowed to return‘?
What is the difference? And by what criterion can he
be in Palestine and I not be in Palestine, except the
criterion that he is Jewish and I am not?

129.
In my last statement, made in this very room
only a fortnight ago, 1 emphasized that the recent
developments
in the occupied territories have proved
that the absence of firm and prompt action by the
Council only contributes to the further aggravation of
the situation [23&r/1 meeting, ptrra. 991. I would
therefore urge the members of this body to adopt
unanimously
the draft resolution which will be submitted shortly by the Islamic group of countries.

136. What is bigotry if it is not what I quoted the
other day from a letter submitted by Uri Avneri to the
Israeli Parliament
relating to orders given by the
commander of the Israeli forces in the occupied territories? When ordering his soldiers, he said:

130. The PRESIDENT
(itlte~p~ctutiotl,pott7 Fret~~h):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make a statement in reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

“Anyone you catch outside, you first beat with
the clubs all over his body except the head. Have no
mercy, Break all his bones. Give no explanations.
First of all, beat. Do not treat this beating as a privilege; it is a duty. They understand no other way.”

135.

What is bigotry and what is racism if not that?

[.2352nd tnrctit7g, prrtw. 69 ]

131. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization):
Yesterday, in his speech before the
Council,
the representative of the junta of Menachem

137. What is bigotry if it is not what the novelist
Amos Elon wrote about in the newspaper Ho’crwtz’!
13

He was talking to a soldier, who said, “Pity we did
not finish them”-the
Arabs--“off
in 1948”. And
another soldier said “Beasts [, those Arabs]. It is not
too late to finish them off today.” Professor Elon
asked why they would want to do that. The answer
of the soldiers: “Because they are Arab.” [ihid.,
prrrc/ I 70 1

fired by a soldier on guard duty near the Beit El
military complex while she was tilling a field with
four of her children.”
141. The representative of Menachem Begin here
is a master of distortion and when he runs out of
arguments-and
he does not have any, by the way,
that could be acceptable or logical-he
resorts to
accusing others and insulting them. His Prime Minister has been telling the world that the killing of any
Israeli or Jewish individual anywhere in the world
will constitute a violation of the cease-fire in South
Lebanon. What is bigotry?

138. What is bigotry if it is not the killing today of
a 60-year-old man, Omar Qatab. in Jerusalem. as a
result of being beaten with the butts of Israeli machineguns while he was protecting his 13-year-old granddaughter from Israeli soldiers?

142. He says that, but what about the Arab blood
that is being spilled inside Palestine? Does that not
also constitute a violation of the cease-fire? Or is
Israeli blood much more valuable than Palestinian
blood? Is that because Israeli blood is the blood of the
chosen people and the Palestinian people are not
chosen?

139. What is bigotry? Is it not discrimination against
people because they do not belong to the same group
you belong to? Is it not the denigration of people
because they happen to belong to another religion or
another race?
140. An article in The Jcr*nsolem Post of 9 April
reports about an incident that took place in the occupied territories as follows:

143. I could go on and on speaking about the bigotry
of the Zionists, but I do not wish to burden the Council with further comments on the subject.

“Strange things happen in the West Bank.
Wednesday afternoon five men armed with Uzi submachine-guns beat up a guard and the dean of
students at the Bethlehem university. They then
moved on to damage university property inside the
campus and from there went to the neighbouring
town of Beit Sahour to attack a Greek Orthodox
club and a local coffee shop.

144. The PRESIDENT
(into.pl.LJtotion.~otn
Fwm*/r):
The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I call
on him.
14.5. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The sorry procession of the
bigots continues, unfortunately,
to parade here.
I believe that after today’s deliberations the dangers
and implications
inherent in the injection into our
discussions of religious fanaticism and incitement
must have become evident for all to see.

“By last night no one had been detained for
having been involved in this rampage, although
three of the five attackers were clearly identified
by local residents. One of them is reported to be
Samer Bishara Kumsiya, the son of the head of the
Bethlehem area village league, Bishara Kumsiya.
They were also clearly seen travelling in a LandRover vehicle, the type which is used by village
league members for their patrols.”

146. I cannot pass over in silence the bigoted statement made by the representative of Bangladesh. A
cultivated English accent is no guarantee of the veracity of statements. I am sure that the representative of
the United Kingdom will agree with me on that. The
representative of Bangladesh made reference to the
Holocaust in Europe and to the genocide perpetrated
against my people in Europe during the Second World
War. What does he know about that genocide? Where
was he at that time? There are Holocaust studies
at many universities. We should not be lectured by
ignoramuses who desecrate the memory of 6 million
Jews-6 million brothers and sisters of mine-in
the
shameless way this man did that here. There is a Iimit
to impudence and arrogance and shamelessness and
audacity-even
in the Council-and
this newcomet
to our ranks should be reminded of this. Beyond any
differences of opinion, I think that the memory of
6 million martyrs should not be desecrated in such
a shameless fashion.

Those are the village leagues that the Zionist forces
of occupation want to impose on the Palestinian
people as their leadership. The article goes on to say:
“But what has been happening in the West Bank
in recent weeks can hardly be described as ‘building
confidence’ by the Israeli authorities. To make
matters worse, Israeli soldiers and settlers apparently are far freer now to use their firearms to wound
an-l kill than they were hitherto.
“There must certainly be better ways of dispersing even violent crowds of young protesting
students than shooting at them. But once strict
discipline for the use of arms is loosened, even a lone
soldier on guard can easily become trigger-happy.
Unfortunately,
there is no other way of describing
yesterday’s sad incident in which a 40-year-old
Arab woman was killed instantly by a single shot

147. There have been other bigots here today.
I should like to address one question to them. and
I should like to do so through the good offices of our
eminent colleague the representative of Syria.
I4

148. In my statement yesterday I requested information about the shelling and destruction of mosques
and churches by the Syrian army in Syria and Lebanon in recent months [23531*d nzerfin~~, ptrr. 941. To
my surprise and regret, we have had no response from
OUI’ Syrian colleague.
Let me therefore enlighten the
Council on the achievements of the Syrian army in this
regard in recent months.

“The World This Week-End” which was aired last
Sunday, I1 April, on Radio Four of the British Broadcasting Corporation. In that programme Liz Donnelly
reported on the situation in Hama and pointed out that
more than 15,000 persons had apparently been killed
by the Syrian army: that one of the inhabitants of the
city had told her that in his view no massacre of that
kind had been perpetrated since the Stone Age: and
that virtually all the mosques of the city had been
destroyed.

149. In Th N~II, York Times of 15 April, there is an
article by Flora Lewis in which, into’ trlitr, she states
that Muslim
fundamentalist
opposition
has been
crushed in the nort-western city of Hama-that
is,
north-western Syria-and:

153. NOW, I wish to put some questions to the bigots
-yes, the bigots-who have spoken in this debate.
And here I address myself to our colleague the representative of Saudi Arabia. My first question is: Has
His Majesty King Khaled Ibn Abdul Aziz, King of
Saudi Arabia, in his capacity as Chairman ofthe Islamic
Summit Conference, appealed to the Islamic countries
to observe a work stoppage around the Islamic world
in protest against this desecration of scores of mosques
in Syria? If not, why not? Another question: Has His
Majesty King Khaled Ibn Abdul Aziz, King of Saudi
Arabia, in his capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Summit Conference, appealed to all Islamic countries
to observe a work stoppage to protest the desecration
of the great mosque in Makkah in November 1979?
If not, why not?

“Moderate estimates of the cost in lives are 5,000 civilians and 500 to 600 soldiers dead, plus the razing
of large parts of the city.”
That piece of information
other sources.

is fully borne out also by

150. Thus, for instance, the Dutch .journalist Pietel
Michelsen,
in an article which he recently wrote
after returning from Syria and which was published
in the Dutch daily Hmdrl.sklad,
states that all the
mosques of Hama-except
one-have been destroyed
by the Syrian army over the past two months.
IS I, From another source-an article published in the
Nerrr Ziirchr~r Zcitrtng, the prestigious Swiss dailywe learn that Hama used to have 96 mosques. SO of
those 96 mosques 95 were destroyed by the Syrian
army. And, for the sake of even-handedness and so as
not to bring on their heads the guilt of discrimination
against Islam, the Syrian army for good measure also
destroyed the churches of Hama.

154. I would very much hope that at least one of the
bigots would care to respond to my questions.

NOTE

152. Now, if further sources are necessary, I can
refer members of the Council to a programme entitled

’ United

I5

Nations.

TIYWIJ~ Seks,

vol. 75. NO. 973.

p. 287.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
horn bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGIJIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLlCATlONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

sent en vente dam les librairies
et Its agences
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de! mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas estan en venta en librerlas
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones

00400

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas, Section de Ventas,

88-60989-June

1989--2.050
