United Nations

S/PV.4512

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4512

th meeting
Monday, 15 April 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Fall
Mr. Corr
Mr. Gokool
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-33057 (E)

*0233057*

S/PV.4512

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Japan, Malawi, Pakistan, Peru,
Spain, Turkey and Ukraine in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Ouch Borith (Cambodia), Mr.
Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Valdés (Chile), Mr. Niehaus
(Costa Rica), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Mr. Lamba (Malawi),
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan), Mr. Balarezo (Peru), Mr. Arias
(Spain), Mr. Cengizer (Turkey) and Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Sir Jeremy Greenstock to take a seat at
the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. At this
meeting, the Security Council will hear a briefing by
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

2

Sir Jeremy Greenstock: It is now six months
since the establishment of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) and the
Council agreed that it would review the structure and
activities of the Committee at this point.
I shall not go into detail about the CTC’s
achievements so far because that information is already
well known to Council delegations and to the wider
United Nations membership through my regular
briefings, but let me briefly set out the latest statistics.
We have received 143 reports from Member States and
others. We have reviewed and responded to 62 States
and we are working hard to finish by the end of May
the review of the remainder of reports received. We are
following up with the 50 States that have not yet
submitted reports.
This is a significant achievement and I should
like to thank the Vice-Chairmen of the Committee for
leading the work in the subcommittees so intensively
and thoroughly. I should also like to thank the
Secretariat for the excellent support it has given to the
CTC and its sub-committees and I pay tribute to our
team of experts, sitting behind us, who have so ably
risen to the challenge set by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. All of them — all of us — are developing
a deeper expertise as we move forward.
Delegations are familiar with the work
programmes that we issued for the first and second 90day periods. Council members will find before them
the work programme for the next, third, 90-day period
in document S/2002/318, but let me outline in a little
more detail how the CTC sees its work developing in
the next phase.
The Committee is unanimous in the view that it
should continue to perform properly and thoroughly on
the basis of transparency and even-handedness the
tasks set for it by the Council, so that the capacity of
all Member States to deal effectively with terrorism in
their jurisdiction should be genuinely enhanced. In the
course of monitoring the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) in all States, the CTC will check the facts
of the legislative picture, the administrative action
taken and the way in which these tools are being used
to prevent the territory of each State being abused by
terrorists. We will continue the excellent dialogue
which we have begun with all Members of the United
Nations until the Committee is confident that each

S/PV.4512

State has taken action on all the issues covered by
resolution 1373 (2001).

begun their written exchange with the Committee
before 31 May 2002.

Reaching that point of confidence does not equate
to the CTC’s declaring any Member State 100 per cent
compliant. We do not believe that the Committee can
sign off with any State. Against a constantly evolving
background, there may always be further work to do to
meet the objectives of 1373 (2001), so the CTC will
preserve the potential for dialogue with all States,
although this will vary in intensity according to the
capacity developed by the State concerned.

The Committee intends, in the process of
reviewing the reports, to identify issues of crosscutting concern where the professional work of other
bodies interconnects with the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We intend to continue to make
contact with other international organizations with a
view to encouraging them to take action on issues that
fall within their area of expertise. As an example, we
have a close interest in the Financial Action Task
Force’s work on the funding of terrorist networks.
There may also be a need for the International Civil
Aviation Organization to look with fresh eyes at
aviation security or for the International Maritime
Organization to consider how the issuance of travel
documents could be improved to prevent abuse by
terrorists. As we proceed, we may have to contract in
specialist expertise in these areas.

During the coming 90-day period, the CTC will
complete its preliminary review of the reports it has
received and, from 7 June, it will embark on its second
review as the second round of reports begins to arrive.
We intend to be more direct in the second phase in
identifying potential gaps and in asking States what
action they intend to take to address the issues of
concern. The Committee will also need to be
professional with States that require assistance. The
CTC expects the experts to recommend what assistance
might be needed and where the State might go to find
the help it needs.
As we go forward under the terms of our
mandate, the CTC will remain aware of the interaction
of its work with human rights concerns, inter alia,
through the contact the CTC has developed with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
There is also an agreement in principle around
this table, reflected in our informal discussion on 2
April, that the CTC and the Council will, if necessary,
consider what action is needed to address failures to
meet the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) where
these affect the comprehensive implementation of that
resolution.
I should like to encourage the 50 countries that
have not yet submitted a report to get in touch with the
Committee. We understand that putting together a full
report may be difficult for countries that have little
experience of dealing with terrorism or for which the
preparation of such a report is a significant strain on
their government machinery. But it is extremely
important that all States be in dialogue with the CTC
and we believe that this is the best way in which we
can help States to find the assistance they might need
to implement resolution 1373 (2001). Whatever the
difficulty, it is essential that all States should have

The CTC further intends to deepen its contacts
with regional organizations. It is in the interests of all
States that their neighbours have proper safeguards in
place to deal with terrorism and regional organizations
have a key role to play in ensuring that action is taken
across the region. It will add impetus to our work if
countries of similar geographical and cultural identity
cooperate proactively to keep terrorism out of their
region.
11 September posed a new challenge for the
United Nations. The Organization has risen to the task
of acting to raise the capacity of all Member States in
counter-terrorism, thus catalysing global action to
counter a global threat, but in doing so, we should
recognize the added burden which this activity has
placed on the Secretariat. The translation service has
done a phenomenal job in producing hundreds of pages
of documentation every month to enable the CTC to do
its work, but the pace of our work is being constrained
by the speed with which the translation service can
produce documents. I have discussed this issue with the
Secretariat and shall continue to do so with a view to
reducing demand wherever possible, but I call on
Member States, in the Council and beyond, as a whole
to recognize the heavy translation demands we place on
the Secretariat and to reduce these demands wherever
possible.

3

S/PV.4512

We are doing the same within the Committee, but
I am concerned that, as a new operation, the CTC tends
to be allocated the resources that are left over when
everything else has been covered. That does not reflect
the urgency with which we need results from our
counter-terrorism work. I should be grateful for
everyone’s help in resolving the administrative
problem the CTC has posed for the Secretariat, because
I am not yet getting the response I need on this issue.
I thank the Council for placing its confidence in
me and the Vice-Chairmen to continue to direct the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We look
forward to doing so with equal determination over the
next six months. I welcome the intention of the Council
to conduct a further full review in early October.
I shall be very glad to respond to comments and
to answer queries in this debate.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for his briefing. I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Allow me at the
outset to say that my delegation would like to associate
itself fully with the statement that will be made later by
the Permanent Representative of Cambodia on behalf
of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
I am also very pleased to be the first of many,
hopefully, to commend Ambassador Greenstock, the
three excellent Vice-Chairmen and the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) as a whole for the
remarkable work that the Committee has done. The
CTC is clearly at the tail end of phase I of its work. It
has gone through more than half of the paragraph —
6 reports submitted by Members and is on target to
complete the task by the end of May. By all measures,
the CTC has done extremely well. This is a point that I
hope the Council will take note of this morning.
I think it is also important to bear in mind that we
should compare our battle against terrorism to a
marathon rather than to a sprint. It is clearly a longterm task that we in the United Nations have taken
upon ourselves. Incidentally, in trying to find some
ideas for this speech this morning, we looked in history
books and discovered that terrorism is as old as human
history and has, indeed, been practised worldwide since
time immemorial. One of the earliest references we
found was a remark made by the ancient Greek

4

historian, Xenophon, who, 2,400 years ago, noted the
effectiveness of terrorizing the population of enemy
cities in bringing victory. We make this comment in the
hope that in today’s discussion we will reinforce the
need for a long-term commitment in the struggle
against terrorism.
To obtain such a commitment, it may be useful
for us to reflect and to ask ourselves a fairly simple yet
fundamental question: How exactly does the work of
the CTC help to eliminate terrorists? We ask this
question because we thought that if the other Members
of the United Nations and the public at large can see a
direct connection between the work of the CTC and the
battle against terrorism, I think that support for the
CTC and for this battle will become even stronger.
In an effort to try to get the discussion going, we
have suggested at least four clear areas in which the
CTC does not merely produce reports and engage in
discussions such as this one but actually has an impact
in the real battle against terrorism. The first way in
which the CTC does this is by forcing Member States
to look carefully at their national legislation and to
assess its adequacy in addressing the demands of
resolution 1373 (2001). If, in the process, more and
more countries review their legislation, we suggest that
this is one direct, practical benefit that comes out of the
work of the CTC.
Secondly, we hope that with the work of the CTC,
the momentum towards the ratification of conventions
and instruments related to counter-terrorism will also
increase in pace. This is something we can measure and
see: since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the creation of the CTC, more and more countries are
ratifying the key conventions in the battle against
terrorism.
Thirdly, the CTC has directly — or perhaps even
indirectly — deepened the mechanisms for information
and intelligence exchange through the creation of a
directory of Member States and related United Nations
and international bodies and through the hiring of
counter-terrorism experts to assist the CTC. All this
flow of information that has come from the CTC is also
very important.
Fourthly, the CTC has pushed for an increase in
the assistance available to Member States in the fight
against terrorism. We hope that the end result of all
these efforts will be to close the various loopholes that
exist in the international system, through which the

S/PV.4512

terrorists are able to operate, either in terms of their
financial systems or their movements. We hope that the
work of the CTC will close these loopholes and have a
direct impact on the activities of the terrorists.
Ambassador Greenstock has also pointed out the need
to consolidate cooperation at the regional level and to
work closely with other intergovernmental bodies such
as the Financial Action Task Force.
Here, we are pleased to note that within the
ASEAN region, we understand this need and are trying
to step up our efforts. I believe that last month
Ambassador Greenstock made a lightning visit to
Hawaii to participate in an ASEAN Regional Forum
meeting, which was specifically dedicated to the
question of terrorism. It is meetings such as that, which
expand the impact of the CTC in various parts of the
world. As I said earlier, we are pleased that the
Permanent Representative of Cambodia will be
describing ASEAN’s efforts in the battle against
terrorism.
Finally, I would like to end by touching upon the
last point mentioned by Ambassador Greenstock: his
appeal for more translation services to ensure that the
reports of the CTC are translated in good time. I
support that request and want to enhance it by saying
that the time has come for the United Nations to ask
whether it needs to provide more resources so that such
translation work can be done in good time. If we
consider the battle against terrorism to be important
and if we believe that more resources are needed from
the Organization, then it is incumbent upon Member
States to agree to provide more resources to the
Organization in this battle. I hope that we will agree to
do that today.
Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I thank your for organizing the present
meeting to allow Member States to discuss, for the
second time in this Chamber, the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). This
demonstrates the Council’s determination to fight
terrorism effectively within a concerted and
coordinated framework.
My delegation would also like to thank Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for the encouraging information he
has just communicated to the Council on the work
carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Through him, we also extend our gratitude to
the other members of the CTC and to its support staff

for the volume and quality of the work completed.
Sixty-two of the 143 national reports submitted have
already been considered — in record time. This says
much about the work already accomplished by the
Committee.
We welcome the Council’s renewed expression of
confidence in the Committee’s Chairman and ViceChairmen in carrying out their duties. We assure them
of our cooperation and support.
My delegation welcomes the regularity with
which Member States are informed of the Committee’s
work through the Chairman’s briefings. This without
doubt attests to the Committee’s transparency in
conducting its work. My delegation supports the CTC
programme underway and encourages Member States
to cooperate further with it.
We agree with the CTC and its Chairman that a
consideration of constraints related to translation
services is necessary in order to advance at the desired
pace.
The study of the first reports allows us to affirm
that the question of assistance remains central to our
concerns. We believe that such assistance is required at
the financial and technical levels. The Committee
should identify sources of assistance and refer
countries to them according to their needs.
Since the heinous terrorist attacks of 11
September 2001, nearly all countries have expressed a
real desire to fight effectively against the scourge of
terrorism. It would be very useful to support that
determination of States with the appropriate assistance
in order to help them create or improve their counterterrorism mechanisms.
As for the group of experts, it would be desirable
to ensure the effective representation of all regions.
That would enable the concerns and experiences of all
to be considered, with the advantages of a comparative
approach. As well, greater coordination is needed
between the various organs of the United Nations and
those of other organizations, particularly regional
organizations. In this respect, my delegation welcomes
the contacts that have been established between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and certain subregional,
regional and international institutions, and we
encourage such contacts to continue.

5

S/PV.4512

The examination of the second set of reports to be
submitted by Member States to the Committee will
provide a good indication of the additional measures
that the international community will have to adopt in
the fight against terrorism. The Committee will have to
consider this issue in depth, and my delegation will
make its own modest contribution in that regard.
Furthermore, we hope that the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 51/210 to elaborate a draft convention
against international terrorism will reach a successful
conclusion during its next session. We also welcome
the entry into force, on 10 April, of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, which constitutes an important step on the
part of the international community in the fight against
terrorism in general.
Finally, my country, aware of the urgent need to
fight terrorism, will spare no effort to strengthen its
domestic measures to that end. It will rely on
international cooperation for achieving its objectives in
that respect.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
would like, in advance, to associate itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union
by the Permanent Representative of Spain.
Speaking as the representative of France, I would
like at the outset to express my warmest
congratulations and gratitude to Ambassador Sir
Jeremy Greenstock and all those who are working with
him in the British Mission, as well as to the ViceChairmen who are assisting him, for the utterly
remarkable work accomplished by the CounterTerrorism Committee since it was set up. In setting up
the Committee, the Council endowed itself with an
essential instrument to play its full role in the fight
against terrorism. Success was not guaranteed in
advance: the task seemed so enormous and, at the
beginning, the Council appeared so poorly equipped for
facing up to its responsibilities. It is truly one man —
Sir Jeremy Greenstock — who, through his capacity
for hard work and his dynamism, as well as his concern
for transparency, has made all the difference. I believe
that we should pay a very warm tribute to him today.
France attaches the highest importance to the
Committee and its work, because we are convinced that
the international community will be able, progressively
and gradually, to eradicate the scourge of terrorism

6

only if it works in unison within the United Nations. In
that respect, I subscribe entirely to the judgement of
the representative of Singapore: the Council has
embarked on a long-term, marathon task, which will
involve convincing all the States within the
international community to equip themselves with a
legislative and administrative arsenal that can gradually
enable all of them to be effective in fighting this
scourge together.
Today, 143 States have submitted their national
reports. It could be said that that is a kind of record;
but it is also an opportunity to address a message of
encouragement to the 46 States that have not yet sent in
their reports. It is high time that they took part in that
collective endeavour so that the Committee can, in the
time that it has allocated, complete its an inventory.
The ongoing, exhaustive and unprecedented exercise of
making an inventory on which the Committee has
embarked is a kind of global audit of the state of the
world’s capacity to fight against the scourge of
terrorism. The importance of this inventory — this
global audit — must be understood by all, and every
State must contribute to it.
I would also like to pay tribute to the Secretariat
and the independent experts for the role they are
playing. As Ambassador Greenstock told us, it is the
combined efforts of all, including the Secretariat and
the experts, that make it possible for the Committee to
continue its work without wavering.
The fact that some 60 evaluation letters have
already been sent to Governments through their
representatives is testimony to compliance with the
time frame that was established. If all goes well,
towards the end of the month of May that first stage
will have been successfully completed. In June the next
stage will begin: the examination of the second round
of reports, which are now being awaited.
Like the Ambassador of Singapore, I would like
to underline a second aspect of the work of the
Committee that we believe to be absolutely essential:
its dialogue with regional organizations. Ambassador
Greenstock was right to underscore the significance of
that work, because regional organizations are clearly
better placed than the United Nations to facilitate
assessment among peers — among neighbouring
countries — of the state of their legislation. I believe
that we must encourage such regional work so as to
ensure that, in addition to the work that we do here in

S/PV.4512

New York, a process is under way in various parts of
the world that contributes to the general mobilization
against terrorism. The Committee should also act as a
kind of umbrella under which all the technical
organizations concerned — and there are a great many
of them — can work together. I believe that they have
clearly understood Ambassador Greenstock’s appeal to
them to avoid duplication. The Committee should
remain a central body. Its purpose is not to replace the
competent technical bodies, but to help to bring a
coherent approach to the counter-terrorism effort as a
whole.
Finally, I agree absolutely with the comment
made by Ambassador François Fall with regard to one
major area — that of technical and financial assistance.
The Committee has set up a directory with the purpose
of listing offers of technical or financial assistance
from both States and regional or technical
organizations. France will make its contribution by
sending a detailed letter so that our offer can be duly
recorded in the directory.
I also agree with Ambassador Fall’s comments
about the need to ensure broad geographical
distribution in the provision of expertise. I would like
to underline the importance of appointing an
independent expert specifically to follow up technical
assistance, so that it can be deployed for the benefit of
the countries that need it. It seems to us that the time
has now come to strengthen that aspect of the work of
the Committee. We are moving from a world audit to
action on the ground, and the appointment of a
competent expert could certainly contribute to the
effectiveness of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in this new sphere of activity.
In conclusion, here we have a model Committee.
I think that this has to be emphasized, and once again
we warmly thank Ambassador Greenstock.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria fully endorses the statement that the
Permanent Representative of Spain will make on behalf
of the European Union.
Bulgaria is profoundly grateful to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock for his very important work as Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We would also like
to thank his colleagues at the British Mission and in
London. We warmly thank the Vice-Chairmen and all
the other members of the Committee.

We fully endorse what has just been said by my
colleagues who have spoken before me, in particular
Ambassador Levitte. Ambassador Greenstock not only
has indeed managed to show the serious-mindedness
with which we are all familiar, but he has also taken
the right approach to the daunting task before him by
giving due weight to the political and technical aspects
of the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which are intimately interrelated and often very
difficult to distinguish from one another.
I think that the great success of Sir Jeremy’s work
has been due to his openness, in particular with the
media, and to his constant efforts to explain to the
international community and the general public an
activity that, ultimately, is not always very easy to
explain. My thanks go to Sir Jeremy for his excellent
work.
Bulgaria is very satisfied with the results of the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. However,
we note that 46 countries have still not submitted their
national reports. We would like to voice our hope that
those countries will be able to submit their reports as
soon as possible. It is clear that there are many reasons
for those delays. In particular, as Sir Jeremy has
pointed out, for some countries the fight against
terrorism is something new, and the administrative
machinery in those countries lacks the appropriate
means to carry it out. Our delegation believes that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee should focus particular
attention on that aspect of its work and possibly come
to the Security Council with a proposal to accelerate
the preparation of these reports well in advance of the
review of the work of the Committee, which will occur
at the beginning of October.
We entirely share the view of the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee that virtually no country
today can pride itself on having entirely achieved the
objectives set forth in resolution 1373 (2001). The
implementation of that historic resolution is a long and
evolving process.
Jean-David Levitte spoke of a world audit. That
is exactly what is happening. I think that after
identifying the scope of the problems we shall then
make our way towards identifying the means of solving
them. It is here that, in the near future, the CounterTerrorism Committee will have to be put through its
paces.

7

S/PV.4512

Like delegations that have spoken before us,
Bulgaria entirely agrees that the regional approach has
great potential. We are delighted to see that this is the
approach the Committee has adopted. In that spirit, let
me note that in the very near future, quite probably at
the end of June, Bulgaria intends to organize a regional
forum of the countries of South-East Europe at which
the countries of the region will be able to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Committee to do so. We encourage Members that have
the capacity to do so to provide assistance to those who
need it, to those who want to join the fight against
terrorism and who need help in doing so, and to those
who want to fully implement resolution 1373 (2001)
and need help in doing so. A number of States,
including the United States, are engaged in this effort
of providing support, and we want to encourage
everyone to do what they can in that regard.

In conclusion, I would again like to thank the
Secretariat and the independent experts for the
remarkable work they have done and express the hope
that Sir Jeremy will continue his work in the same
vein.

I also want to applaud Ambassador Greenstock’s
vision of a vigorous and dynamic Counter-Terrorism
Committee process and effort, including more direct
dialogue with members, in the next phase of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
work
and
in
addressing concerns about failures to implement 1373
(2001) or to comply with all of its provisions.

Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): It
is good for us to observe that six months have gone by
since the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to take note of what really has been the
significant progress achieved in its work and to look a
little bit ahead. I want to thank Ambassador
Greenstock, as others have done, for his vigorous,
committed and creative leadership, and also to thank
all those who have worked with him, because I am sure
he would be the first the acknowledge what a
tremendous team effort this has been, particularly on
the part of the Vice-Chairs, the other Committee
members and all the experts involved. This has been
complicated, hard work, and they have done a
tremendous job. I must say I think that they have had a
lot of success in helping to focus global efforts on the
global threat that is terrorism.
Resolution 1373 (2001) was intended to enhance
the ability of the members of the international
community to combat terror over the long term, as
some others have mentioned. There is no deadline in
this struggle, no foreseeable end to it. We will have
occasion to come back periodically over time to assess
how we are doing. In that regard, I note and welcome
Ambassador Greenstock’s thought that the CounterTerrorism Committee will preserve the potential for
dialogue with all States and with each State as this
process goes forward, because all of us, I hope, will be
adapting as we learn more and as we achieve progress
in the battle against terrorism.
All States have an obligation to comply with
resolution 1373 (2001), both in terms of the process
that it sets out and by national action. We urge
Members that have not filed reports with the

8

I want to join others also in emphasizing the
importance of the roles of regional and subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism. Those
organizations — those that are willing to join in the
fight — have an essential role to play, we think,
because they provide a local, regional forum of
interchange, action, encouragement and assistance.
They are well placed to encourage their members to
implement resolution 1373 (2001), and they are also
well placed to assist the Committee in monitoring
implementation and in promoting international support
for its efforts.
The United States strongly supports the
deepening of contacts between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and those regional organizations that are
joining the fight against terror. We, of course, support
the course that Ambassador Greenstock has outlined
for the future and welcome the continued strong
leadership he and his colleagues have brought to bear
in this endeavour.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
thank Ambassador Greenstock for his excellent and
inclusive leadership of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the important work carried out
so far. I would like also to thank the Secretariat and the
team of CTC experts. The tasks they perform greatly
facilitate the effective and uniform implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by the Member States.
The legitimacy of, and global adherence to, the
Committee’s work is clearly demonstrated by the
number of reports submitted to it. We look forward to
reports by all Member States.

S/PV.4512

Information obtained so far suggests that terrorist
groups are already finding it increasingly difficult to
receive funding through international channels.
For the legal and financial measures envisaged in
resolution 1373 (2001) to function as intended, it is
essential that all Member States implement the same
barriers on the transfer of terrorist funds. Norway
supports the CTC approach to offer assistance to those
States that have not been able to report on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) to the
Committee. We have submitted information to the CTC
about available Norwegian experts in various relevant
fields.
Norway highly appreciates the cooperation of,
and partnership with, African countries in combating
terrorism. Recently, Norway concluded an agreement
with the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on a
project aimed at the effective and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the OAU
and its member States.
There is, in our view, no contradiction between
the obligations set forth in resolution 1373 (2001) on
the one hand and the obligation to protect human rights
on the other. The effective implementation of antiterrorist measures nationally should not be perceived
by anyone as an excuse to disallow fundamental rights
and freedoms. Continued contact between the CTC and
the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
will prove mutually useful.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to express my delegation’s
support for the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and for the efforts made by
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Committee, his Vice-Chairmen and the members of the
subcommittees and the experts to implement Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).
During the two previous stages of its work, the
Committee was able to undertake important efforts in
the implementation of its mandate. This was
demonstrated by direct interaction between Member
States and the Committee, as shown in the numerous
reports submitted to the Committee under paragraph 6
of resolution 1373 (2001). The Committee has
considered a large number of these reports. It has
drafted letters of reply to States containing requests for
supplementary information or legislative texts, in order
that those States’ national legislation be harmonized

with the requirements of counter-terrorism efforts. Sir
Jeremy, in his statement a few minutes ago, referred to
the statistics on these reports, which we find
encouraging.
The Committee is now entering the third phase of
its work. This is an important stage, during which the
Committee is to receive replies to the experts’
questions and legislative and legal texts as to how
Governments will confront this dangerous scourge.
Our delegation is convinced that the failure by
some 50 States to submit their reports to the Committee
reflects no ill will or intention not to implement the
resolution. The reasons for that non-submission were
set out earlier by Sir Jeremy, reasons that, we believe,
include the lack of financial, technical and
administrative resources. Not all States are equally able
to devote the necessary human, financial and technical
resources to review current legislation, upgrade it and
harmonize it with the requirements of the resolution.
The international community and the CTC must assist
these States in order to obtain the desired result: a
universal response to resolution 1373 (2001).
It is encouraging that the Committee has
reviewed this issue and decided to create a mechanism
for technical assistance to those Member States that
submitted reports and expressed a need for assistance,
and to those States that so far have been unable to file
reports. In this regard, we look forward to the
appointment of the seventh expert charged with
coordinating potential assistance and to the creation of
a trust fund to finance that assistance.
My delegation supports the future programme of
work to be undertaken by the CTC. We underline the
importance of continuity in the bureau and the
chairmanship of the Committee to ensure follow-up of
the successful outcome achieved so far in the two
previous stages. We also stress the utmost importance
of the role of the United Nations Secretariat in assisting
the Committee in the discharge of its obligations
through the provision of expertise and translation
services, and also because the Secretariat is the
institutional memory of the United Nations.
We believe that the States requiring assistance
should receive it either through their delegations here
in New York or through in their capitals. We also stress
once again the need for equitable geographical
representation in the group of experts.

9

S/PV.4512

Our delegation expressed its opinion and position
in detail at the meeting held on 18 January 2002. We
have always stressed the need to combat terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, regardless of whether
the perpetrators are individuals or States. We believe
that the international community is today more dutybound than ever to put an end to the deliberate
confusion and ambiguity regarding the definition of
terrorism, with which we are all struggling.
We must also admit that ignoring the definition of
terrorism has encouraged some to ignore international
law, norms and values — which has led to grave
violations of human rights and of international and
international humanitarian law. This will also open the
way to selective accusations of acts of terrorism in
which some
acts
will
be
arbitrarily
and
indiscriminately included and others will be placed
outside this understanding, such as State terrorism in
which war crimes and genocide are perpetrated. We
therefore believe that the international community must
be more objective and courageous in describing the
acts of destruction and killing being perpetrated against
the Palestinian people, who are languishing under
occupation and suffering from the most severe form of
terrorism.
Hundreds of millions of Arabs are looking to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
international community to cooperate in developing a
definition of terrorism with a view to eradicating this
vacuum and coming closer to the truth — that is, if we
truly want to combat terrorism. We would also like to
stress once again that Syria is prepared to participate in
any effort to strengthen the work of the CTC, and we
pay tribute to the international community for the effort
it has devoted to the activities of the Committee.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): I would first like to extend my congratulations
and gratitude to Sir Jeremy Greenstock for the detailed,
current and enlightening information he has just given
us with regard to the work of the Committee whose
chairmanship he has assumed with such competency,
commitment and skill. I must say that we are becoming
accustomed to being spoiled by Ambassador
Greenstock. It is always with great pleasure that we
rush to the briefings he gives us on the Committee’s
work. As the Council will understand, it is a pleasure
for Cameroon to endorse the well-deserved tribute that
was paid to him a few moments ago by the Ambassador

10

of France and others for his vigorous work at the head
of the Committee.
The tragic events of 11 September 2001 not only
had the immediate effect of instilling chilling fear, they
also marked the onset of a growing commitment to
international peace and security by the international
community and the emergence of a sense of
mobilization and solidarity in the fight against
terrorism, which is indeed a negation of the right to
life. The unanimous condemnation that emerged in the
wake of 11 September is evidence of the degree of
revulsion aroused by acts whose consequences may be
eternal. But above and beyond that condemnation, what
is important is the individual and collective action of
States. That is why we attach great importance to the
adoption of tangible measures and to frank cooperation
in the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which
we believe to be the best road map available to us in
this field.
Apart from the condemnation voiced at the
highest levels of the State, and while awaiting the
adoption of more elaborate national legislation in this
area, Cameroon already possesses a general legal
framework to underpin the effective implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which Cameroon fully
supported from the very beginning. The report
transmitted by my country to the Committee is
especially illustrative in that regard. We will of course
be prepared duly to provide any additional information
requested of us.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
been in existence for six months. We are here today to
try to evaluate the road travelled so far and to look
towards the future. I would like to say right away that,
as described to us in the introductory briefing by the
Chairman of the Committee, the Committee’s present
structure and its working methods enjoy the full
support of Cameroon. As far as the balance sheet is
concerned, if we can in fact draw one up at this
moment, I would say that we have been particularly
struck by the number of reports the Committee has
examined in such a short span of time. Examining 62
out of a total of some 143 reports is really
extraordinary, especially given that the Committee had
to organize itself and begin to examine reports while it
was being set up and while its manual was being
written, as it were. That is highly praise-worthy work.
We should encourage such swiftness. This work was
possible thanks to the ambitious strategy of

S/PV.4512

transparency established by CTC and to the
professionalism of the six experts and the members of
the three Subcommittees, to which we should also like
to repeat our encouragement.
Cameroon, for its part, will continue to make its
contribution to Subcommittee A, of which it is a
member, in order to enable CTC to complete its
programme for the third 90-day period. It is evident
that the Committee cannot effectively accomplish its
task unless all States fulfil their obligations under
paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001), which calls
upon them to submit national reports on the counterterrorism measures they have undertaken.
For that reason, in the context of the review of the
Committee’s activities during the first six months, my
delegation would like to raise four specific points,
concerning national reports, relationships between the
Committee and States, relationships between the CTC
and international organizations and, finally, a
particularly important problem: that of assistance to
States.
First, national reports: here again, we cannot fail
to welcome the major step already taken. Despite the
Committee’s newness and that of the field of its action,
the Chairman told us earlier that 143 countries have
already submitted their reports. I believe that is an
edifying figure. We may rest assured that the remaining
States will not fail to submit their reports in the coming
months, it being understood that they are well aware
that the effective fight against this scourge depends
largely on the degree of solidarity in the international
community. Only sharing and awareness of the national
measures being undertaken will enable us to leave
these horrible acts behind us.
The second point concerns relationships between
the Committee and Member States. In our view, the
dialogue engaged in since the beginning deserves to be
maintained and strengthened. For that reason,
Cameroon has welcomed and approved, in form and
substance, the letters sent to States following
consideration of their national reports. Also, the regular
briefings organized by the Committee, seem to us the
best way to enable all States to be sufficiently informed
of its activities. Therefore, those briefings should be
continued. Furthermore, the participation of an everincreasing number of Council members in our debates
and the large attendance attest to the interest of States

and to their commitment to the fight against this
scourge.
The third point concerns the Committee’s
relationships
with
international
organizations.
Cameroon believes that the dialogue between the
Committee and such universal, regional or subregional
organizations that have or intend to have counterterrorism programmes, cannot fail to facilitate the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
For that reason, Cameroon believes that such dialogue
should be intensified and at the same time that the
Committee should remain faithful to its mandate.
The final point we should like to emphasize
concerns the importance of technical assistance to
States. As previous speakers have said, such assistance
is necessary and indispensable for the setting up and
strengthening of national and regional structures and
capacities in the fight against terrorism. In that regard,
we welcome Norway’s offer of cooperation to the
Organization of African Unity. We should also like to
return to our request with regard to assistance from the
Committee and its member States for the organization
and holding of regional and national awareness
seminars. We believe that the appointment of an expert
concerned exclusively with assistance requests could
be extremely useful in that respect. We stress this point
because, on the national level, Cameroon intends to
publicize throughout its territory all legal instruments
related to counter-terrorism. Naturally, the principal
targets are administrative, judicial, military and law
enforcement bodies, as well as on decentralized
communities and civil society. Such an operation, if it
is to be accomplished, will require varied and
multidimensional cooperation from our partners.
With regard to the Committee’s future activities,
Cameroon fully endorses the programme of work for
the next 90 days submitted by the Chairman and
reaffirms its readiness to contribute to the success of
the Committee.
In conclusion, Cameroon would like to insist
once again on the need to work effectively towards the
adoption of a comprehensive convention against
terrorism. As we have emphasized before, only such a
convention will be able to fill the current legal vacuum
and deal with the enemies of life: the terrorists.

11

S/PV.4512

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the Rio Group by the Ambassador of
Costa Rica.
I wish to begin by thanking Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing in his capacity as Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for his
tireless efforts to maintain standing relations with
Member States and various bodies and forums on our
behalf. This is an invaluable task to which he has been
very dedicated.
Relations with regional organizations are a matter
of priority for the CTC. The exchange of experiences
that the Committee initiated with the Organization of
American States, among others, has allowed it to
familiarize itself with some of the activities being
undertaken at the hemispheric level and with the
instruments that have been adopted effectively to
counter terrorism. It is therefore necessary for the
Committee to strengthen its relations with such bodies,
as indicated in the briefing.
In the next phase, the Committee will have to
embrace a broader vision that encompasses existing
regional accords on counter-terrorism measures with a
view to ensuring regional security. Currently, national
reports are evaluated without being explicitly placed in
a regional context.
We believe that the CTC’s competence allows and
requires it to utilize the instruments at its disposal,
such as the group of experts, the technical assistance
directory and the so-called trust fund, inter alia, so as
to maintain a fluid dialogue with regional
organizations. At the same time, it must establish
which of the counter-terrorism tools available to it are
being truly effective at the regional level and, thus,
having a national effect.
My delegation feels that this does not imply that
the CTC may interfere in the functions of regional
agencies, thereby weakening their autonomy and
independence. On the contrary, it strengthens links with
such organizations by sharing information, establishing
effective cooperative mechanisms and activities for
technical and financial assistance to counter terrorism,
adopting effective legal and governmental measures
and strengthening border controls, in compliance with
the international commitments of States to ratifying
international conventions adopted by the United
Nations to eradicate terrorism.

12

In order to facilitate the technical and financial
assistance required by Member States, it is
undoubtedly important that the team of experts and the
technical assistance directory be established, all of
which is currently being undertaken by the Committee.
In this connection, we must stress the quality and
competence of the group of experts, to which a great
deal of the success of the most recent phase was due.
We also urge that obstacles be overcome to the speedy
appointment of the expert in charge of promoting
relations with organizations and States and of offering
the technical and financial assistance necessary to
combat terrorism. I also wish to stress the importance
of an effective and operative trust fund provided with
the financial wherewithal to offer the technical
assistance that States require in order to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).
The results obtained by the Committee over the
first six months of its operations are essentially
intangible or not readily apparent with respect to the
original objective of raising the standards of States in
their struggle against terrorism. However, an analysis
of the reports submitted by States and of the reaction of
regional organizations and States to the requirements
set out in resolution 1373 (2001) undoubtedly reveals
that the objective set out therein is beginning to be
attained.
That is important because, in many cases, we
must build where there was previously nothing. What
is essential, however, is that, given the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
CTC itself, each State be able to show some concrete
and effective results in its struggle against terrorism
and that the CTC demonstrate that it is acting in a
global crusade to counter the gravest threat facing
humankind early in the new century. As Ambassador
Mahbubani pointed out, this is all very significant.
I conclude by appealing that we remain alert to
terrorism, which gives no quarter, is relentless and is
already awaiting the opportunity, the right time and the
right place to demonstrate its power to destroy and to
sow fear and confusion among the people.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation wishes most warmly to
congratulate Ambassador Greenstock on his excellent
work at the helm of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and to express the hope that he will continue in
that position for a further six months. We also thank

S/PV.4512

the Chairmen of the three sub-committees and express
our appreciation to the experts and the Secretariat staff
who have been working with Ambassador Greenstock.
The establishment of the CTC was an innovative
response of the international community to problems
relating to peace and security. It was an expression of
the readiness of States to implement Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), which was unprecedented in its
requirements upon all States Members of the United
Nations. The CTC is thus a tool for implementing such
requirements and represents progress in strengthening
international security law and the United Nations
special role in the struggle against terrorism. The
Committee’s performance will determine not only the
success of this vital struggle of our times, but also the
progress and consolidation of international law as a
civilizing factor.
We feel that the Committee must continue to
ensure cooperation, transparency and objectivity in its
work and at all costs avoid any politicization of its
activities. My delegation believes that there are five
premises that must guide the work of the Committee
and the United Nations.
First, it must continue to enjoy the political
support and resolve of Member States to comply with
obligations emanating from resolution 1373 (2001) and
commitments contained in existing international
treaties and agreements.
Secondly, the determination of States to combat
terrorism must be strengthened within the context of
multilateral agreements, efforts and actions undertaken
in the context of international law, in contrast to
unilateral activities.
Thirdly, the ability of the United Nations and of
the Security Council to ensure the implementation of
their own resolutions must be maintained. Hence the
importance of the Committee’s work and of the support
that all must give it.
Fourthly, my country believes that credibility and
transparency are fundamental because they ensure the
international community’s confidence in the role of the
United Nations and in the effectiveness of its
resolutions and instruments. The Committee’s
credibility in the effective fight against terrorism
constitutes crucial support for our multilateral legal and
institutional actions. Today’s open meeting strengthens
the credibility and transparency of the Committee’s

work. That is why the Committee must continue — as
it has done so far — to act on the basis of trust through
dialogue among it’s members and with all Member
States. So far, this has been achieved through the very
instructive informal meetings that Ambassador
Greenstock has organized with Member States.
Fifthly, we consider full respect for human rights
and the observance of international law to be essential
for the Committee’s work. Mexico considers that the
international community’s measures to combat
terrorism must not jeopardize the protection of human
rights and the rights of genuine refugees. Otherwise,
the legitimacy of all our efforts to eradicate terrorism
will be diminished and be in significant conflict with
the principles that must govern our action.
The challenge in the fight against terrorism is to
find a balance between the universal protection of
human rights and the ability to respond to terrorism.
The universal system for the protection of human rights
is based on the Charter of the United Nations and on
other legal instruments. As a result, Members States
always and in all circumstances have the obligation to
ensure that their conduct complies with those legal
imperatives.
That is why our delegation has particular interest
in the briefing to the Committee by Mrs. Mary
Robinson, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The Committee should receive regular
briefings on this issue from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We believe that it is important that the Committee
be persistent in its efforts to conclude the initial review
of national reports by 31 May. Meeting its deadlines
will enable the Committee to advance at a satisfactory
and efficient pace. We also believe that the Committee
should continue its efforts to achieve uniformity of
content in the letters it sends to States as a result of the
expert analysis of the national reports.
The international assistance required by States is
key to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Committee should continue its initiatives to offer
assistance to States that require it. In this endeavour it
should enjoy all the assistance and support the
Organization can offer. It also requires that the
contributions to the Committee continue to increase.
Thus, we value the Chairman’s timely vision for
progress through a coordination strategy among States

13

S/PV.4512

and organizations at the international and regional
levels, with the objective of improving the ability to
fight terrorism and of avoiding duplication among the
various assistance programmes.
We value the dialogue held a few weeks ago with
César Gaviria, Secretary-General of the Organization
of the American States (OAS). I wish to mention that
the OAS recently approved the draft Inter-American
Convention for the Prevention and Elimination of
Terrorism, in the framework of a working group headed
by Mexico.
Our efforts in this area also extend to the
subregional level, namely, North America. Mexico, the
United States and Canada are working on trilateral
strategies for border security in order to prevent the
movement of terrorists through our area. I also wish to
underline the efforts of the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism in improving border security.
Another element to consider in the fight against
terrorism is that we must insist that all efforts conform
to the provisions of the United Nations Charter and of
international law. The use of force is not without its
limits; it must be governed by a valid interpretation of
the legitimate right of self-defence and must in all
circumstances
conform
to
the
principle
of
proportionality.
Finally, I wish to mention that my country
endorses the proposals and statements to be made later
in this meeting in the name of the Rio Group.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing on the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). Under his leadership, the
CTC has done much fruitful work since its
establishment. It has formulated a pragmatic
programme of work, and its open, fair and transparent
approach has met with the appreciation of the
membership at large.
In its current consideration of national reports,
the Committee is guided by the relevant provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the relevant working
guidelines. With good cooperation and coordination, its
Subcommittees have made good progress. We believe
that this is all due to the able leadership of its
Chairman and Vice-Chairmen, who have the active
cooperation and support of the other Members of the

14

United Nations. It can also be attributed to the efforts
of the experts and of the Secretariat.
Like other members of the Council, we endorse
the work programme for the third 90-day period
approved by the Committee, and we view favourably
the current composition of the Bureau.
We believe that two points merit the attention of
the Committee. First, there should be a focus on
questions relating to assistance to Member States in
implementing the resolution. We hope that, as soon as
possible, an assistance fund will be set up, within the
framework of the United Nations, that will help
Member States to enhance their ability to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).
Secondly, we should always keep in mind the fact
that the main objective of the CTC is to assist Member
States so that they can improve their own legislative
and administrative capacity to fight terrorism and take
part more effectively in international cooperation
against terrorism. To that end, the review should be
focused; that will help the CTC to conclude its
consideration of the national reports within the
appropriate time frame.
The current international fight against terrorism
has been continuing for more than seven months —
since last September. Some practical problems have
emerged during that fight that have raised concern on
the part of the international community, and the
Council should give due attention to those problems.
The question of whether the CTC should, at an
appropriate time, respond to certain problems, and the
form that such a response should take, merits our
consideration. States Members of the United Nations
hope that the Council will continue to play its central
role in the international fight against terrorism.
Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): My delegation would
like to thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Greenstock, for his
comprehensive and informative briefing on the work of
the Committee. My delegation also joins others in
commending him and his staff for the very good work
done by the Committee. Let me also express my
satisfaction for the immense contribution of the
Secretariat and the experts to the work of the
Committee.

S/PV.4512

My delegation associates itself with the views
and comments expressed by Ambassador Greenstock
on the work of the Committee, and we fully support the
contents of the draft presidential statement to be
adopted after this meeting.
The overwhelming response to resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States is not only a manifestation of
the international global alliance against the scourge of
terrorism, but is also telling evidence of the desire of
each Member State to rid its territory of terrorism.
Perhaps this is the first resolution ever to receive such
a degree of acclaim and support from Members.
Indeed, it must be. When we see the indiscriminate
atrocities and callous violence meted out to innocent
citizens by barbaric acts of terrorism, when we assess
the economic and social damage and the disruption
resulting from irresponsible terrorist acts, and, most of
all, when we imagine the trials and traumas suffered by
the victims and their families, including women and
children, we realize the imperative need for immediate
action at the national, regional and international level
with a view to doing away with the plague that
international terrorism represents.
The work conducted by the CTC during the first
and second 90-day periods is, indeed, impressive. Most
of all, we appreciate the transparent and even-handed
manner in which the Committee has been operating.
We strongly support the procedures that have been
adopted; they have been very rewarding in terms of
establishing confidence-building measures between
Member States and the CTC. As Mauritius is one of the
vice-chairmen of the Committee, my delegation would
like to thank the members of the Council for the
confidence placed in our delegation. We will continue
to work with determination and to shoulder the
responsibility of the vice-chairmanship over the next
six months with full dedication.
Terrorism cannot be wiped out on this planet
without the true and genuine engagement of all
countries,
individually
and
collectively.
The
submission of reports by countries is only the initial
stage in the process. Constructive action to combat
terrorism will require more than pledges and promises.
Effective enforcement at the domestic level of the
international conventions signed by Member States
would be a good start. In addition, it will be necessary
for each country to incorporate the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) into its domestic legislation.

Allow me to make a few remarks on our
experiences with respect to our vice-chairmanship of
the Committee and Chairmanship of Subcommittee B.
We have been confronted with many questions from the
Member States that have so far been invited to our
meetings to take cognizance of the draft letters
addressed to them following the assessment of their
respective reports. Here, we would like to share some
of their concerns.
First, States have asked whether some of the
questions in the draft letter might not be beyond the
scope and purview of the mandate of resolution 1373
(2001). Secondly, they have asked whether the answers
to the questions set out in the draft letters would in any
way help in understanding whether, or concluding that,
a country has complied with resolution 1373 (2001) or
whether it has taken sufficient steps to deal with the
problem of international terrorism. Thirdly, they have
asked what the next course of action might be after the
reports of all Member States have been thoroughly
studied at the level of the CTC.
While we do not have clear and precise replies to
those questions, we believe that the objectives set out
in the resolution speak for themselves, and the very
comprehensive statement of the Chairman today will
help us to clarify many of the points raised.
Another pertinent question is the linkage between
respect for human rights and the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). It is the view of many Member
States that anti-terrorism measures should not be an
excuse for the violation of human rights. It is important
to remind ourselves of what the Secretary-General said
at a meeting of the Commission on Human Rights in
Geneva on 12 April this year. He said:
“while the Council has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and
security, this Commission has a particular
responsibility to promote the international
implementation of human rights. Therefore it
must make every effort to protect those
threatened by violations of human rights, whether
these violations result directly from terrorism or
are committed in the name of counter-terrorism.”
Finally, let me conclude by making two
observations. First, terrorism is the enemy of peace,
life, hope and society. It is the enemy of all that we
should strive for and of the aspirations of ordinary
people. Secondly, in order to fight terrorism and

15

S/PV.4512

eradicate it from the globe, it is important to address its
causes.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like first to thank
you, Mr. President, for arranging today’s open meeting
of the Council on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by Spain later in the debate on behalf of
the European Union.
Resolution 1373 (2001) remains a defining
architectural under-pinning in the fight by the
international
community
against
international
terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee, for its
part, has played an indispensable role in monitoring
and shaping the response of States in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). As the three
90-day work programmes indicate, it has done this
comprehensively and rigorously, but also, in the view
of our delegation, with sensitivity to the scale of the
tasks involved, with openness to the views and
perspectives of the wider United Nations membership,
and in a spirit of genuine dialogue and transparency.
Ireland appreciates this very much.
I would also wish, in particular, to place on
record, as others have done this morning, our strong
appreciation of the work of the CTC Chairman,
Ambassador Greenstock. I would also like to thank
him, as well as his colleagues in the United Kingdom
Mission and in London for what they have done. The
scale of the task of establishing the CTC and getting it
off to such a strong start was very daunting and
demanding. It required a huge commitment of time and
energy by Ambassador Greenstock. So, I want to
warmly thank him for this. Ireland also appreciates the
dedicated, committed work of the three Vice-Chairmen,
the experts appointed to assist the Committee and, of
course, the Secretariat.
At this stage in our meeting, there is no need to
repeat the many points already made this morning. I
would like, however, to make a few general points of
importance to my delegation.
First it is of great importance that the CTC
continue its present approach of dialogue and of
openness to the concerns of United Nations Members.
For many States, and not because of any lack of
political
determination,
the
legislative
and
administrative requirements of implementing resolution

16

1373 (2001) are complex and daunting. There needs to
be sustained appreciation of this, and concomitant
support from those most capable of providing it.
Secondly, as we progress in the period ahead into
more
detailed
assessments
regarding
the
implementation by States of the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001), we must also be careful, as at
present, not to micro-manage or to prescribe beyond
the requirements actually laid down in 1373 (2001).
My delegation fully takes the point — and
Ambassador Greenstock rightly emphasized this in his
remarks — that reaching a measure of confidence that
States are taking action on all the issues does not
equate to declaring any Member State to be 100-percent compliant. It is also, I think, worth emphasizing as
a related point that resolution 1373 (2001) is clear on
what is required. We must avoid going beyond the
spirit or the letter of its provisions. The fight against
terrorism is now, so to speak, a global public good and
is almost universally regarded as such. That perception
must be strengthened, not diminished, over time. This
means that a realistic sense of the complexity of things,
not any spirit of Manichaeanism, will continue to be
our safest guide towards our agreed goals. We are, in
summary, the guardians of the spirit as well as the
detail of 1373 (2001).
Thirdly, Ireland attaches the utmost importance to
support by the United Nations, and by the international
community generally, for the efforts of developing
countries where this is necessary to implement 1373
(2001). This may involve the provision of expertise and
assistance as appropriate or, in many cases, pointing to
where it is available. It must not mean, of course, a
diminution of development assistance for other goals.
This also means that we need to understand fully that
resolution 1373 (2001) poses particular challenges to
many developing countries and to continue fully to
take this into account in our work.
Fourthly, Ireland strongly welcomes, as others
have this morning, the work of the CTC and its Chair
in encouraging regional organizations to work together
in the fight against terrorism. This is more than
important; it is essential.
Fifthly, on a wider level, we believe that the fight
against terrorism can never be at the expense of human
rights. Here, my delegation is in full agreement with
what the Secretary-General said to the Commission on
Human Rights in Geneva on 12 April:

S/PV.4512

“Let us, therefore, be careful not to place
whole communities under suspicion, and subject
them to harassment, because of acts committed by
some of their members. Nor must we allow the
struggle against terrorism to become a pretext for
the suppression of legitimate opposition or
dissent.” (Press release SG/SM/8196)
Not only are such measures profoundly unjust. They
are also liable to achieve the precise opposite of the
desired effect by driving more members of the targeted
groups to resort to violence. In short, the SecretaryGeneral went on to say, “any sacrifice of human rights
in the struggle against terror is not only wrong in itself,
but will ultimately be self-defeating”.
I should add that Ireland very much appreciates
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mrs. Robinson, on human rights and
terrorism as presented to the Commission on Human
Rights earlier this month. This is an excellent example
of the United Nations and its institutions looking,
together, at issues affecting us all.
Finally, Ireland endorses fully the remarks made
by Ambassador Greenstock earlier on the importance
of adequate provision of resources to the CTC. We
understand the problems involved, but this is important
work for an essential objective and, however we
resolve the issue of resources, it must be done.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We note with satisfaction that the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) is continuing to work
energetically to implement resolution 1373 (2001). No
small credit for this goes to the Chairman of the
Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, to all the members
of the Committee, to the experts and to the Secretariat.
It is important that the CTC not confine its work
to analysing the reports submitted by States on the
measures they are taking in the fight against terrorism.
The Committee must also constantly bear in mind the
need to give advisory and technical assistance to States
in order to enable them to effectively comply with their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001). The active
work of the CTC in setting up close cooperation with
other international structures concerned with counterterrorism is of great significance. We expect that the

appointment of an additional expert on that subject will
give new momentum to the work of the Committee.
We also support the proposal that in selecting
new experts due attention should be given to ensuring
the representation of all regions. Of course, we support
Ambassador Greenstock’s appeal to the effect that the
Committee should get the appropriate level of
Secretariat support. We agree too that, at present,
increasing interaction between the CTC and regional
organizations is of particular importance.
Since Russia is the current President of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I can
inform the Council that the CIS attaches the utmost
importance to counter-terrorism issues. We have set up
the appropriate legal basis in the form of a treaty on
cooperation among States parties in the area of
counter-terrorism. In Moscow, we have established the
CIS Counter-Terrorism Centre, in whose work the
majority of law-enforcement bodies and special
services of the countries of the Commonwealth take
part.
Last July, a branch of the CIS Counter-Terrorism
Centre was opened in Bishkek; it will monitor the
situation in Central Asia and coordinate the activities
of the relevant CIS bodies in the counter-terrorism
fight in the region.
We support the programme of work of the CTC
for the coming 90-day period. We believe it is
important to begin preparing now for the next stage in
the Committee’s work, when it will be necessary to
review the responses of States to the additional
questions put to them by the CTC. It is necessary to
establish in advance the methodology by which the
CTC should be guided in putting forward its
recommendations for the elimination of flaws in the
legislation and practical mechanisms of States to fight
terrorism.
The Security Council has a clear general
understanding that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
should not, and will not, function as a repressive organ
or in any way go beyond the limits of its mandate.
Nor should we forget that resolution 1373 (2001)
on counter-terrorism was adopted in response to one of
the most dangerous challenges of modern times, which
was described by the Council as a threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council
itself therefore bears the main responsibility for putting

17

S/PV.4512

an end to this threat, in strict compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations. Of course, this applies
also to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The positive trends in the work of the CTC over
the past six months have laid a genuine basis for the
effective implementation by the Committee of its key
functions in carefully monitoring compliance by all
Member States with the decisions of the Security
Council and of the United Nations in the counterterrorism struggle. Russia, as a permanent member of
the Security Council and a Vice-Chairman of the CTC,
is ready to continue to cooperate in these efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Spain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Cyprus and Malta, as well as Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes this fresh
opportunity to review the important work undertaken
by the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). This meeting provides us with an opportunity
to present the principal developments in the common
action against terrorism undertaken by the member
States of the European Union and the European
Commission, in fulfilment of resolution 1373 (2001).
I wish once again to underline the historic
significance of this resolution as well as the European
Union’s commitment to its objectives and instruments.
We congratulate the CTC for the work it has
done, and especially for the resolve and dedication
demonstrated by its members and by the experts who
advise it. The United Nations Secretariat also deserves
special mention for its collaboration with the CTC and
with the Member States.
I must also commend the Committee’s
transparency. Open briefings are now a common
practice of the CTC. Those briefings involve a
presentation by the Chairman of the Committee on
significant activities as well as on key decisions and
progress made in the area.

18

Thirdly, we commend the CTC’s concern for
facilitating States’ compliance with resolution 1373
(2001), particularly by providing information on offers
of assistance.
According to the information presented, 142
national reports had been received by the end of
March, but more than 46 States had not yet complied
with that obligation. The European Union calls upon
those States to submit their reports as a matter of
priority.
The European Union understands that, in many
cases, non-compliance may be due more to practical
difficulties than to lack of political will. Therefore, it is
important to facilitate assistance to those States that
face this type of problem. Several of the member States
of the European Union and the European community
are included in the directory of assistance offers
published by the CTC.
The European community has, through the
European Commission, informed the CTC about the
assistance available to third States in areas related to
the fight against terrorism, such as finance, customs,
immigration, extradition, police, the judiciary and so
on. We encourage all potential providers of assistance,
advice and expertise to submit an entry to the CTC’s
directory of assistance.
The CTC recently presented its work plan for the
next 90 days, in which it states its confidence in its
ability to complete, within a specific time-frame, the
evaluation of the first series of reports and to begin
reviewing supplementary ones. The Union supports
this proposal for continuity in the review of compliance
with resolution 1373 (2001).
The assessment of national reports may prove
beneficial in helping States to identify areas in which
they should strengthen or supplement their domestic
legislation or administrative measures. In keeping with
the Committee’s spirit of transparency, lessons learnt
from this evaluation process must be shared with all
States, and we trust that the CTC will know how best
to do so. The main goal of the CTC should be to
achieve a uniform, full and comprehensive application
of the resolution.
Measures against terrorism must accord with the
Charter of the United Nations, including the obligation
to promote and respect human rights. That obligation

S/PV.4512

should be taken into account fully
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

in

the

The CTC is very active in its contacts with
regional and subregional organizations. In addition to
exchanging information about their respective work in
the fight against terrorism, the CTC can contribute very
effectively to achieving a coherent approach by those
organizations and coordination with their member
States. We stress the need for a coordinated
international approach to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Furthermore, we underline the
role of regional organizations in facilitating assistance
to their member States.
The European Union presented a common report
to the CTC in addition to those of its member States,
and it will soon join with other organizations that have
maintained direct contact with the CTC in order to
brief them on its joint anti-terrorist activity.
The Secretary-General has created a working
group to review and improve actions undertaken by the
various departments of the Secretariat in the fight
against terrorism. We support that initiative.
The European Union takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s appointment of the new head of the United
Nations Vienna-based institutions. We welcome the
efforts of the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
Centre for International Crime Prevention as part of
United Nations system-wide counter-terrorism efforts.
In this regard, the European Union awaits the report of
the Secretary-General requested by paragraph 103 of
General Assembly resolution 56/253, which will
“make proposals to strengthen the Terrorism
Prevention Branch ... to enable it to carry out its
mandate as approved by the General Assembly”.
Even before 11 September, the European Union
had been undertaking significant coordinated efforts,
on the understanding that terrorism takes advantage of
every loophole and of legal or administrative
differences among countries.
The European Union gives maximum importance
to the fight against terrorism, which is the top priority
of the Spanish presidency. The European Union
common action is focused on the areas where it can
contribute an added value to the national efforts of its
members, complementing them.

This common European initiative stems from a
common position and an action plan adopted by the
heads of State and Government of the European Union.
In the spirit of transparency, we have submitted that
action plan to the Security Council for dissemination.
The Union’s goal is to develop concrete common or
concerted measures against terrorism within and
outside the European Union.
The Union’s response includes a broad range of
actions. Some are political, others legal or operative.
Many entail a greater dialogue and closer cooperation
within the European Union and with third countries.
The implementation of our action plan is being
carried out very actively. In the field of justice and
home affairs, an important set of measures has been
agreed. They include the European Arrest Warrant; a
common definition of terrorist crimes; a common list
of terrorist organizations; a new judicial cooperation
unit called Eurojust; and Europol, an anti-terrorist task
force within the joint police unit.
With respect to the fight against the financing of
terrorism, compliance with resolution 1373 (2001) is
well under way. The list of terrorist individuals, entities
and organizations annexed to the common position of
27 December is being revised and updated. Just
yesterday, a major suspect was detained in Spain who
is believed to be responsible for the financing of
Al Qaeda.
The European Union is also carrying out an
assessment of its relations with third countries in the
light of their attitude towards terrorism.
In the desire for transparency that the European
Union shares with the Committee, we have sent the
plan of action to the President of the Council, as I
mentioned earlier.
In closing, the European Union believes that
terrorism is a very real threat to all States. International
cooperation is therefore crucial in combating it and in
ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice. The
actions of the European Union are aimed at individuals
or groups of terrorists, never at peoples, religions or
cultures. The goal is to strengthen international
security, the rule of law and human rights.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

19

S/PV.4512

Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for your timely initiative
to convene this open debate on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, at a time when the
international community is confounded both by the
appalling violence unleashed against the population of
Palestine and by the atrocity of the acts of terrorism
committed against civilians in Israel.

each and every member of the international
community. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
stated, the United Nations must have the courage to
recognize that just as there are common objectives,
there are also common enemies, and that to defeat
them, all nations must combine their efforts, and the
United Nations has a unique role to play in promoting
this effort.

That situation morally degrades all mankind and
should lead us to realize the urgency of making
progress towards the common goals that we set for
ourselves as an Organization in the aftermath of the
events of 11 September 2001, namely, to eradicate
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and to
address situations, such as that in the Middle East,
which feed the worst expressions of hate and
resentment and thereby foster a climate that contributes
to the spiral of violence and terror.

That is why we believe that it is essential for us
to underscore today the value of both multilateral
action and the United Nations in this complex task.
Moreover, we feel obliged to express our conviction
that it is only within this multilateral framework that it
will be possible to combat both those who make
terrorism a way of life and the conditions that enable
their hate to resonate among disaffected groups
throughout the world.

Chile fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Rio Group.
Today, my country would like to reiterate its
condemnation of the terrorist acts committed on
11 September and to express its support for resolution
1373 (2001), which seeks, within the framework of the
Charter of the United Nations, to restore international
security through the adoption of adequate measures to
eradicate international terrorism.
Within that framework, we welcome the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of
the Security Council, established pursuant to that
resolution, which recently put forward its programme
of work for a third period of 90 days. We note the
professionalism and transparency of its efforts and the
wise guidance of Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock and
his Vice-Chairmen. We trust that during this new phase
the Committee will maintain the transparency of its
work and the impartiality of its results.
We urge the countries that have not yet submitted
their national reports to cooperate with the Committee,
whose positive results will benefit the international
community as a whole.
As we said in our first statement following the
events of 11 September, Chile believes that terrorism is
a rejection of the basic principles of human coexistence
and that it is contrary to every civilized principle.
Combating terrorism is therefore the responsibility of

20

The fight against terrorism must therefore be
waged within the framework of each country’s respect
for the rule of law, international law and human rights.
Morally and ethically ambiguous actions which use
that objective as justification merely hinder efforts to
eradicate terrorism. Any State that loses sight of the
ethical difference that separates it from the terrorist is
giving up in advance the principal weapon that enables
it defend its citizens, namely, the legitimacy of its
cause.
We are also convinced that the oppression of
peoples, ignorance accompanied by extreme ideologies
and especially the conditions of extreme poverty in
which a substantial part of humanity lives are
increasingly creating a climate of marginalization and
dehumanization that encourages recourse to violence
and legitimizes the actions of terrorists through the
degradation it perpetrates. We should not lose sight of
the limitations of strategies that reduce this combat to a
simple question of military strength. Our strategy in
combating terrorism must be based on a multifaceted
and resolute approach that includes the commitment
freely undertaken by our heads of State and contained
in the Millennium Declaration.
While respecting the mandate given to the
Committee, Chile would like the Committee to also be
used to gather experiences that would facilitate
progress towards the elaboration of new concepts of
security that are more in tune with the problems of the
twenty-first century.

S/PV.4512

My country welcomes the recent entry into force
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism, adopted by the General
Assembly in 1999, on which many of the provisions of
Council resolution 1373 (2001) were based. It also
notes with satisfaction that in the Organization of
American States negotiations have been concluded on
the inter-American convention against terrorism, which
we hope will be adopted at that organization’s general
assembly to be held in Barbados.
In 2001, Chile, in its capacity as coordinator of
the Rio Group, organized a meeting of legal experts to
consider questions related to the prevention and
punishment of acts of terrorism, and particularly to
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). The text
adopted at that meeting was the result of a fruitful
exchange of opinions on national legislation in force
regarding terrorism and on their reform. That made it
possible to take note of the progress achieved by our
Group and the advantages of reviewing these efforts
within a regional framework.
Chile will participate in all appropriate forums
with a message of total rejection of terrorism without
relativism of any kind. To that end, it has a clear
willingness to implement and apply the 12 treaties
adopted within the framework of the United Nations on
this topic. Chile is a party to all those treaties.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): Since the heinous terrorist
attacks of 11 September last year, significant progress
has been made through international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism. This progress is encouraging,
but the fight is only at its beginning stage. It is
therefore essential for all Member States to strengthen
their cooperative efforts to attain our common goal of
eliminating terrorism.
In that context, I cannot overemphasize the
importance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), particularly its valuable activities to enhance
the capacity of countries concerned with combating
terrorism. I would thus like to pay my highest tribute to
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock and the other members
of the CTC Bureau for the strenuous efforts they have
devoted to the activities of that important Committee.

Thanks to them, the CTC is already a successful
institution.
In the immediate aftermath of the 11 September
attacks, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi affirmed
that the Japanese Government is resolved to make the
fight against terrorism its own responsibility and to
engage itself actively in that fight. The full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) is a central task in such efforts on the part of the
Japanese Government.
In particular, the Government of Japan places
high priority on the swift implementation of the
Security Council’s measures in order to deprive
terrorists of any possibility of withdrawing funds
before their assets are frozen. In freezing the financial
assets of the individuals and entities associated with Al
Qaeda and the Taliban pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1333 (2000) and 1390 (2002), the Japanese
Government has been taking the necessary measures
nearly simultaneously with the sanctions Committee’s
decisions to add an individual or an entity to the
sanctions list. The assistance extended by the sanctions
Committee is crucially important in order to make it
possible for us to take such swift action. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso,
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, for his
cooperation.
Furthermore, in order to ensure the thorough
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and, at the
same time, to make it possible for the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism to enter into force, the Japanese Government
has submitted the relevant draft legislation to the
Japanese Diet and plans to ratify the Convention as
soon as the Diet approves it. That will complete
Japan’s ratification of all 12 anti-terrorism conventions.
We highly appreciate the fact that the CTC has
been vigorously conducting its work of reviewing the
reports submitted by Member States on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Therefore, it
is all the more important to urge those countries that
have not yet done so to submit their reports to the CTC
promptly. In that connection, the Japanese Government
considers it a serious problem that many countries,
despite their intentions, have not submitted their
reports because they lack the capacity to do so.
Therefore, we would like to call on the CTC urgently

21

S/PV.4512

to consider what needs to be done to help those
countries.
Assistance to developing countries is essential in
order to secure the global implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), and such assistance could be better
organized if the CTC could identify countries in need
as well as the areas in which they require assistance.
Such a step would facilitate cooperation between donor
and recipient countries and would further promote the
implementation by developing countries of resolution
1373 (2001). From that point of view, we support the
CTC’s intention to focus its future activities on those
countries facing difficulties in implementing resolution
1373 (2001).
In this context, it is particularly important to
upgrade the CTC directory of assistance, which already
exists to a limited extent. To that end, we must urge
those countries capable of providing assistance to
register their assistance programmes in the CTC
directory as soon as possible. The Japanese
Government, for its part, has already registered its own
technical assistance training programmes and has
decided to double the number of trainees that it will
accept for those programmes in 2002.
The Japanese Government supports the CTC’s
intention to take advantage of cooperation with
regional organizations and other international forums
to promote the full implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). My Government, for its part, will work to see
to it that regional organizations and other forums to
which it belongs expand their cooperation with the
CTC.
I would like to conclude by stressing that now is
the time for all Member States to reaffirm our common
commitment to combat terrorism and to renew our
determination to support the CTC so that it can
continue its valuable work, building upon the success it
has achieved so far. The tasks that the CTC will have to
face in the future will be far more challenging than
those it faced during the initial period. In the light of
this recognition, the Japanese Government will remain
committed to do its best in support of the CTC in the
months to come.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Canada, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

22

Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Since 11 September, the global community has moved
beyond condemnation, condolences and solidarity to
practical action against terrorism. To a very large
extent, that action is guided by resolution 1373 (2001),
which marked an exceptionally important step. We are
pleased to see that this dynamic continues. We remain
acutely aware that we must work in the spirit of
multilateralism and partnership to find new and
creative ways to face common threats in our
increasingly interdependent world.
I should like to offer my compliments to
Ambassador Greenstock and to the Vice-Chairmen of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for the
remarkable work that they have accomplished.
(spoke in English)
On 19 September 2001, leaders of the Group of 8
(G-8) issued a statement that condemned the terrorist
attacks of 11 September and cited the 12 United
Nations counter-terrorism instruments as the standard
for international action in the fight against terrorism.
Those conventions and Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) provide us with the requisite counterterrorism architecture. We urge all countries to
implement these instruments as soon as they possibly
can.
Canada recently ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and, just last week, ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
That means we have now implemented all 12 United
Nations counter-terrorism instruments. I should like to
add that under our system, treaties are ratified only
when we have the necessary measures in place to
implement them.
In their 19 September statement, the G-8 leaders
also requested their foreign, finance, justice and other
relevant ministers to draw up a list of specific measures
to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation. As this
year’s Chair of the G-8, Canada has initiated a
cooperative relationship with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee — one that, we hope, will mature into a
strong and effective partnership.
At the first meeting between the G-8 and the
CTC, the issues of capacity-building and outreach were
discussed. With respect to capacity-building, the G-8
respects the CTC as the central body for monitoring

S/PV.4512

and facilitating the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The G-8 will cooperate closely with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, supporting its efforts in
any way that is appropriate.
In terms of capacity-building, we are aware that
members of the global community face challenges with
regard to both financial and human resources.
Technical assistance — providing expertise in a
number of fields, from the drafting of legislation to law
enforcement and security — is perhaps even more
important, and definitely more enduring, than financial
assistance.
Representatives of the G-8 and the CTC have
agreed to meet quarterly, with the next scheduled
meeting in June 2002. In the meantime, G-8 expert
groups and ministerial groups will also meet. We
believe that, by the time of the next exchange between
the G-8 and the CTC, we will have more progress, and
more significant progress, to report.
Multilateralism and partnership remain key if we
are to develop long-term solutions to this horrific
challenge to us all. The G-8 will focus on practical,
multidimensional action. The priorities and goals are
clear and the G-8 looks forward to cooperating with the
CTC as we all work to meet these goals. No single
country will be able to achieve its security on its own.
I wish to say a word about Secretariat support.
Canada is one of the countries most insistent on
limiting the growth of the United Nations budget. We
do recognize nonetheless that the membership cannot
just dump new, unsourced obligations on the
Secretariat. At the same time, we in Canada are also
one of the more insistent countries in urging that
resources be shifted to meet changing and new
priorities. In our view, counter-terrorism is such a
priority and we assume the Secretariat agrees. In fact,
some parts of the Secretariat have adjusted
appropriately and we call on those departments that
still have not done so to adjust their support so that the
CTC gets the back-up that it so urgently and
appropriately needs.
The President (spoke in Russian): I hope that the
representative of Canada does not include drinking
water among those priorities that have become less
urgent.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate on the
activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
We are grateful to the Chairman of the
Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for his summary of
the Committee’s work and for sharing with us its plans
for future activities, as well as for the excellent manner
in which he and the other members of the Bureau have
been conducting their work. We highly appreciate the
efforts of the Chairman and the Bureau to achieve
maximum efficiency, transparency and cooperation
with all Member States.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my Government's full support for the CounterTerrorism Committee's work programme for the next
90 days.
The CTC has entered a new phase. Its workload is
enormous, but this is the work that needs to be done to
achieve the objectives and we place our trust in the
Committee members' competence and wisdom. We
believe that the effective work of the Committee under
the chairmanship of Sir Jeremy Greenstock, in close
cooperation with all Member States, constitutes the
most vivid example of thorough implementation of
Security Council resolutions.
As the United Nations brings together the
political, diplomatic, legal, economic, humanitarian
and security dimensions of the counter-terrorism
agenda, it provides an appropriate framework for
national and international actions. It is the base for our
collective efforts in fighting terrorism and we believe
that, as this crime is a transnational phenomenon, only
multilateral action can counter it successfully. A useful
exchange of opinions and information between
representatives of organizations, States and the CTC
would definitely benefit the work of the Committee.
In this regard, Ukraine welcomes steps taken by
the Committee to facilitate dialogue with States and
relevant international and regional organizations on
matters covered by resolution 1373 (2001). We also
attach
great
importance
to
the
continuing
communication by the Committee of regular
information on its activities. This, in our view, is one
of the essential prerequisites of its success.

23

S/PV.4512

Another direction of the work that is successfully
covered by the Committee is to provide appropriate
assistance to those countries that are willing but unable
to improve their counter-terrorism capabilities. I would
like to express the full support of my country for the
efforts of the Committee to help such countries by
establishing a directory of sources of advice and
expertise in the areas covered by resolution 1373
(2001).
I will not focus on our national report, which was
submitted to the Committee, but let me underline some
recent developments related to Ukraine in connection
with measures against international terrorism that have
been taken since the January meeting of the Council.
This year, Ukraine will become a party to the
European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism
and the International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings. The relevant instruments have
already been deposited by Ukraine. I wish to
emphasize that my country is among the few Member
States that have ratified the European Convention
without any reservations. We also expect that the issue
of the ratification of the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, signed
in June 2000, will be high on the agenda of the new,
recently elected Parliament of Ukraine. With the
ratification of that instrument, Ukraine will become a
party to all universal conventions and protocols on
international terrorism.
The Department of Financial Monitoring was
recently established as a separate governmental agency
within the Ministry of Finance. The main task of the
Department is to collect and analyse information on
financial transactions that are subject to mandatory
supervision, with a view to recommending legal and
executive measures against money-laundering.
Under the auspices of the Council of Europe,
Ukraine also initiated an international meeting of
experts on illegal migration with the purpose of
elaborating proposals for an international strategy to
limit the spread of terrorism by strengthening
migration regimes.
Finally, I would like to wish the Committee and
its Chairman every success in their future work. Let me
reconfirm that Ukraine stands ready to make its worthy
contribution to our common cause.

24

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
respond to some of the comments.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock: I just wish to catch up
with some of the questions raised and comments made
before people depart for lunch.
I am extremely grateful for the general support
which the Committee has had from those members and
non-members of the Council who have spoken and for
the careful thought that has gone into their
presentations this morning. They have been generous in
their praise of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) so far, but I want to underline once
again, as many speakers have said, how important it is
that this be a team effort. A lot of people have
contributed to it, not least, may I say again, my own
staff, both in my delegation and in the support I have
had from London.
I think that Ambassador Mahbubani rightly
pointed to some of the areas where the CTC has made a
difference, but I think it goes beyond his four points.
The overall determination of virtually all Member
States to do something about terrorism has definitely
taken off since 11 September and since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001). One of the most important of
them is the extra legislation that is now being passed. It
is not just looking at legislation which is now going
forward, it is the actual adoption of new legislation.
The increase in the ratifications of the conventions and
the real cooperation that is beginning to take place in
stopping terrorist actions and the financing of terrorism
amount to more than intentions; it is actually
happening now. And I want very quickly to move on to
the area of assistance and make that an actual and not
just an intended measure.
There was clearly some confusion over numbers,
because 143 plus 50 does not add up to 189. The fact is
that we have had, as I said in my report, reports from
Member States and others, including the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union, the Cook Islands and Switzerland, which are
not Members of the United Nations as such, yet. That
adds up to 193. There are 50 which now need to move.
I am grateful to those who said how important that is.
It is the Committee’s approach to liaise with nonreporters in a cooperative way since virtually all of
them are not reporting because they have difficulties.
Japan and others have said “well then, they need

S/PV.4512

assistance, and that assistance must be arranged”. That
is something I now want to do. May I inform the
Council and, indeed, the Committee, that I am now in a
position to move forward with the appointment of the
seventh expert and will take action on that within the
next 24 hours. It is an important appointment and one
on which I want work to get going.
Regional organizations are absolutely vital, as
many people have said. Frankly, I think that as we
move forward in the CTC’s work with regional
organizations, this could be the beginning of a model
of cooperation with regional organizations in other
aspects of the Council’s work. I think we need to give
some thought to that. I particularly appreciate
Norway’s work with the Organization of African Unity
in setting up a project to get them going in
implementation, a project which I did not know about.
Inevitably, because of lack of experience in this field,
Africa is in danger of falling behind in this whole area,
and I very much appreciate that sort of donor-State
activity with regional organizations.
Cameroon and others referred to the whole
concept of State responsibility. I think that Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou expressed that very well. It lies at the
heart of the effective implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). In the end, the CTC can be only a catalyst
for this, although, if we have to, at the end of the day,
there is a bit of a stick to wave. But States must take on
their own responsibility. There is nothing more
important than that. That is where it is in their own
interest to use their regional organizations and for that
to be an active area.
On human rights, I think we have the balance
right. I have taken careful note of what the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has said
recently and of what the Secretary-General has said.

But I think the Committee has got the balance right.
The Committee is in consensus on human rights: it is
awareness and discussion and liaison. But it is not
implementing action as far as human rights obligations
are concerned. The Committee is working up to its full
mandate but not beyond it.
I will pick up some of the points from regional
organizations and other Member States after lunch. But
Spain, on behalf of the European Union, mentioned
lessons learned and the spreading of lessons learned.
One very useful paper produced recently on the subject
of lessons learned from reports so far was written by
the spokesman for the Committee’s experts, Mr. Walter
Gehr. It has now been distributed to all Member States
as a resource. I suggest that the delegations look at it. It
is a useful addition to the category of lessons learned.
Spain also mentioned the Secretariat setting up a
unit. Before this meeting, I discussed with Sir Kieran
Prendergast whether the Secretariat wished to speak. I
do not think that unit is yet fully formed enough to
make an input. It will be up and running, I understand,
by the end of June. In the next debate that we have, I
hope that the Secretariat will make a full contribution.
As for the Vienna institutions mentioned by
Spain, there will be an important series of seminars and
symposiums in earlier June. I will be going to one of
them on 3 and 4 June.
I will pick up other points after lunch because
people want to get away. I thank everyone for the
positive tone of the debate so far.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for his additional comments.
I propose now to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

25
