S/2016/957

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 8 November 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1983 (2011), in which
the Council invited me to provide further information, as appropriate, relating to
urgent and coordinated international action to curb the impact of the AIDS epidemic
in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In the five years since the adoption of resolution 1983 (2011), there have been
many developments in the global effort to combat the AIDS epidemic. There has
been tremendous progress in the expansion of medical treatment for people living
with HIV, resulting in a significant decline in the number of AIDS -related deaths.
At the same time, however, the number of new infections among adults has
remained steady at an estimated 1.9 million annually. In the light of these two
independent trends, conflict-related disruption of life-saving HIV treatment is likely
to become more common. The goal of ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030, as
reflected in Goal 3 of the Sustainable Development Goals, is important in both
conflict and post-conflict settings. Achieving this goal will require strengthening
our collaborative efforts.
During the June 2016 high-level meeting on ending AIDS, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations organized a side event entitled “HIV and security: past, present and
future”. Participants cautioned that HIV and high-risk social drivers such as sexual
violence during conflicts and humanitarian crises must be squarely addressed both
during and after conflicts and in humanitarian crises.
In parallel with the high-level meeting, UNAIDS and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations conducted a review of the imp lementation of resolution
1983 (2011). While the Security Council in that resolution called for a global
response to curb HIV/AIDS in conflict and post-conflict situations, with support
from Member States, United Nations entities and international financial institutions,
the review focused on the critical role of peacekeeping operations as a part of the
global effort.
The review found that there was near universal provision of HIV -related training
and services to United Nations peacekeeping personnel, while the integration of HIV
service delivery in mandated activities was dependent on a number of factors,
including the mandate of the mission, available resources and partnerships with
other United Nations entities. In addition, the review highlighted the need for links

16-18461 (E)

151116

*1618461*

S/2016/957

between efforts to address HIV and efforts to address sexual and gender -based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence. It also pointed out the need to
further reinforce system-wide United Nations cooperation to address HIV in
emergency settings, including conflict and post-conflict situations, to apply the
latest knowledge and to ensure the most effective use of limited resources.
The review found that at least six peacekeeping operations 1 had incorporated
HIV-related communications and outreach into mandated mission tasks. Those
missions contributed to national AIDS responses by providing HIV sensitization and
awareness training to national military forces, national police force s, ex-combatants
and internally displaced persons, training peer educators within national uniformed
services and extending voluntary HIV testing and counselling, condom distribution
and post-exposure prophylaxis to the host population. The extent to which external
HIV activities are integrated into the mandated tasks depends on the scope of the
mission mandate, the levels of human and financial resources available and the level
of collaboration with other United Nations entities and partners. Such collaboration
also facilitates a smoother transition to United Nations post -conflict support.
Since the adoption of resolution 1983 (2011), there has been a stronger
recognition of the links between sexual and gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, and increased risk of HIV infection. In its
resolution 2106 (2013), the Security Council urged United Nations entities, Member
States and donors to support the development and strengthening of capacities of
national health systems and civil society networks in order to provide sustainable
assistance to women and girls living with or affected by HIV and AIDS in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. Women’s protection advisers and focal points
in several missions 2 have been mainstreaming HIV/AIDS considerations in their
advocacy, political engagements and preventive measures. However, it is necessary
to strengthen action to address those links.
In its resolution 1983 (2011), the Security Council requested me to strengthen
ongoing work to prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse. In my report on
combating sexual exploitation and abuse (A/71/97), not only did I reiterate my
strong belief that this Organization should never remain silent or indifferent in the
face of reported incidents, irrespective of the perpetrators, but also I laid out a
comprehensive strategy to ensure that United Nations entities work actively and in
unity.
The response to AIDS has moved from emergency management of a global
crisis to a systematic effort to deliver HIV-related services at the level required to
end AIDS as a public health threat by 2030. Data trends underscore the importance
of continued engagement by the United Nations within conflict and post -conflict
settings during this phase of the response.
__________________
1

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
2
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), MINUSMA, MONUSCO, UNAMID, UNMISS and UNOCI.

2/3

16-18461

S/2016/957

To ensure the most effective use of the limited resource s available to the
United Nations system, the review recommended strengthening the architecture for
joint United Nations action against AIDS in emergency settings, including conflict
and post-conflict situations, to reflect the most recent international co mmitments on
AIDS and conflict-related sexual violence, and applying the latest knowledge on
effective responses to HIV in a variety of settings. That should include an updated
cooperation framework among relevant United Nations entities that extends beyon d
UNAIDS and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to support responses to
AIDS in emergency settings and that reflects the comparative advantages, roles and
responsibilities of each entity. Such a framework should clearly define who does
what on the ground and at Headquarters.
I count on your support and endorsement of the continuation of this important
work, which I encourage my successor to take forward.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-18461

3/3
