United Nations

A/RES/56/229

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/576)]

56/229. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/70 of 4 December 2000 and its previous resolutions
on the elimination of discrimination against women,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in
Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to promote universal respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind, including
distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate equally in social, economic
and political development, should contribute equally to such development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,1 in which the Conference
reaffirmed that the human rights of women and the girl child were an inalienable,
integral and indivisible part of universal human rights,
Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
promotion and protection of the human rights of women, which includes the
integration of the human rights of women into the mainstream of United Nations
activities system-wide,
Reaffirming the commitments made in the political declaration 2 and the
outcome document 3 of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”, in particular paragraphs 68 (c) and (d) concerning the Convention on the

_______________
1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution S-23/2, annex.
3
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
2

01 49466

A/RES/56/229

Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto, 5
Recalling that, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 heads of State
and Government resolved to implement the Convention,
Welcoming the progress made in the implementation of the Convention, but
expressing concern about the remaining challenges,
Welcoming also the growing number of States parties to the Convention, which
now stands at one hundred and sixty-eight,
Welcoming further the entry into force on 22 December 2000 of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women that national reports should contain information on
the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, 7 in accordance with
paragraph 323 of the Platform,
Having considered the report of the Committee on its twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth sessions, 8
Expressing concern at the great number of reports that are overdue and that
continue to be overdue, in particular initial reports, which constitutes an obstacle to
the full implementation of the Convention,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 9 on the status of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; 4
2.
Expresses disappointment that universal ratification of the Convention
was not achieved by 2000, and urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so;
3.
Emphasizes the importance of full compliance by States parties with their
obligations under the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;5
4.
Welcomes the rapidly growing number of State parties to the Optional
Protocol, which now stands at twenty-eight, and urges other States parties to the
Convention to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
5.
Also welcomes the fact that the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women has adopted the rules governing its work under the
Optional Protocol as part of its revised rules of procedure; 10
6.
Notes that some States parties have modified their reservations, expresses
satisfaction that some reservations have been withdrawn, and urges States parties to
limit the extent of any reservations that they lodge to the Convention, to formulate
_______________
4

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 54/4, annex.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/56/38).
9
A/56/328.
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/56/38), annex I.
5

2

A/RES/56/229

any such reservations as precisely and as narrowly as possible, to ensure that no
reservations are incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention or
otherwise incompatible with international treaty law, to review their reservations
regularly with a view to withdrawing them and to withdraw reservations that are
contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention or that are otherwise
incompatible with international treaty law;
7.
Urges States parties to the Convention to make every possible effort to
submit their reports on the implementation of the Convention in accordance with
article 18 thereof and with the guidelines provided by the Committee and to
cooperate fully with the Committee in the presentation of their reports;
8.
Encourages the Secretariat to extend further technical assistance to States
parties, upon their request, in the preparation of reports, in particular initial reports,
and invites Governments to contribute to these efforts;
9.
Commends the Committee on its contributions to the effective
implementation of the Convention;
10. Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to take appropriate
measures so that acceptance of the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1, of the
Convention by a two-thirds majority of States parties can be reached as soon as
possible so that the amendment may enter into force;
11. Expresses its appreciation for the additional meeting time that allows the
Committee to hold two sessions annually, each session of three weeks’ duration and
each preceded by a pre-sessional working group of the Committee;
12. Also expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the Committee to
improve the efficiency of its working methods, and encourages further efforts in this
regard;
13. Acknowledges the number of reports awaiting consideration by the
Committee, and in this regard decides to authorize the Committee to hold, on an
exceptional basis, an extraordinary session of three weeks’ duration in 2002 to be
used entirely for the consideration of the reports of the States parties in order to
reduce the backlog of reports, and to enlarge the membership of the pre-sessional
working group in 2002 to prepare for the exceptional session of the Committee,
taking into account decision 25/I of the Committee; 11
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 54/4 of 6 October 1999, to provide the resources, including staff and
facilities, necessary for the effective functioning of the Committee within its full
mandate, in particular taking into account the entry into force of the Optional
Protocol;
15. Urges Governments, agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to disseminate
the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
16. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within
their mandates, as well as Governments and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, in particular women’s organizations, as appropriate, to
continue to assist States parties, upon their request, in implementing the

_______________
11

Ibid., part two, chap. I, sect. A.

3

A/RES/56/229

Convention, and in this regard encourages States parties to pay attention to the
concluding comments as well as the general recommendations of the Committee;
17. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system to continue
to build women’s knowledge and understanding of and capacity to utilize human
rights instruments, in particular the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
18. Welcomes the submission by the specialized agencies, at the invitation of
the Committee, of reports on the implementation of the Convention in areas falling
within the scope of their activities and the contribution of non-governmental
organizations to the work of the Committee, and encourages the specialized
agencies to continue to submit reports;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session a report on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the implementation of the present
resolution.
92nd plenary meeting
24 December 2001

4
