VI. Resolutlom ,adopted oa tile repor11 of the Third Committee

34/176.

United Nadons Trust Fund for Chile

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/174 of 20 December
1978, by which it established the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile as a voluntary fund to receive contributions and distribute, through established channels of
assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons whose human rights have been violated by detention or imprisonment in Chile, to those forced to leave
the country and to relatives of persons in the abovementioned categories,
Recalling also the appeal to Member States for
pledges and contributions to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile made by the Secretary-General in his
letter dated 28 September 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 8 November 1979 126 on the implementation of resolution 33/174, in which he informed the General Assembly that, as at 31 October 1979, no contributions
or pledges of contributions had been received,
1. Notes that some Governments have since 31
October 1979 decided to contribute or make pledges
of contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile;121
2. Appeals to Member States to respond favourably
to the request for contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile made in the letter of the SecretaryGeneral dated 28 September 1979.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 177.

International co-operation in drug abuse
control

The General Assembly,
Noting the continuing spread of drug abuse in many
parts of the world and its harmful impact on developing
and industrialized countries,
Viewing with concern the detrimental effects drug
abuse can have on all societies and individuals, particularly young people,
Recognizing that illicit traffic in drugs and the profits
accruing therefrom to traffickers and criminal organizations pose a threat to the socio-economic well-being of
many countries and should be addressed through development assistance programmes together with intensified law enforcement, education and demand reduction
efforts,
Noting with satisfaction the positive results that have
been achieved in a number of countries, but at the same
time expressing concern for the lack of realization of
many of the objectives for drug abuse control set forth
in the drug control treaties as well as in the resolutions
and documents of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
the International Narcotics Control Board, the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
World Health Organization,
Recalling its resolution 33/168 of 20 December
1978, in which it requested more extensive and coordinated co-operation between Governments and relevant bodies of the United Nations and the specialized
126 A/34/658.

121 See A/34/658/Add.1.

1'1

agencies in the designing and implementation of programmes aimed at the eradication of illicit demand for
and illicit traffic in drugs,
Bearing in mind the necessity for international drug
abuse control strategy and policies, as requested in General Assembly resolution 32/124 of 16 December 1977
and reiterated in Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 8 (XXVIII) of 23 February 1979,128
Having received the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, 129 noted in Economic and Social Council decision 1979 / 18 of 9 May 1979, in which are proposed, in the annex to resolution 8 (XXVIII), principles
to guide future international drug abuse control
activities,
1. Takes note of the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs and requests all agencies and organizations concerned to implement paragraphs 2 and 3
of Commission resolution 8 (XXVIII), to elaborate a
practical and dynamic drug abuse control programme,
noting the principles annexed to that resolution, and to
provide, within the existing regular budget, for the monitoring of the implementation of the programme by the
Commission;
2. Requests the Commission to finalize at its next
special session, to be held in 1980, a meaningful programme of international drug abuse control strategy and
policies aimed at eradicating illicit demand for, production of and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, and to report to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1980 on the progress achieved in this respect;
3. Invites Member States to take into account the
principles set forth by the Commission in allocating,
within their capabilities, national resources to drug
abuse control programmes-including programmes to
combat the illicit production of and trafficking in .narcotic and psychotropic substances and to reduce the
demand for those drugs-and calls for greater technical and financial contributions to those developing
countries which are constrained by limited national resources in their efforts to implement drug abuse control
programmes;
4. Further invites Member States to take appropriate
measures for the prevention of uncontrolled or illicit
manufacture and export of psychotropic substances and
the chemical precursors of drugs of abuse such as acetic
anhydride;
5. Urges States which have not yet become parties
to the international drug control treaties to adhere to
them and to make maximum efforts to implement them;
6. Further urges greater action by the specialized
agencies and programmes of the United Nations, especially the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Development Programme, in developing
and implementing, within their mandates, programmes
aimed at the reduction of illicit production of and demand for drugs, and specifically requests those agencies
to make this activity a regular item on the agendas of
their governing bodies;
7. Requests the agencies and program.mes of the
United Nations, the international financial institutions
128 Offecial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 5 (E/1979/35), chap. XIV.
129 Ibid., Supplement No. 5 (E/1979/35).

General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Selllon

192

and member Governments within their bilateral and
multilateral development assistance programmes to consider providing, when requested by a recipient State
and if possible, appropriate assistance for the implementation of drug abuse prevention and control measures,
particularly activities which promote new income
sources that can substitute for illicit production of narcotic raw materials and which promote the reduction
in demand for dangerous drugs;
8. Further requests the organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies with programmes having an impact on narcotics, as a means of expediting a
concerted international effort substantially to reduce
illicit drug activities, to report annually to the General
Assembly on their activities and proposed projects in
this field;
9. Appeals to Member States, in accordance with
their individual development goals, to consider within
their national development programmes the inclusion of
appropriate drug abuse control measures;
10. Reiterates its continued support for the initiatives of the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control
in helping countries reduce the demand for, production
of and traffic in illicit narcotics;
11. Expresses its disappointment at the low levels
of financial support being provided to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control and appeals to Member
States to make new, sustained or increased cash contributions to the Fund as well as further financial or in-kind
contributions in support of its projects and activities;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General Assembly on the progress being
made in the implementation of the present resolution and
Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 8 (XXVIII)
and to transmit the present resolution to Governments
and concerned international agencies.

106th plenary meeting
17 December I 979

union activities, and 33/173 of 20 December 1978 on
disappeared persons,
Noting that the year 1979 marks the three hundredth
anniversary of the act which in 1679 gave statutory force
to the remedy of habeas corpus,
Recalling that, from 15 to 28 August 1961, a seminar
on amparo, habeas corpus and other similar remedies
was organized by the United Nations at Mexico City, 188
under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights,
1. Expresses its conviction that the application
within the legal system of States of amparo, habeas
corpus or other legal remedies to the same effect is of
fundamental importance for:
(a) Protecting persons against arbitrary arrest and
unlawful detention;
(b) Effecting the release of persons who are detained
by reason of their political opinions or convictions, including in pursuance of trade union activities;
(c) Clarifying the whereabouts and fate of missing
and disappeared persons;
2. Considers that the use of those remedies may also
forestall opportunities for persons exercising power over
detainees to engage in torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
3. Calls upon all Governments to guarantee to persons within their jurisdiction the full enjoyment of the
right of amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies
to the same effect, as may be applicable in their legal
system;
4. Decides that, in order to extend the global understanding and larger applications of institutions such as
amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies to the
same effect, an international seminar on the matter
would be timely and useful;
5. Decides further to consider this question again
at its thirty-fifth session.

I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/178.

The right of amparo, habeas corpus or other
legal remedies to the same effect
34/179.

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 130 of the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment181 and of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 132
Mindful, in particular, of article 9, paragraph 4, of the
said Covenant, which stipulates that anyone who is
deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be
entitled to take proceedings before a court, in order that
that court may decide without delay on the lawfulness of
his detention and order his release if the detention is not
lawful,
Recalling its resolution 32/121 of 16 December 1977,
concerning the protection of the human rights of persons
who are detained in respect of offences which they have
committed, or are suspected of having committed, by
reason of their political opinions or convictions,
,Recalling also its resolutions 33/169 of 20 December
1978, concerning persons arrested or detained for trade
1ao Resolution 217 A (III).
1s1 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.
1a2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

Human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 31/124 of 16 December
1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977 and 33/ 175 of
20 December 1978 on the protection of human rights
in Chile,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 11 (XXXV) of 6 March 1979134 on reported violations of human rights in Chile, in which the Commission,
inter alia, decided to appoint a Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Chile and experts to
study the question of missing and disappeared persons
in Chile,
Expressing its regret that the Chilean authorities refused to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur and the
experts appointed by the Commission on Human Rights,
1 3 3 The report of the seminar was issued as document
ST/TAO/HR/12.
134 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supp[ement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
