S/2014/162

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2119 (2013) of 10 October 2013, the Security Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) until 15 October 2014, and requested that I report on its
implementation semi-annually and not later than 45 days prior to its expiration. The
present report covers major developments from the issuance of my report of
20 August 2013 to 10 March 2014 (S/2013/493) and outlines activities undertaken
by the Mission in line with its mandate under Security Council resolutions
1542 (2004), 1608 (2005), 1702 (2006), 1743 (2007), 1780 (2007), 1840 (2008),
1892 (2009), 1908 (2010), 1927 (2010), 1944 (2010), 2012 (2011), 2070 (2012) and
2119 (2013).

II. Political and security update
Political situation
2.
The early part of the reporting period was marked by heightened tensions and
a lingering stalemate between the executive branch and Parliament. The
promulgation of a new electoral law and the launch of a national dialogue process
alleviated some of those tensions by creating a climate conducive to the holding of
long-awaited elections and ensuring the continuity of Parliament.
3.
On 9 September 2013, two weeks after submission by the Government, the
Chamber of Deputies adopted a new electoral law which was a prerequisite to the
holding of long-delayed local, municipal and partial senatorial elections. The draft
law specified that the terms of the senators elected in 2009 would run to January
2015, thereby ensuring that Parliament would continue to operate throughout 2014
in spite of the electoral delays. The law was subsequently endorsed by the Senate on
2 October with a number of additional amendments, including a provision
stipulating that the Electoral Council would be headed by a director designated by
the Electoral Council rather than by the executive branch. That led to a stand-off
between the executive and legislative branches, which was partly defused when
President Michel Joseph Martelly agreed to convoke an extraordinary session of the
Chamber of Deputies in the second half of November, through which the law could
be reconciled.
14-24888 (E) 100314

*1424888*

S/2014/162

4.
The perceived slowness of the political process and the continued delays in
holding elections fuelled tensions not only between Parliament and the executive
branch but also throughout the country, resulting in a series of political
demonstrations. Those commenced in late September 2013 and peaked on 18 November
when up to 20,000 anti-government protesters took to the streets of the capital and
other major cities. In late September, the Senate adopted a report calling for the
indictment of President Martelly. The report alleged that, despite denials to the
contrary, the President and a number of ministers had attempted to pressure a judge
investigating allegations of corruption among members of the First Family to drop
his case. At the same time, the Senate also rejected the Government’s proposed
budget for fiscal year 2013/14. On 5 November, the Minister for Justice and Public
Security, the Minister for the Interior and Territorial Communities and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs narrowly survived no-confidence votes in the Senate.
5.
Meanwhile, during September and October 2013, a number of political parties
and civil society groups, including the Episcopal Conference of Haiti, consisting of
a group of Catholic bishops, and the coalition Religions pour la paix issued public
calls for constructive dialogue between the executive branch and Parliament. On
14 October, President Martelly and the Presidents of the Senate and the Chamber of
Deputies met under the auspices of Religions pour la paix and agreed to launch a
dialogue process. Shortly thereafter, President Martelly also accepted the offer of
the Episcopal Conference to begin a series of meetings with a range of political
actors to promote better dialogue.
6.
On 11 November 2013, a number of opposition parties set preconditions for
the resumption of dialogue, including the promulgation of the electoral law, the
lifting of a controversial arrest warrant against opposition lawyer André Michel and
the official appointment by the executive branch of the members of the Council of
the Superior Court of Auditors and Administrative Disputes.
7.
Finally, on 22 November 2013, an extraordinary session of the Chamber of
Deputies was convoked by the President and, at the same time, the arrest warrant
against Mr. Michel was lifted. The session’s agenda included the version of the
electoral law adopted by the Senate, which the President had initially opposed.
Following adoption by the Chamber of Deputies, President Martelly promulgated
the law on 10 December, which significantly de-escalated political tensions.
8.
On 13 January 2014, Parliament held the opening of its first ordinary session
of the 2014 legislative year. On that occasion, President Martelly as well as the
President of the National Assembly repeated their calls for national unity and
dialogue, seemingly setting the tone for a more collaborative relationship between
the executive branch and Parliament. Three days later, the executive branch
promulgated a law on the formation, functioning, and financing of political parties,
another precondition set by the opposition.
9.
On 24 January 2014, a national dialogue process between the executive
branch, Parliament and political parties was launched and mediated by the Episcopal
Conference, focusing on three areas of concern: democratic governance, elections
and constitutional amendments. The launch was attended by President Martelly,
parliamentary leaders, the representatives of a range of opposition and pro-government
political parties and civil society observers. In his address, the President of the
Episcopal Conference, Chibly Cardinal Langlois, stressed the importance of an
“inter-Haitian” dialogue process that included the participation of all key national

2/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

stakeholders. On 3 February, representatives of the executive branch, Parliament and
certain political parties reached a preliminary consensus on the holding of combined
elections in 2014 for two thirds of the Senate, the Chamber of Deputies, municipal
administrations and local councils. On 12 February a number of opposition parties
abandoned the dialogue process, and on 15 February formalization of the agreement
was postponed owing to delays by the executive branch in publishing the full list of
council members of the Superior Court of Auditors and Administrative Disputes.
10. During the reporting period, the United Nations, together with other
international and regional organizations, participated as observers in high-level
discussions between Haiti and the Dominican Republic, which took place on
7 January 2014 in Ouanaminthe (North-East Department of Haiti) and on 3 February
in Jimani (Dominican Republic). The discussions focused on a number of bilateral
issues, including border management, migration policy, trade and environmental
protection in the aftermath of the ruling on nationality by the Dominican
Constitutional Court on 23 September 2013.
Security assessment
11. The overall security situation during the reporting period remained relatively
stable. Crime statistics collected by the national police and MINUSTAH showed a
marginal downward trend in major crimes compared with the reporting period of the
previous year. The total number of homicides in 2013 (817 reported cases)
was 21 per cent lower than in 2012, reversing a five-year trend. Violence and
gang activity continued to be concentrated in major urban centres, with
approximately 77 per cent of homicides in 2013 taking place in the metropolitan
area of Port-au-Prince. Equally important, the total number of kidnappings in 2013
decreased by 53 per cent compared with 2012. The average monthly number of
reported rapes showed a slight increase to 33.8, compared with 30.5 during the
previous reporting period.
12. The first half of the reporting period, marked by political tensions linked to the
impasse on the electoral law, saw a 57 per cent increase in demonstrations. The
majority of those, however, were triggered by socioeconomic grievances concerning
inadequacies in basic services such as education, infrastructure, electricity and water
supply. Most were peaceful even though they were characterized by frequent use of
road barricades. By far the area most affected by civil unrest was the metropolitan
area of Port-au-Prince, followed by the urban areas of the North, North-East and
Artibonite Departments.
13. The performance of the national police continued to improve and the security
situation in the five Departments vacated by the Mission’s military component
(Grand-Anse, Nippes, North-West, South and South-East) remained stable.
Nevertheless, when the capacity of the national police was put to severe test, both
by local criminal activity and heightened civil unrest, operational support by
MINUSTAH forces was required.
14. In September 2013, 11 Haitian officers and 30 technicians graduated from a
seven-month military engineering training course overseas. In October, a statement
by the Ministry of Defense indicated that the cohort represented the start of a new
corps of military engineers, as envisaged in an action plan for the restoration of a
defence force developed by the Ministry for the period 2013-2016. In January 2014,

14-24888

3/23

S/2014/162

a new group of 28 technicians started their military training overseas. After their
graduation, they are expected to join the ranks of the new corps of military engineers.

III. Humanitarian, recovery and economic update
15. Haiti has made progress on the humanitarian front. As at the end of 2013,
90 per cent of the population displaced by the earthquake of 2010 had left the
camps, in great part as a result of the return and relocation programmes
implemented by the Government, the United Nations and non-governmental
partners. The overall incidence of cholera had been halved since its outbreak in late
2010 and severe food insecurity was reduced from 1.5 million affected people in
early 2013 to 600,000 affected as at the end of the year.
16. Critical needs and acute vulnerabilities remain, however. According to the
International Organization for Migration, as at 31 December 2013 an estimated
146,000 individuals (about 39,000 households) remain displaced in 271 sites and
face protection issues and a lack of adequate access to basic services. Forced
evictions driven by private landowners continued to occur from both camps for
internally displaced persons and informal settlements, and were often characterized
by acts of violence. The United Nations and partners continue to work with the
Government to ensure that legal procedures are followed and durable solutions are
provided. In 2013, less than 50 per cent of the humanitarian requirements were
funded, limiting the availability of human and financial capacities needed to ensure
basic services in key sectors.
17. Haiti still has the highest number of cholera cases in the world. According to
the Ministry of Public Health and Population, the cholera epidemic has caused the
death of 8,562 people. A total of 698,304 people were infected from October 2010 to
31 January 2014. The Pan-American Health Organization forecast as many as
45,000 infections in 2014 if current infection levels maintained. While the number
of suspected cases has been reduced significantly each year, from 352,033 cases
in 2011 to 58,608 cases in 2013, which is also reflected in the reduction of
cholera-related deaths, the institutional fatality rates (the number of suspected
cholera victims who die in cholera treatment facilities) increased in 2013 to a yearly
average of 1.07 per cent, up from 0.83 per cent in 2012. That reflects weaknesses in
the capacity of health centres to provide timely and adequate health services to
patients affected by cholera and the longer travel time required for treatment as a
result of the closure of many cholera treatment centres.
18. While recognizing improvements in the food security situation, mainly
resulting from the absence of hurricanes during the reporting period, the prevalence
of global acute malnutrition among children under the age of 5 increased from
5.1 per cent in 2012 to 6.5 per cent in 2013, affecting approximately 100,000
children, of which 20,000 are affected by severe acute malnutrition. As a result of
continuing critical needs and the challenges faced in completing the humanitarian
transition process, four clusters covering shelter, health, protection and water and
sanitation have been maintained.
19. In December 2013, the International Monetary Fund assessed the economic
growth rate in Haiti for fiscal year 2012/13 at 4.3 per cent, above the 3.4 per cent
estimate issued in June 2013. During 2013, the Haitian economy benefited from a
more favourable global economic climate, a stable macroeconomic situation and
4/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

improved weather conditions, all of which were considered to have favoured the
increase in economic activity. However, a series of existing constraints continue to
hinder greater economic growth, including the unstable supply of electricity, poor
infrastructure, high transportation costs and difficulties in accelerating the execution
rate of public investment.

IV. Activities of MINUSTAH
Provision of support to State institutions
20. During the reporting period, MINUSTAH provided technical and logistical
support for the launch of the Government’s “Programme d’intervention nord et
nord-est”, which saw the training of 112 staff from 16 municipal administrations of
the North and North-East Departments. This pilot programme of the Ministry of the
Interior and Territorial Communities is supported by external partners to build the
capacity of selected municipalities in the delivery of basic services.
21. In December 2013, MINUSTAH provided technical support for a three-day
symposium organized by the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial Communities
that coached 5 departmental delegates and 38 vice-delegates on strategies to
enhance the delivery of government services at the local level. From November to
December, MINUSTAH, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other partners supported the departmental forums on risk and disaster management
organized by the Department of Civil Protection in the North, South and Artibonite
Departments.
22. MINUSTAH continued to provide technical support to Parliament. With donor
support, the Mission worked with several partners, such as the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and
UNDP, to establish an office for gender equity in Parliament aimed at promoting the
adoption of gender-sensitive legislation. Both houses of Parliament adopted the law
against money-laundering and terrorist financing for which the Mission had been
advocating. The law will help bring regulations in Haiti in line with international
standards on financial compliance.
23. In close collaboration with the Ministry of Justice and Public Security and the
Bar Association of Port-au-Prince, MINUSTAH supported operations in four legal
aid offices that processed more than 2,000 cases during the reporting period. In an
effort to raise the awareness of parliamentarians on the issue of prolonged pretrial
detention, the Mission facilitated visits for parliamentarians to the national
penitentiary and the women’s prison of Pétion-Ville. UNDP is also providing
support to the Ministry of Justice and Public Security on issues related to pretrial
detention and dossier management.
24. MINUSTAH provided technical expertise on the establishment of the
interministerial Technical Border Commission. The body has a three-year mandate,
starting in November 2013, to secure the country’s border crossing points, improve
revenue collection and curb the smuggling of illicit goods and trafficking in persons,
particularly women and children. The Mission also continued to advise the Ministry
of Economy and Finance on the implementation of a strategic plan to rehabilitate
the Customs Surveillance Directorate.

14-24888

5/23

S/2014/162

Support to the political process
25. My Special Representative for Haiti, Sandra Honoré, engaged intensively with
political decision-makers to advocate for the continuity of democratic institutions,
national dialogue, a consensual legislative agenda, the adoption of key legislation
and progress towards the holding of the elections. My Special Representative also
cooperated closely with the country’s international partners, including the
diplomatic corps in Port-au-Prince, to coordinate the international community’s
good offices efforts and to maintain momentum with regard to the Government’s
key priorities under its “5 E” policy programme (employment, education,
environment, energy and rule of law).
Support for the forthcoming elections
26. MINUSTAH and UNDP provided technical advice throughout the legislative
process leading to the adoption and promulgation of the electoral law and continued
to support the work of the Electoral Council. A final consensus is required
concerning the sequence of elections, which are overdue since 2010 for municipal
and local offices and since 2011 for one third of the Senate. Elections for another
third of the Senate as well as the renewal of the complete Chamber of Deputies are
due by the end of 2014. That will ultimately define the support required from
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team. Furthermore, the Mission’s
consolidation will imply a more focused and strategic use of available assets in
support of efforts by the national authorities. Meanwhile, the Mission has provided
logistical assistance to the National Identification Office in registering new voters
and distributing national identification cards using mobile registration teams
throughout the country. MINUSTAH also increased its efforts to train a pool of
police electoral officers as part of its handover of responsibilities to the Haitian
authorities, in line with the Mission’s progressive disengagement from operational
support activities.
Military
27. During the reporting period, the military component of MINUSTAH continued
to fulfil its primary mission of assisting the Government in ensuring a secure and
stable environment, in addition to enabling the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and preparing for disaster response. Several joint security operations were
conducted in accordance with established procedures, whereby operations are led by
the national police with support from MINUSTAH police and, when required, from
the Mission’s military component. Independent United Nations police and military
patrolling continued to be carried out without Haitian National Police presence, an
indication that further progress is required before the national police can deliver the
same level of security currently provided by MINUSTAH. Cordon and search
operations aimed at disrupting gang and criminal activity were conducted by the
military component in the most sensitive regions of Haiti, particularly in the Portau-Prince metropolitan area. The military component also executed deterrence and
support operations, employing quick reaction forces, in remote and isolated areas of
the country.
28. In addition to providing engineering capacity to the Mission, MINUSTAH
military engineering companies continued to support government priorities aimed at

6/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

the improvement of living conditions for communities, which included well drilling,
water distribution and the rehabilitation of schools and orphanages.
Police
29. The period was marked by close collaboration between the MINUSTAH police
component, the Superior Council of the National Police and the Haitian National
Police hierarchy to support the implementation of the national police development
plan for 2012-2016 through a joint implementation mechanism. Those efforts,
combined with a reinforced co-location strategy of MINUSTAH police officers with
the Haitian National Police, have resulted in a more robust implementation of the
plan’s key priorities. In December 2013, 1,058 cadets (including 111 women)
graduated, in line with the requirement of 1,000 additional officers per year to reach
the plan objective of 15,000 officers in service. A new cohort of more than 1,050
officers is anticipated to start a seven-month training programme by the end of
March 2014.
30. The Haitian National Police are increasingly proactive and visible, including
in formerly violence-prone neighbourhoods. Crime prevention and crime fighting
efforts led by the national police and supported by MINUSTAH in sensitive urban
areas have resulted in a decrease in major crime indices in 2013, compared with
2012, and the dismantling of several criminal gangs. Moreover, the implementation
of community-oriented policing strategies focused on crime prevention, with a
particular focus on at-risk youth and women, has continued, particularly in Port-auPrince (West Department), Les Cayes (South Department), Gonaïves (Artibonite
Department) and Jacmel (South-East Department).
31. In September 2013, a new Inspector General of the Haitian National Police
was appointed. Since then, the Inspectorate has begun the implementation of its
strategic plan, which aims to strengthen the independence and effectiveness of the
oversight body by overcoming challenges such as insufficient personnel, inadequate
financial resources and equipment and limited specialized training. The Inspectorate
established a 24-hour telephone service enabling citizens to report cases of police
misconduct such as arbitrary arrests and the excessive use of force. It also
re-launched inspections and audits of units and services throughout the country.
Protection of vulnerable groups
32. The MINUSTAH military and police components maintained their presence in
camps for internally displaced persons and in fragile, crime-prone urban communities
where women and children are vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence. Of
the remaining 271 sites for internally displaced persons, 24 high-risk camps were
patrolled on a daily basis. The remaining sites were subject to random patrols.
During the reporting period, the military and police components conducted 9,135
patrols in camps for internally displaced persons in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan
area. Consistency in approach between the Mission and the United Nations country
team was assured through coordination within the protection cluster.
Community violence reduction
33. MINUSTAH continued to conduct stabilization initiatives in fragile urban
neighbourhoods that addressed high youth unemployment, poor infrastructure, weak
security institutions and limited access to justice. The Mission tackled those issues

14-24888

7/23

S/2014/162

by supporting labour-intensive infrastructure and environmental projects, vocational
training, income-generating activities, legal aid offices and safe housing solutions,
which offer socioeconomic alternatives to former gang members, at-risk youth,
women and vulnerable groups. The labour-intensive projects focused on watershed
management, public infrastructure and canal rehabilitation, providing temporary
employment to an estimated 15,000 persons considered to be at risk. Furthermore,
more than 65 sensitization activities aimed at diffusing social tensions and fostering
social dialogue were carried out in historically violent areas by partners
that included the Ministry of Youth and Sports, the Ministry of Environment, the
Prison Administration, the Haitian National Police, municipalities, local authorities
and numerous community-based organizations. The Mission completed 42 of
48 projects planned for the 2012/13 fiscal year and initiated 29 projects for the
2013/14 fiscal year.
Justice
34. MINUSTAH supported the Superior Council of the Judiciary in the preparation
of its first workplan and the drafting of its internal and financial procedures. During
the past year, the Superior Council has made progress in enhancing the
independence of the judiciary despite the controversial arrest and release in October
2013 of opposition lawyer André Michel, as well as the continued detention of
individuals who are plaintiffs in cases alleging corruption in government circles.
The Council’s prerogative to certify the appointment of all judges is designed to
curb those incidents of political interference. The institution has ensured that the
recruitment of judges takes place primarily among graduates of the School of
Magistrates, which MINUSTAH and several donors have been supporting through
the training of 40 new magistrates, to be completed by mid-2014. While the
Superior Council continues to experience difficulties in its deliberations, those steps
are indicative of progress in strengthening the Council’s institutional structure.
35. With technical and financial support from MINUSTAH and UNDP, the
Ministry of Justice and Public Security continued the implementation of its action
plan for 2013-2016. The Ministry’s emphasis has been on infrastructure, while
MINUSTAH provided technical assistance for the Ministry’s efforts to establish its
office on pretrial detention and improve the management of prison sentences. The
Ministry has been working on the development of a national criminal justice policy
to define the vision, priorities and strategies of the State in fighting crime and to
determine the means and resources for the prosecution of criminal offences.
MINUSTAH continued to provide technical assistance for the reopening of the
Forensic Medical Institute. Specific funding for the Institute was proposed in the
draft national budget for fiscal year 2013/14 and the Institute’s director has been
appointed by the Government.
Corrections
36. MINUSTAH provided technical and logistical support to the Prisons
Administration Directorate by coordinating specialized training for junior and senior
corrections officers and prison medical staff. MINUSTAH also contributed to the
reduction of prolonged and illegal detention cases by assisting prison administrators
in facilitating access to justice by referring cases to judicial authorities. Those
efforts have resulted in the release of 215 detainees since September 2013.
MINUSTAH initiated and facilitated a formal partnership between prisons and the

8/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

Ministry of Public Health and Population aimed at improving prisoner health and
welfare and, in particular, mental health care services. During the reporting
period, those programmes were successfully implemented in seven prisons in
Jérémie (Grand-Anse Department), Jacmel (South-East Department), Anse-à-Veau
(Nippes Department), Port-de-Paix (North-West Department), Saint-Marc
(Artibonite Department), Fort-Liberté (North-East Department) and Les Cayes
(South Department).
Human rights
37. Capacity-building in Haiti, together with monitoring and reporting on human
rights, continued. One of the most notable achievements was the international
accreditation on 4 December 2013 of the Haitian Office of the Ombudsperson as a
National Human Rights Institution by the International Coordinating Committee of
National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. Moreover,
the interministerial commission on human rights became operational during the
reporting period.
38. Haiti’s signature of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on 16 August 2013 and its adherence to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on 10 October
were positive developments for which the Mission had been advocating. On
16 December, Haiti deposited the ratification instrument of the Hague Convention
on the Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Intercountry Adoption.
In November, Haiti submitted the periodic report on the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, due since 2007. In addition, the initial draft
report on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities has been submitted to the interministerial commission on human rights.
Another positive initiative taken by the Government was the compilation of a
midterm report on the implementation of the recommendations accepted by Haiti
following the universal periodic review of October 2011.
39. On 20 February 2014, the Port-au-Prince Court of Appeal issued a decision
rejecting a lower court’s ruling and ordering additional investigations into charges
of crimes against humanity and financial crimes brought against former President
Jean-Claude Duvalier.
40. Notwithstanding this progress, systemic deficiencies in human rights
protection remain. They include reports of excessive use of force by the national
police, the slow response by the Inspectorate General of the Haitian National Police
in investigating those allegations and prolonged pretrial detention in cruel and
inhuman conditions.
Gender
41. The Mission released a study in August 2013 on the response of the police and
the judiciary to cases of rape. The study identified weaknesses in the courts,
prosecution offices and police stations in their handling of cases, and showed that
the vast majority of reported rapes are never properly adjudicated. To address the
situation, MINUSTAH and UNDP supported training activities for magistrates,
judicial police and police officers that included a five-day training of 283 police
officers (including 31 women) on fighting and preventing sexual and gender-based
violence. During the reporting period, five new offices for the management and

14-24888

9/23

S/2014/162

investigation of sexual violence cases were opened within police stations. The
Haitian National Police, with the support of MINUSTAH, provided support to
victims of sexual violence, including transportation to medical centres, relocation
services, locating support for psychological assistance and judicial follow-up. In
November, a joint national office of the Ministry for the Status of Women and
Women’s Rights and the Haitian National Police was inaugurated by President
Martelly.
42. MINUSTAH supported advocacy efforts to promote the integration into the
new electoral law of the constitutional 30 per cent minimum representation of
women in public life, including through a Mission-funded national workshop held in
September 2013. The electoral law includes articles on the representation of women
in the electoral apparatus and in municipal and local councils. Similar to the
recently promulgated law on the formation, functioning and financing of political
parties, the electoral law includes financial incentives for political parties
concerning the representation of women.
Child protection
43. During the reporting period, MINUSTAH received reports of 206 incidents
against minors, including cases related to sexual violence (127 cases of rape and
other sexual violence and 14 cases of child prostitution); 17 cases of homicide;
9 cases of physical assault and injury; 5 cases of the use of children by armed gangs;
1 case of abduction; 5 cases of child trafficking; and 28 cases of mistreatment. The
reports were shared weekly with the national police and the Brigade for the
Protection of Minors for follow-up. With regard to juvenile justice, MINUSTAH
continued to monitor the situation of children in pretrial detention in the main
detention facilities. Advocacy with the judges of the juvenile courts led to the
release of six children.
HIV/AIDS
44. MINUSTAH and United Nations agencies, including UNDP through the work
of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, continued supporting
the national AIDS programme in its priority areas: reducing sexual transmission,
eliminating mother-to-child transmission, eliminating stigma and discrimination,
providing social protection to people living with HIV and eliminating sexual-based
violence. During the reporting period, the guidelines for antiretroviral treatment
were revised. Last December, on World AIDS Day, a workshop was held to discuss
the draft law on HIV to be introduced in Parliament in early 2014.
Quick-impact projects
45. During the reporting period, a total of six quick-impact projects were
completed. An additional 26 projects were under implementation, 26 were approved
and 30 new projects were under examination. The projects included: measures to
contain the cholera epidemic and prevent water-borne diseases (25 projects), the
enhancement of safety and security in impoverished and insecure areas through the
installation of public solar lighting (3 projects), support to rule of law institutions
and good governance (25 projects) and rehabilitation of other public infrastructure
and buildings (30 projects). The remaining five projects focused on the promotion of
gender equality and vocational training.

10/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

Conduct and discipline
46. The Conduct and Discipline Unit continued to implement the integrated
strategy to prevent misconduct through training sessions for 578 MINUSTAH
personnel. Specific training-of-trainers sessions on the prevention of misconduct, in
particular sexual exploitation and abuse, were also delivered to military and police
commanders and focal points. The Mission leadership consistently delivered strong
messages to all staff members to maintain the highest standards of conduct at all
times, both inside and outside the Mission area.
Public information and outreach
47. During the reporting period, MINUSTAH continued to use public information
as a strategic outreach tool in support of the implementation of its mandate and its
conditions-based consolidation plan. Key information activities included
international and national media relations, regular press conferences and releases
and communication products such as the Mission’s radio, website, live streaming
programmes, social media presence and publications and television productions.
Significant efforts directly targeted youth living in vulnerable areas of Haiti with a
nationwide awareness campaign entitled “Ann Chwazi Lapè” (“Let Us Choose
Peace”). The campaign focuses on citizen participation, non-violence and human
rights, including ways to promote participation of women and persons living with
disability in public life and decision-making processes. In parallel to those outreach
activities, MINUSTAH launched a monthly television debate series with participants
from government institutions, civil society and the United Nations, tackling themes
such as human rights and prolonged pretrial detention.

V. Humanitarian, recovery and development activities
Coordination between the Mission and the United Nations country team
48. The United Nations country team continued to implement joint programmes in
alignment with the Government-endorsed United Nations integrated strategic
framework. As at 31 December 2013, the overall disbursement rate of United
Nations projects funded by the Haiti Reconstruction Fund was 86 per cent.
49. In order to move forward on the implementation of the framework for
coordination of external aid, a high-level technical group has been established that
includes the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Planning and External
Cooperation, the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator and members of the Group
of 12 donors in Haiti. Also with the support of MINUSTAH, the Government held
its first-ever national forum on non-governmental organizations on 8 October 2013.
The forum brought together the Government, more than 250 organizations and
members of the international community to discuss draft legislation regulating
non-governmental organizations in the country and their role in national
coordination structures and emergency response. The draft legislation in its current
form, while aiming to promote greater alignment of aid-funded activities to national
priorities, would have significant implications regarding the presence of
international non-governmental organizations, which would be subject to taxation
and more rigid regulations.

14-24888

11/23

S/2014/162

50. As part of the Political Champions for Disaster Resilience initiative, Haiti
participated in a meeting in New York on 25 September 2013. The Government,
with the support of the Political Champions, identified three Departments (North,
North-East and Grand-Anse) to initiate resilience-building efforts. Significant
strides were also made in the establishment of a disaster risk reduction thematic
table, which has been given priority in the national framework for the coordination
of external aid.
51. The humanitarian action plan for 2014 identifies a need for $169 million. The
action plan is intended to seek solutions and provide basic services for the
remaining internally displaced persons living in camps and to address critical needs
related to the cholera epidemic, food insecurity, nutrition, protection and disaster
preparedness. So far, only $6 million of the necessary funds have been received.
United Nations ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic
52. The United Nations system in Haiti has developed a two-year, $68 million plan
as a direct support to the 10-year National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in
Haiti that aims to reduce infection rates by cutting cholera transmission to less than
0.5 per cent. The two-year plan focuses on four priority areas: epidemiological
surveillance; health promotion; medical treatment; and water, hygiene and
sanitation. The plan is intended to serve as a short-term effort to curb the disease
while structural and institutional responses are built through the national plan.
Delivering and sustaining better health to the women, men and children of Haiti
requires an urgent, scaled-up effort to combat cholera and address decades of
underinvestment in basic systems for safe water, sanitation and health care.
53. Both direct and indirect cholera-mitigating activities were executed over the
reporting period, including the construction of canals and dry walls to limit flooding
and the risk of waterborne disease transmission in vulnerable communities. The
United Nations also trained health staff and built cholera treatment centres in at-risk
locations in partnership with national authorities, including the Ministry of Public
Health and Population.

VI. Update on drawdown and reconfiguration of the Mission
54. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2119 (2013), the military
component continued the reduction of its personnel during the reporting period and
is on target to achieve the mandated strength of 5,021 troops through a balanced
withdrawal of 1,249 infantry and engineering personnel by the end of June 2014.
This 15 per cent reduction in the Mission’s uniform strength coincides with the
planned troop rotation schedules. On 1 July 2014, the military component will
consist of 21 infantry and 3 engineering companies, aviation capability and a level II
hospital, and will no longer possess a maritime capability. During the reporting
period, the military component redeployed a platoon from Saint-Marc to Gonaïves
(Artibonite Department) and two platoons from Jacmel and Anse-à-Pitres (SouthEast Department) to the West Department.
55. MINUSTAH has continued working with the Government of Haiti to advance
progress towards the four jointly agreed stabilization benchmarks outlined in the
Mission’s conditions-based consolidation plan. An update on achievements and
challenges is attached to the present report (see annex I).
12/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

56. Also in accordance with Security Council resolution 2119 (2013), an
integrated planning process on the post-2016 United Nations configuration in Haiti
was launched, involving key national and international stakeholders, including the
United Nations country team. The process will inform a future Council decision on
the most appropriate United Nations configuration able to assist Haiti following the
completion of the four-year consolidation process in 2016.
57. An early review of MINUSTAH and United Nations country team activities
has identified the political and peacekeeping functions that are likely to remain
relevant beyond 2016, including continued support for the development of the
Haitian National Police, consolidation of political stabilization gains through good
offices, continued strengthening of the rule of law through security sector and
legislative reforms and the promotion and protection of human rights. Five broad
possible configurations for their delivery are presented below.
58. The first option would entail ending the United Nations peacekeeping mandate
and designating a United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti to deliver political good
offices with the capacity to support a Haitian-led political process. This option
entails the complete withdrawal of the military and police components and closure
of all regional facilities. The Haitian National Police would have to possess the
capacity to address country-wide security needs, while its continued development
would have to rely on bilateral and United Nations country team support.
59. The second option foresees the end of the peacekeeping mandate and the
establishment of a special political mission with a Haitian National Police
development capability. The special political mission would focus on political
facilitation and promotion and oversight of rule of law and human rights activities
and provide continued support to police development through a minimal presence of
international police officers in select locations across the country. It would entail a
complete withdrawal of the military component and formed police units and the
closure of all regional facilities. Also under the option, the Haitian National Police
would have to possess the capacity to address country-wide security needs.
Integration mechanisms with the United Nations country team would continue to
provide coordinated responses to the priorities of the Government of Haiti.
60. The third option envisages ending the mandate of MINUSTAH in order to
establish a new peacekeeping mission with a primarily political role and a muchreduced footprint. The smaller mission’s mandate would focus fully on political
facilitation, the development of the Haitian National Police, assistance with and
oversight of rule-of-law activities and the promotion and protection of human rights
and operational support in maintaining a stable environment. There would be a
complete withdrawal of the military component, including enablers, with a
continued and possibly increased country-wide presence of formed police units able
to complement possible operational security shortfalls. A reduced complement of
individual police officers would focus exclusively on training. Civilian regional
facilities would be limited to three or four critical urban settings, while all other
United Nations activities would be performed by the United Nations country team.
61. Under the fourth option, the mandate of MINUSTAH would similarly end and
a new peacekeeping operation would be established under the same terms as the
third option, but with the addition of a military strategic reserve force of one
composite battalion for an initial period of one year. The strategic reserve force
would be fully relieved of the conduct of routine security operations and garrisoned

14-24888

13/23

S/2014/162

in a single location with adequate airlift capability to transport one company
throughout the country.
62. The fifth option foresees the Mission’s current peacekeeping mandate adjusted
to reflect the reduced scope of activities achieved through the completion of the
consolidation plan. The military component would continue to progressively draw
down while police deployment would initially remain unchanged. A significantly
reduced civilian presence would operate in four or five of the most populated urban
settings. Structural integration with the United Nations country team would continue
to provide coordinated responses to the priorities of the Government of Haiti.

VII. Financial implications
63. By its resolution 67/275, the General Assembly appropriated the amount of
$609,187,500 for the maintenance of MINUSTAH for the period from 1 July 2013
to 30 June 2014. The proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June
2015 has been submitted to the Assembly for its consideration at the second part of
the resumed sixty-eighth session. As at 19 February 2014, unpaid assessed
contributions to the Special Account for MINUSTAH amounted to $145.5 million.
The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at
that date amounted to $2,019.3 million, while amounts owed to troop and formed
police contributors to MINUSTAH totalled $18.5 million. Reimbursement of troop
and contingent-owned equipment costs have been made for the periods up to
31 October 2013 and 30 September 2013, respectively, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations
64. The reporting period initially saw an increase in civil unrest and
demonstrations, many of which were attributable to socioeconomic grievances and a
growing sense of impatience with regard to the continued delays in holding
elections. Lingering tensions between the branches of Government added to the
unrest.
65. The adoption by Parliament of the electoral law and its promulgation in
December 2013 by the executive branch helped to significantly defuse tensions.
Moreover, the launch on 24 January 2014 of an inter-Haitian dialogue process
between the executive branch, Parliament and political parties was seen as a key
step towards addressing persistent animosities over the delayed elections, a
perceived weakening of democratic governance and divergent views on the need to
further amend the Constitution. Those are encouraging signs, made possible by a
series of concessions by the negotiating sides in an attempt to find consensual
solutions to the country’s recurrent political crises. I commend Haiti’s political
leaders for embarking on this positive political path and encourage stakeholders to
nurture this process aimed at reaching a basic political accord and creating an
environment conducive to socioeconomic development.
66. The holding of elections in 2014 is critical for the continuity of the country’s
democratic institutions. I therefore urge the authorities to spare no effort in ensuring
a level playing field for the holding of transparent and inclusive elections as soon as

14/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

possible. While an incipient consensus on the type and sequence of the elections in
2014 is starting to emerge, a number of concrete steps are required from both the
executive and legislative branches in preparing for the elections. In keeping with its
pledge, the Government’s contribution to the electoral budget is commendable. As
before, the United Nations stands ready to provide the requested support to the
electoral process.
67. While I welcome the accomplishments in key priority areas of the
consolidation plan, such as the professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
slow progress in other equally important areas risks jeopardizing some of the
important achievements made to date. In particular, progress in the field of justice
and accountability has lagged behind the development of the national police,
creating an imbalance in the delivery of the rule of law. I am also concerned that the
lack of political consensus is impeding the ability of national institutions to
eventually assume full responsibility over the electoral process. In view of the
consolidation of MINUSTAH, it has become imperative for the national authorities
to assume greater responsibility in establishing the rule of law and in preparations
for the next elections.
68. Despite those challenges, considerable progress has been made in the
stabilization of Haiti since the Mission’s initial deployment in 2004. I am therefore
confident that Haiti and its partners can firmly move ahead with the ongoing
consolidation process, mindful of the security requirements for the Presidential
elections scheduled for November 2015, while at the same time explore the best way
to continue contributing to greater stability and development beyond 2016. The
future United Nations presence in Haiti should ensure, through a more tailored
mandate and a lighter footprint, the consolidation of gains in security and capacitybuilding achieved since the deployment of MINUSTAH while still being able to
complement possible operational shortfalls in security. If the current level of
progress is sustained, the need to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations in a future mandate could be revisited.
69. A full scale, United Nations-wide strategic assessment will be carried out to
provide an updated, in-depth assessment of conditions on the ground as they relate
to the five possible configurations I have presented in the present report in broad
terms. The findings of the strategic assessment will be reflected in a subsequent
report to the Security Council, which will also include my recommendations
regarding the most appropriate option for Haiti at that juncture. In the period leading
up to the Council’s decision, MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team will
continue to work closely with the Haitian authorities to intensify ongoing efforts for
the handover of the Mission’s functions to the Government. Should conditions on
the ground allow, an accelerated transition to a new United Nations configuration in
Haiti could be considered.
70. It is critically important for Haiti and the international community to redouble
current efforts to continue improving the humanitarian situation, in particular with
regard to the ongoing cholera epidemic. In that regard, in late August 2013
I appointed a Senior Coordinator for Cholera Response in Haiti with the objective of
ensuring effective support to the national cholera response strategy. I also initiated
the establishment within MINUSTAH of an Integrated Solutions Support Unit to
assist in the coordination of all United Nations cholera-related activities. In order to
build upon the progress made in 2013, I call upon Member States and partners to

14-24888

15/23

S/2014/162

provide the urgently required funds for the Organization’s two-year plan in direct
support of the National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti.
71. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative, Sandra Honoré, for her service in support of Haiti at a time when
the Mission is undergoing its reconfiguration. I would also like to thank the women
and men of MINUSTAH, troop- and police-contributing countries and the United
Nations country team and their partners for their continued dedication and
commitment to stability and development in Haiti.

16/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

Annex I
Progress in the consolidation of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti
In my report to the Security Council of 8 March 2013 (S/2013/139), I outlined
the conditions-based consolidation plan of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which identifies four stabilization benchmarks that
constitute the framework of the operationalization of the Mission’s consolidation.
The present annex provides an update on progress made during the reporting period
towards the achievement of those four stabilization benchmarks.

Key achievements
Police development
MINUSTAH focused its support to augment Haitian National Police capacity,
in line with the country’s police development plan for 2012-2016. Achievements on
the key benchmarks of the consolidation plan on police development are set out
below.
• In December 2013, 1,058 cadets (including 111 women) graduated from
training, which is in line with the requirement of 1,000 additional officers
per year to reach the development plan objective of 15,000 officers in service.
A new cohort of more than 1,050 officers is anticipated to start a seven-month
training programme in March 2014.
• In accordance with the consolidation plan, the national police school is
operating at full capacity with 98 national instructors. With regard to the senior
management capacities of the national police, 41 Commissaires graduated in
October 2013 from the national police school. Furthermore, a new cohort of
38 Commissaires began their six-month training programme in November
2013.
• At the time of reporting, the strength of the Haitian National Police assigned to
the regions beyond the greater metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince stood at
32.5 per cent, close to the one third target. Half of the complement of police
officers in the regions received crowd control training during the reporting
period.
• In order to improve the ability of the police force to effectively manage itself,
the revision of procedures for standing offers, allocations and supply chain has
been under way since October 2013. During the reporting period, 87 police
facilities were constructed or renovated and the vehicle fleet received 194 new
vehicles and motorcycles. The procedures for asset and equipment
maintenance were also improved.
• A total of 4,291 officers (38.2 per cent of the national police force) are
assigned to specialized units, including corrections, community-oriented
policing, crowd control, criminal investigations, traffic, response to sexual and
gender-based violence, human rights, the coast guard and border management.

14-24888

17/23

S/2014/162

• During the past two years the Government of Haiti has increased the
proportion of the national budget allocated to the national police. For fiscal year
2013/14, the forecasted budget of the Haitian National Police is $153.9 million.
The Chamber of Deputies has approved an amount of $157.5 million and a
final allocation is pending adoption of the budget by the Senate.
Electoral capacity-building
The Mission’s objective is to create conditions that will allow the Government
of Haiti to assume full responsibility for the electoral process following the next
presidential elections, scheduled for 2015.
• Because elections were not held in 2011, 2012 and 2013, constitutional
deadlines were not respected.
• Although a Permanent Electoral Council was not established, a transitional
Electoral Council was formed on 19 April 2013 and an Executive Director was
nominated on 13 January 2014.
• The Government of Haiti has pledged approximately one third of the
provisional electoral budget. In the light of the provisions of the 2013 electoral
law and the sequence and type of elections to be held in 2014, the planned
budget may need to be revised.
• With regard to the capabilities of Haitian authorities to progressively assume
full responsibility for electoral logistics and security, discussions between
MINUSTAH and the Electoral Council on the matter are at an early stage
owing to the fact that a formal agreement has not yet been reached on the
sequence and timing of elections in 2014.
Rule of law and human rights
MINUSTAH is focusing its activities on supporting the work of the
Government to strengthen rule of law accountability and oversight mechanisms and
to advance crucial legislative reform.
• While the rules of internal procedures of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
have been drafted, they have not yet been adopted by the members of the
Council.
• With regard to the establishment of the Judicial Inspectorate of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary and other administrative structures of its secretariat,
the recruitment process for a Director and judicial inspectors has begun.
• Gender considerations have been taken into account in the recruitment of new
student magistrates currently being trained at the School of Magistrates,
resulting in a student body that is 37 per cent women.
• No positive developments have been identified with regard to the capacity of
the Superior Court of Auditors and Administrative Disputes to handle an
increased caseload. At present, 7 of the 10 members proposed by the Senate
have been confirmed by the President.
• The Office of the Ombudsperson is operational and adequately funded through
the State budget and has representation throughout the entire territory.

18/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

• Drafts of the Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code have been proposed
to the Government. Regarding the Criminal Code, a competing draft has been
prepared by the President’s Commission on Legislative Reform. Neither
version has yet been presented to Parliament for adoption.
• At the time of writing, the Anti-Corruption Unit has the ability to investigate
cases. An anti-corruption law is pending adoption by the Parliament that would
confer enforcement powers upon the Unit, which it currently lacks.
• The vetting process for the Haitian National Police is progressing and 4,992
police officers and civilian staff have been certified. An additional 3,201 cases
are near to completion. Background checks for new officers are conducted
jointly by the Inspectorate General and the MINUSTAH police component
prior to their graduation from the national police school.
• In February 2014, the Inspectorate General published its first annual report
since 2008, documenting 78 cases that were opened against police officers for
various misconduct and human rights violations. So far, 14 of those officers
have been dismissed from the police force, and appropriate sanctions have been
applied in 14 other cases. Twenty-eight cases were considered unfounded.

Key governance issues
The Mission’s objective is to promote dialogue on a minimum political
consensus regarding elections and the legislative agenda and to support the
strengthening of State institutions at the central and local level.
• National political stakeholders engaged in a mediated dialogue process
focused on democratic governance, elections and constitutional amendments.
• Policy proposals outlining short-, medium- and long-term governance and
human rights priorities by civil society organizations in six Departments
(North-East, Artibonite, South-East, Grand-Anse, South and West) were finalized
and presented to the Haitian authorities.

14-24888

19/23

S/2014/162

Annex II
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti: countries
providing military staff and contingents
(as at 10 February 2014)
Staff officers
Country

Females

Troops
Males

Females

Males

Total

Argentina

11

40

521

572

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

12

193

Brazil
Canada

18
2

Chile

14

3
3

El Salvador

1

Ecuador

1

France

2

Guatemala

2

1 402

208
a

1 434b

2

7

18

436

457

34

35

1

51

53
2

11

Honduras

122

135

1c

1

Indonesia

1

167

168

Jordan

10

241

251

Nepal

13

21

34

Paraguay

3

5

109

117

Peru

6

23

344

373

1

11

146

159

850

861

Philippines

1

Republic of Korea

1

Sri Lanka
United States of America

1

Uruguay
Total

1

2

11

5

7

8

10

40

887

937

107

175

5 527

5 814

a

Including one Bolivian attached to the Brazilian contingent.
The Force Commander is employed on a United Nations contract and hence is not reflected
in the troop strength.
c
Attached to the Chilean battalion.

b

20/23

14-24888

S/2014/162

Annex III
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti: composition
and strength of the police
(as at 11 February 2014)
Number of United Nations police
Country

14-24888

Number of formed police units

Female

Male

Female

Male

Argentina

1

11

–

–

Bangladesh

–

5

104

212

Benin

1

40

–

–

Brazil

2

8

–

–

Burkina Faso

20

35

–

–

Burundi

8

35

–

–

Cameroon

5

29

–

–

Canada

10

71

–

–

Central African Republic

–

1

–

–

Chad

–

5

–

–

Chile

2

12

–

–

China

–

–

–

–

Colombia

1

26

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

7

125

–

–

Croatia

–

5

–

–

Egypt

–

16

–

–

El Salvador

–

–

–

–

France

2

20

–

–

Grenada

–

2

–

–

Guinea

–

15

–

–

Guinea-Bissau

–

–

–

–

India

–

5

1

419

Indonesia

–

–

–

–

Italy

–

–

–

–

Jamaica

–

–

–

–

Jordan

–

11

–

278

Kyrgyzstan

–

1

–

–

Lithuania

–

1

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

Mali

2

35

–

–

Nepal

–

2

9

131

Niger

10

41

–

–

Nigeria

2

1

–

–

Norway

4

2

–

–

21/23

S/2014/162

Number of United Nations police
Country

Female

Male

Female

Male

Pakistan

–

–

–

139

Paraguay

–

1

–

–

Philippines

3

10

–

–

Portugal

–

1

–

–

Romania

3

20

–

–

Russian Federation

1

8

–

–

Rwanda

4

9

14

126

Senegal

1

5

11

129

Serbia

–

–

–

–

Sierra Leone

–

–

–

–

Spain

–

9

–

–

Sri Lanka

3

5

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

Timor-Leste

–

–

–

–

Togo

–

–

–

–

Tunisia

1

13

–

–

Turkey

–

12

–

–

Thailand

3

4

–

–

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

–

1

–

–

United States of America

8

52

–

–

Uruguay

–

4

–

–

Vanuatu

–

2

–

–

Yemen

–

18

–

–

104

734

139

1 434

Subtotal
Total

22/23

Number of formed police units

838

1 573
2 411

14-24888

MINUSTAH map as at March 2014

S/2014/162

14-24888

23/23
