S/PV.7597

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7597th meeting

Tuesday, 22 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Sun Lei
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-44653 (E)
*1544653*

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi,
Permanent Representative of Spain, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am honoured to brief the Security Council on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004).
Since I last briefed the Council in this Chamber
in June (see S/PV.7463), I think that, without a doubt,
the most important occurrence has been the increase
in the number of acts of extreme violence being
perpetrated by terrorists in nearly every region of the
world. I have begun my briefing with this introduction
because resolution 1540 (2004) is the cornerstone
of the non-proliferation regime of weapons of mass
destruction. However, despite the resolution’s strength,
there is no doubt that in certain regions, including the
Middle East, events have demonstrated that it has not
been respected. We have received information from
organizations such as INTERPOL indicating attempts
by various countries to smuggle nuclear material.
Non-proliferation is a phenomenon reflecting a
global challenge, and for that reason the response must
be wholly global. I believe that we all share the idea that
it is far more economical and safe to invest in prevention
than in cure. That is why I shall suggest in this briefing
that if we all work together, by the end of the exercise
culminating next year with the review of resolution
1540 (2004) we shall adopt a more effective resolution
that will truly prevent weapons of mass destruction
from falling into the hands of non-State actors.

2/19

22/12/2015

I shall now discuss the activities of the 1540
Committee in the four areas of its work.
The first is implementation. “Implementation” is
a word that the Spanish language has imported from
English, and is now considered to be Spanish. To
implement is basically to interact with the Committee.
The Committee must receive national reports
and regular information from States. Ideally, the
Committee should receive voluntary action plans. In
other words, implementation is interaction between the
1540 Committee and the States Members of the United
Nations. Preliminary indications in recent times are
that implementation is going well but unevenly, both
thematically and geographically. Geographically, not
all regions of the world have implemented resolution
1540 (2004) equally; thematically, deficiencies remain
in export controls, to cite but one example.
Members have heard me say on more than one
occasion that my goal as Chair of the 1540 Committee
is to achieve its universal application. That will
essentially require all States Members of the United
Nations to submit their plans and projects. Yet there
remain 17 States that have yet to submit their plans. I
trust that, over the course of the coming year, we shall
achieve our goal.
One fundamental element of implementation is the
training of national experts responsible for ensuring
the proper implementation of the resolution. In that
regard, I would underscore the important work done
in the reporting period by the Chinese Mission, which
convened in Chingdao a training course for all 1540
experts of the Asia-Pacific region. I had the honour to
attend and inaugurate that event. I also note the efforts
undertaken by Chile to host a similar training course
for the countries of Latin America next year.
The second area of the 1540 (2004) Committee’s
work is assistance. Assistance basically means helping
to train the States that do not have the necessary means
or expertise to implement the resolution appropriately.
Unfortunately, I am forced to acknowledge that,
in this area, our efforts have not enjoyed their due
success because we are not always sufficiently adept in
matching donor and recipient States so as to establish
the most effective assistance mechanisms. That is why
I propose to deepen the regional approach to assistance.
In that respect, I hope to attend a very important African
Union in Addis Ababa in March 2016.

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The Committee’s third area of work involves its
cooperation with regional organizations, of which
there are many. I shall try to brief. We are also working
well with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In that regard, the most important event to have taken
place in the reporting period was the participation of
representatives of the 1540 Committee in an exercise
on the security of the maritime transportation of
nuclear material that was organized by Morocco and
Spain, in cooperation with Agency. We continue
working with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, naturally on the issue of chemical
and biological substances. I highlight in particular the
outstanding effort undertaken by Jordan in organizing a
meeting in Amman in June that met with great success.
I should like to refer to three especially important
organizations. The first is the World Customs
Organization. There is no doubt that resolution 1540
(2004) seeks to establish customs controls to prevent
illicit trafficking in banned substances and materials.
The second is INTERPOL, which can provide early
warning and information on illicit cross-border
trafficking. The third is the Financial Action Task
Force. The financial aspects of resolution 1540 (2004)
are very important, as is hindering the ability of
non-State actors to tap into sources of illicit funding.
Another very important organization is the African
Union, which plays a critical role in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as does the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
achieved great progress in appointing 1540 points of
contact. I also note the important role played on the
American continent played by the Organization of
American States, which has proposed establishing the
post of manager for 1540-related projects. The 1540
Chair has maintained contacts with other organizations
working to prevent proliferation, including the Missile
Technology Control Regime and the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, with which we maintain frequent exchanges
of view. Obviously, within the United Nations system
we work very closely with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Another area of the Committee’s work is
transparency and outreach. With respect to transparency,
it is important to stress that one significant aspect of
the Committee’s work is ensuring that the industries
that produce relevant substances and materials clearly
understands the dangers involved in the manufacture

S/PV.7597

of certain materials that could be converted into
ingredients for the production of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons. On this point, we note the
important ongoing cooperation of Germany through
the Wiesbaden Process, in which participants have the
opportunity to exchange views and ideas on the best
ways to share controls with the industrial sector so as to
ensure that its products are not used in the manufacture
of weapons of mass destruction.
I also underscore the importance of outreach to
parliamentarians. Ultimately, the Security Council
adopts resolutions and national Parliaments are obliged
to implement them. However, it is important that we
have a smooth exchange of information and experiences
between the 1540 Committee and national Parliaments
in order to understand where there are deficiencies and
where successes, and which areas need strengthening
in order to ensure more effective implementation of this
resolution.
In the forthcoming year, we start an important
countdown, beginning on 1 January and continuing
over the next 12 months, to the completion of the
comprehensive review of the 1540 Committee.
Resolution 1540 (2004) was a qualitatively new and
fundamental leap in combating the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Enough time has passed
since 2004 to enable us to see its achievements and
inadequacies, and many events have occurred during
that time that have forced us to act more effectively.
I would like to offer a practical case. Suppose that
in some country, in some region of the world — say, in
a country that is unfortunately unable to fully control
its borders — a non-State actor managed to produce
a weapon of mass destruction. It would probably not
be a nuclear weapon, but it could be a chemical or a
biological one. As Chair of the 1540 Committee, I would
first ask where we had failed. What had we not done
that had allowed that to take place? I would convene
the Committee and would tell all our experts that, well,
we have to work together to ensure that such a case
never happens again. As Chair of the Committee and
representative of Spain, I am mentioning this in order
to focus the direction of the comprehensive review, by
whose end, in December 2016, I hope that we will be
able to adopt a draft resolution that can be even more
effective in combating weapons of mass destruction
and ensuring that they do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors, which I know is a goal shared by
every Member of the United Nations.

15-446533/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Ultimately, that is the job we have to undertake,
all of us together. Improving the non-proliferation
system is expensive, but it is more expensive to try to
deal with the results of acts or attempted acts involving
weapons of mass destruction. I think that is obvious.
However, I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
efforts that all countries are making with the aim of
supporting resolution 1540 (2004), particularly those
that are contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund
for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities,
managed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs. The
Committee is grateful for the Office’s support in that
regard, and especially for the resources contributed by
the United States, Kazakhstan, the Republic of Korea
and the European Union. Without them, the Committee
would not be able to do its job effectively.
The President: I thank Ambassador Oyarzun for
his briefing and for all of his leadership over the past
year on this issue. His enthusiasm and command of the
material, which makes all the difference for Chairs of
these Committees, is impressive, and we have learned
a lot.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the United States presidency for organizing today’s
meeting on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing.
Regrettably, in 2015 we had yet again a year
marked by an upsurge in extreme violence on the part
of terrorists around the world. Reports that non-State
actors used chemical weapons against people in the
Middle East are more than worrying. They prove that
the international community must do more to prevent
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of
delivery from getting into terrorists’ hands. Last year’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7) reaffirmed the
importance of resolution 1540 (2004) and laid down
clear guidelines relating to the future work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
Lithuania believes that, during the 2016
comprehensive review, due attention must be paid to
developing a specific strategy aimed at achieving the
full and universal implementation of the resolution.
Greater synergies among the relevant subsidiary bodies
of the Council and improved assistance to Member

4/19

22/12/2015

States should also be explored. Lithuania is also of
the view that the Committee should enhance the
coordination of its non-proliferation work with other
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The Committee should also engage more actively with
civil society, industry and the private sector, and take
their relevant expertise into consideration.
The 2014 Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague
once again reaffirmed its main objective, which is to
strengthen nuclear security and prevent non-State actors
from acquiring nuclear material. Lithuania continues
to implement its commitments relating to nuclear
terrorism under the Nuclear Security Summits of Seoul
and The Hague by building its national capacities
and strengthening cooperation with other States and
international organizations in order to counter illicit
trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive materials. In
preparation for the Nuclear Security Summit to be held
in Washington, D.C., in 2016, Lithuania held a four-day
sherpa meeting in Vilnius this summer. Our nuclear
security centre of excellence, established as a national
capacity-building and training venue, continues to
expand its regional and international outreach, hosting
national, regional and international thematic seminars
and study visits.
Lithuania would like to emphasize the need for
universal and comprehensive reporting under the
resolution, with the aim of identifying challenges that
States may face during its implementation. We applaud
Spain’s tireless efforts to help non-reporting States
submit their initial reports to the Committee. Some
progress has been made in that regard in 2015, although
17 States have yet to submit their initial reports. In order
to effectively implement the goals of resolution 1540
(2004), the Committee and its Group of Experts should
continue their practice of visiting Member States,
particularly non-reporting ones, as well as their active
participation in events related to non-proliferation at the
regional and subregional levels. That direct interaction
has proved very useful in assisting States that lack the
capacity to implement the resolution.
During the 2016 comprehensive review, the
Committee should investigate future options for
further strengthening its clearing-house role in
facilitating matchmaking between assistance requests
and assistance availability. It should also work to
expand its base of assistance providers, which should
be open to all who express the desire to contribute to
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). This

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

is particularly relevant in the area of expert controls,
where many gaps persist. Lithuania also encourages
the 1540 Committee to interact more closely with the
relevant Committees of the Council and their groups
of experts, such as the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Daesh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, in order to reap the benefit of possible synergies
while dealing with issues of non-proliferation of WMD
and their means of delivery.
Last but not least, I would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts of Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi as Chair of the 1540 Committee, as
well as his team for their tireless work and commitment
to achieving the universal and full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Since this is the last scheduled meeting at which my
delegation is delivering a statement as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, on behalf of Raimonda
Murmokaitė, Permanent Representative of Lithuania,
and our whole team, I would like to convey our
appreciation for the fruitful cooperation we have had
with all the members of the Council and its secretariat,
and to thank everyone for the support we have received
during our tenure.
The President: I will have more to say about each
of the departing members at the end of today’s meeting,
but I would like to thank Lithuania for the major
contribution it has made during the past two years.

S/PV.7597

regime, allows us to mitigate those risks and prevent the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by non-State
actors, their delivery systems and related materials.
To that end, Chad welcomes the notable progress
made in implementing the resolution, as we see from
the report of the Chair of the 1540 Committee. Over
90 per cent of States have reported to the Committee,
which has finalized the revision of implementation
measures applicable to all 193 Member States.
Moreover, the Committee has approved the modalities
for the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and and has developed and is
implementing a work plan focused on four issues.
Despite that significant progress, work remains
to be done in achieving the universal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Chad therefore encourages
the Committee to reinforce its cooperation with
the relevant international organizations. Chad also
encourages the Committee to reach out to and to
include the parliamentarians, who are responsible
for drafting and adopting the legislation necessary
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We
welcome the convening of a conference of African
parliamentarians, which will be held in Côte d’Ivoire
next year. Similarly, Chad commends the outreach
efforts of the Committee to civil society, as well as the
holding of a seminar bringing together representatives of
industry in Germany as part of the Wiesbaden process.
We also commend and encourage the initiative of the
Republic of Korea and India, who have announced that
they would organize similar activities in 2016.

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi for
his comprehensive briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). I commend him on his commitment and
leadership.

The Committee must further highlight the role
of African regional and subregional organizations,
because a number of States that have not yet submitted
their first implementation report are located in Africa.
In that regard, more vigorous cooperation with the
African Union and with the continent’s regional
economic communities could help to significantly
reinforce the momentum towards the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The renewed increase of the phenomenon of
terrorism throughout the world, the alleged or proven
use of chemical weapons in some regions and the
attempts to traffic in nuclear material in several
countries are among the many factors that attest to
the risk of non-State actors acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, their delivery systems and related
materials. Nonetheless, fortunately, resolution 1540
(2004), which is the cornerstone of the non-proliferation

As we are at the end of our term in the Council,
and since this is most likely our last meeting this year,
I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of my
entire delegation, to thank all Member States of the
Council and the Secretariat staff for their invaluable
support and their vast understanding, from which we
have benefited during the past two years of our term
on the Council. During that time, we were not able to
achieve everything that we would have liked. However,

15-446535/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

in so far as were able, we exerted every effort to make
our modest contribution to the collective work of the
Council. So far as possible and alongside the other
African members of the Council, we endeavoured to
make Africa’s as yet barely audible voice heard in this
organ.
We are happy to have had this experience for the
first time, and we will keep very fond memories of it.
We hope that, with the caring support of all the members
of the Council, the incoming African members will be
able to maintain and further strengthen the new dynamic
established by the representatives of our continent
within the Council. Africa, which hosts over 70 per cent
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, can and
must be involved in the search for solutions to the crises
that it is undergoing. In that regard, it is imperative that
the views of our continental organization, the African
Union, pertaining to peace and security be taken into
account if we really want to help Africa.
In conclusion, we commend the spirit of openness
and of mutual understanding that has often enabled
members of the Council to work on the basis of
consensus, and we hope that that momentum continues
to grow. I could not conclude without congratulating
the incoming members of the Council — Egypt, Japan,
Senegal, Ukraine and Uruguay — on their election, or
without wishing them every success during their terms
of office. I would also like to commend the outgoing
members — Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria — for
their significant contributions to the work of the Council.
I wish them well in their future activities within other
United Nations bodies.
Lastly, Madam President, I would like to
congratulate you and all of your team for the leadership
and aplomb with which you have conducted the work
of the Council during the United States presidency
for December. On that note, I would like to wish to
everyone Merry Christmas and a happy New Year.
The President: I will come back to the
representative of Chad later. Because he has spoken
about the importance of having a strong African voice
on the Council, I would like to let him know that his
voice was very loud, very strong and always a voice
for dignity, and that voice will be missed. We therefore
hope to hear from him going forward.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We, too,
thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for
his briefing in his capacity as Chair of the Security

6/19

22/12/2015

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), and we congratulate him on his energetic
leadership of that very important Committee.
This briefing comes at an important time for
resolution 1540 (2004) — 10 years after the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption — and we believe that
we can say that good progress has been made, bearing
in mind that it is a crucial backstop to the various
treaty-based instruments that address the issue of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Over
the past 10 years, Governments have recognized the
importance of both national action and international
cooperation to secure and prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We welcome the fact
that more than 90 per cent of United Nations States
Members have voluntarily submitted national reports
on the implementation of the resolution. For its part,
New Zealand has been proud to support the efforts to
extend the implementation of the resolution throughout
the Pacific, where we have funded expert assistance to
Pacific States to help them meet their commitments.
We have also provided assistance with the drafting of
counter-terrorism legislation.
We support the Committee’s comprehensive
review of the resolution. It is time to take stock of
our efforts over the past decade and determine how
the implementation of the resolution can be improved
to best support our collective security. The Group of
Experts has collected an impressive amount of data that
underscore how successful implementation has been.
We can use the data to reveal trends in the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to better identify
risks. We commend the experts for their hard work and
encourage them to continue their direct dialogue and
outreach with States. At the same time, we are aware of
the burden placed on small States, especially small island
developing States, in implementing such a complex legal
framework. We are keen to explore practical solutions,
especially for States that do not produce or store the
relevant materials, while respecting the legally binding
nature of resolution 1540 (2004) and acknowledging
the importance of leaving no gaps. In brief, the
implementation of the resolution is a significant burden
for small countries with small administrations. We also
emphasize the importance of working through regional
and subregional organizations, and we welcome the
cooperation of the Group of Experts with the Pacific
Islands Forum in that regard.

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

New Zealand looks forward to working
constructively with other Council members so that
the comprehensive review can be used to update and
strengthen the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The horrific chemical attacks in Syria over the
past two years have demonstrated all too clearly that
the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction is as
relevant now as it was a decade ago, if not more so.
Ultimately, only through the total elimination of such
weapons, together with ongoing, stringent verification
measures implemented by all Member States, can we
protect our collective security.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), the Permanent Representative of Spain,
for his very comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the
unfailing efforts of Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
and his team in leading the Committee, which has
accomplished a great deal. The Committee has been
extremely active of late, which coincides with the
comprehensive review that is currently under way.
There has been an increase in terrorist activities
in the Middle East, Africa, Europe and elsewhere.
Terrorist organizations have access to complex planning
and implementation mechanisms. It is their goal to kill
as many civilians and bring about as much destruction
as possible. That is just the beginning; we expect the
worst. Such organizations have increasing military
and financial means, and they control huge territories
in some countries, which makes the danger of their
having access to weapons of mass destruction, whether
biological or nuclear, very real. Accordingly, we need
to make every possible effort to ensure that terrrorist
groups do not have access to such arms or the means to
produce them. That is an enormous responsibility for
all countries; accordingly, all countries should comply
with resolution 1540 (2004), which is the cornerstone of
the non-proliferation regime.
Jordan has made tangible progress in terms
of implementing the resolution. We have adopted
legislation and taken measures to control exports
with a view to preventing the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their delivery
systems. During its tenure as a member of the Security
Council, working in close cooperation with the Group
of Experts, Jordan submitted its third national report
on the implementation of the resolution. We very much

S/PV.7597

welcome the information provided by Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi regarding implementation.
I would also like to mention the regional workshop
that took place in Amman, which was organized by the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and
brought together 17 countries, donor representatives
and 11 international and regional organizations. The
workshop provided an opportunity to exchange of views,
determine priorities and identify the difficulties and
solutions encountered in implementing the resolution.
The workshop was an excellent example of cooperation
among countries in terms of capacity-building and
mutual assistance, and also provided additional proof
of Jordan’s commitment to the implementation of the
resolution and its support for the Committee. We hope
that the role of the Committee in assisting countries
will be strengthened over the coming years.
There is also a need to step up cooperation with
regional organizations. Such organizations need to be
encouraged to provide assistance to Member States.
Some countries do not have the means to implement
the resolution owing to security challenges or a lack
of resources. The current comprehensive review of the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
an important step, as it provides us with an opportunity
to gather a great deal of data and information that will
assist in the capacity-building of countries and the
improved implementation of the resolution. We support
that process and look forward to cooperating with the
Committee next year. We also plan to support its efforts
to include the academic community and representatives
of other bodies.
(spoke in English)
I will not say this is the last Council meeting for
Jordan, because perhaps there will be a vote. Neither
will I say that I tried to be a forceful representative
for the Arab world, because all here have heard me
clearly without my having to speak more loudly.
Unfortunately, the Arab world has been a consistent
presence within the Council for the wrong reasons.
However, we have always tried to represent our part of
the world with a great deal of passion and dedication.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for all that you
have done and for your support. I also wish to thank
all of my colleagues, the Permanent Representatives
sitting around the table, those who are leaving as well
as those who are staying — in particular those who are
staying permanently, as we will be coming to see you

15-446537/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

22/12/2015

throughout the year. In the name of Jordan, I thank you
very much.

introducing other sensitive and complicated issues that
do not already fall within its scope.

The President: I thank the representative of Jordan
for her statement, as well as for her leadership. I do
not know of any role more difficult than that of being
pushed and pulled in so many directions as she has
been. The Ambassador has done a tremendous job with
incredible poise, and always with such regard for the
people who are not represented in the Security Council
Chamber. It has been a great privilege for all of us who
have had the chance to work with her. We thank the
Ambassador.

Thirdly, it is vital to listen carefully to the views
of Member States and to ensure the transparency and
openness of the review process. China has noted the
Committee’s work plan for the comprehensive review.
Next year, consultations will be conducted with the
membership. China believes that the principle of
transparency should be adhere to throughout the
process, listening to and fully taking into account
the views of all Member States so as to enable the
comprehensive review process to achieve its expected
results.

Mr. Sun Lei (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing. We appreciate the great deal of work that he
and his team have done.
Over the past six months, the joint efforts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Group of Experts have
enabled the Committee to carry out its work in an
orderly manner on issues such as the implementation of
the resolution, international cooperation, and assistance
and outreach programmes. The focus of the Committee’s
work in the next phase will be the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
connection, China wishes to make several remarks.
First, it is necessary to undertake a comprehensive
review of the implementation of the resolution. The
review should revolve around the core provisions of the
resolution and make full use of existing resources and
tools of the Committee to strengthen the analysis of the
implementation in order to identify both progress and
weak links and provide guidance to Member States with
a view to further raising their awareness with regard
to non-proliferation and improving their capacity to
prevent proliferation.
Secondly, it is important to ensure that the main
thrust of the resolution is properly understood. In
accordance with resolution 1540 (2004), all Member
States should prohibit any non-State actor from
manufacturing, acquiring, processing, developing,
transporting, transferring or using weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, especially
for the purposes of terrorism. The comprehensive
review process should hinge on that core mandate
of the resolution, and should avoid expanding the
interpretation of the scope of the resolution, or

8/19

Fourthly, we must effectively enhance the assistance
mechanism of the Committee through the comprehensive
review. At present, the assistance mechanism has
played a certain role, but there is still room for further
strengthening and improvements. Targeted measures
should be taken through the comprehensive review to
promote a greater role for the Committee in providing
assistance in order to effectively meet the assistance
needs of the relevant countries.
China attaches great importance to the significant
role played by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts. China has actively participated in the work of
the Committee in a constructive way. As part of the
efforts to strengthen capacity-building in the AsiaPacific countries and help them implement resolution
1540 (2004), China hosted a training course in
September on Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
for national focal points in the Asia-Pacific region.
The training course enhanced the understanding of
participants with regard to resolution 1540 (2004) and
its background, thereby assisting countries in their
efforts to make progress on the implementation of the
resolution, both at home and among States. China will
continue to work with all countries to contribute to
international non-proliferation efforts.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): First of all, I would
like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi very much
indeed for his excellent leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). As his
briefing showed, this has been a busy year for that
important body. I would also like to commend the 1540
Group of Experts and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs for their tireless work in support
of the Committee.

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Resolution 1540 (2004) is a vital part of the global
non-proliferation architecture. The threat of non-State
actors, particularly terrorists, acquiring materials for
weapons of mass destruction — whether chemical,
biological or nuclear — is a nightmare scenario for
all of us. By monitoring States’ implementation of the
binding obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations that address that risk, the Committee
fulfils a crucial non-proliferation function. In doing
so, it acts as an important safeguard for international
peace and security. It is therefore right that we take the
time to review, with a critical eye, the state of global
implementation, as well as the work and structures of
the Committee itself.
The United Kingdom supports the comprehensive
review, which is already under way, and looks forward
to the presentation of the final report on the subject to
the Council by the end of 2016. The year ahead will be
a busy one for the Committee. I would like to briefly
highlight three issues.
First, we have not yet achieved universality of
reporting, although there is a high rate of reporting
compliance. Providing a first report to the Committee
is the best way for a country to begin a dialogue
with the Committee on implementation. It allows the
Committee and its experts to highlight potential gaps
and risks and to help provide potential assistance
providers. The provision of follow-up reports and
national implementation action plans is a important
means of sharing information and further supporting
implementation. I would echo Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi’s call on those remaining States to submit a
first report on implementation. If they have not already
done so, 2016 is the year to start such engagement.
Secondly, the Committee’s decision to focus on
implementation on a regional basis is already bearing
fruit. The recent resolution 1540 (2004) training course
held in China for Asia-Pacific countries was a huge
success, and we look forward to more in other regions.
The United Kingdom had the privilege of supporting
a regional workshop in East Africa for States in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
September to support the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The new staff resources committed by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Organization of American States are another
important step-up in engagement. Neighbouring
countries in a region often share geographic
and political similarities when it comes to the

S/PV.7597

implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), so expanding
regional approaches to assistance and training under
that resolution can improve our overall security from
proliferation risks.
Finally, the Committee must continue its proactive
outreach. Resolution 1540 (2004) is a technical resolution
that covers a range of specialist fields. The Committee
should continue to meet with expert communities
in the relevant scientific disciplines, including
academia, lawmaking and industry. As always in the
Security Council, getting new and fresh perspectives
on old problems is a welcome way of improving our
work. Direct engagement with States is also vital. We
invite all United Nations States Members to consider
how the Committee’s work can be strengthened
through the comprehensive review, including through
implementation monitoring, assistance matchmaking
and outreach. We look forward to the public meetings
that Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi is planning so as to
facilitate that dialogue.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom is committed
to the preventative agenda on resolution 1540 (2004).
Measures taken by States today on materials for
weapons of mass destruction, as well as on financing
and export controls, will directly reduce the risk posed
by the proliferation of such materials to non-State
actors. As the threat of those non-State actors evolves,
we must continue to work together to strengthen our
collective security through committees such as these.
Finally, if we are getting all valedictory, I would
like to offer a very brief thanks to Chad, Chile, Jordan,
Lithuania and Nigeria for being five outstanding
non-permanent representatives. Personally, I will
always think of them as permanent, since they were
here when I first joined the Council. I hope that we
will vote tomorrow, but I equally hope that we will not
have to do any explanations of vote, as we will all be
so happy with the text that no one will need to do any
explaining.
The President: Hope springs eternal in the Security
Council.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing. I commend him and his team for
their skill and dedication in taking the Committee and
its work forward. I also take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the unflagging commitment of

15-446539/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the Group of Experts and their unstinting support for,
and cooperation with, the Committee in furthering the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Malaysia reaffirms its view that resolution 1540
(2004) and its effective implementation remain a key
component of the global architecture for countering
the danger posed by the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We continue to believe that
the establishment of effective precautionary measures
and systems to address potential nuclear, chemical or
biological proliferation is a collective responsibilty
incumbent upon all Member States, which must take the
lead in that regard. In that connection, we are pleased
to note that the Committee has recorded an increase
with respect to measures taken by Member States to
comply with the provisions of the resolution. We are
also pleased to note that, of 17 non-reporting States,
three began to report in 2015 as a result of the close and
sustained engagement by the Committee and its Chair.
We believe that that is a positive development, and we
encourage the Committee to continue its engagement
with the remaining States, with a view to achieving
universal coverage.
We share the concern highlighted by the Chair
in his briefing that the current 1540 regime does not
adequately provide for measures to address allegations
of the possession of weapons of mass destruction and
related technologies by non-State actors, particularly
terrorists and violent armed extremist groups. We
believe that the threat posed by such groups is real. A
renewed focus in that direction is therefore needed if
the 1540 regime is to remain relevant and effective. In
our view, the possibility of factoring in the work of the
Committee in the work and activities of the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Council is worth considering.
The difficulty in matching implementation assistance
requests with possible providers is another issued that
the Chair has highlighted. Given the limitations and
varying capacities of registered providers, we would
welcome collaborative approaches with stakeholders in
order to effectively and efficiently address shortcomings
of the present system.
Malaysia commends the Committee for its
ongoing engagement and cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
Biological Weapons Convention Implementation
Support Unit. Additionally, we welcome and support
the Committee’s outreach to the World Customs

10/19

22/12/2015

Organization, INTERPOL and the Financial Action
Task Force on Money Laundering. In our view, such
positive engagement and collaboration creates a better
understanding among all concerned and, in time, it will
lead to more effective and meaningful implementation
of the resolution.
In that context, Malaysia also welcomes the recently
held fourth Weisbaden Industry Process Conference
on Private Sector Engagement in Strategic Trade
Controls on the theme “Recommendations for effective
approaches to implement resolution 1540 (2004)”, held
on 19 and 20 November in Germany. Moving forward,
we believe scope exists to further expand such crosssectoral engagement, including with parliamentarians
and academia, among others.
On the comprehensive review on the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), Malaysia
will continue to lend its support and work alongside
other Committee members and the Group of Experts
to implement the review’s work plan. We look forward
to the upcoming consultations with Member States,
and hope that such engagement can produce potential
synergies in approaches on activities to guide the
review in the coming year.
From 15 to 16 June, Malaysia, in its capacity
as current Chair of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), organized the seventh
ASEAN Regional Forum inter-sessional meeting on
non-proliferation and disarmament. The meeting
succeeded in raising the profile of the 1540 regime and its
effective implementation, as well as raising awareness
on the work of the Committee and the Group of Experts
in that regard. Among other outcomes, participants
reaffirmed their commitment to complement and
strengthen
the
international
non-proliferation
architecture at the regional and subregional levels.
We commend the Committee’s Group of Experts for
playing an instrumental role in ensuring the meeting’s
success.
In conclusion, Malaysia firmly believes that the
full and effective implementation of resolution of
1540 at the national, regional and international levels
remains a fundamental bulwark against the threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
Its effectiveness is also contingent to some extent on
progress being made in other international policymaking
processes. In that regard, the disappointing outcome of
the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons should
15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

not hinder progress in the effective implementation
of the 1540 regime and, more generally, on capacitybuilding efforts in the area of WMD-threat reduction.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We commend
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi for presenting
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which he has
chaired with great effectiveness and dedication.
The current briefing is particularly important
because it deals with the issue of a comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
This is the second such review since its adoption, and
it is taking take place at a time when the measures and
steps that States can take to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction are more
relevant than ever.
Venezuela attaches great importance to the
efforts of the international community to promote
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We would like to express our full
commitment to strengthening the international regime
applicable to such materials by meeting the obligations
flowing from the relevant legally binding instruments
and the measures and controls that States might adopt
on a voluntary basis to cope with this serious threat.
As the Chair of the Committee mentioned in his
report, extremist violence perpetrated by terrorists in
Africa, Europe, the Middle East and North America
has increased. In the current circumstances, therefore,
it is all the more important to coordinate measures
more closely at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels with a view to providing a more
comprehensive and robust response to this serious
challenge and threat to international security, as well
as to coordinate the measures and controls that States
might adopt to face up to this grave threat.
My country reiterates its categorical rejection
of all terrorist acts in any form, for any reasons,
wherever they are committed and by whoever they
are committed. They are a flagrant violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In that context,
the use of toxic chemical agents by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham in Iraq and Syria underscores the
need to redouble efforts to prevent terrorist groups from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. That is why we
have insisted on the fact that the elimination of weapons
of mass destruction is the most effective way to prevent

S/PV.7597

terrorist groups from acquiring such weapons. We
call on States possessing nuclear weapons to conduct
negotiations in good faith aimed at eliminating those
arsenals in favour of international peace and security.
Venezuela is fully committed to the process
of the comprehensive review on the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We will
actively participate in all the phases of the review.
The goal is for as many States as possible to adopt on
a voluntary basis the largest quantity of measures and
controls so that non-State actors are unable to acquire
materials, delivery systems or financing in order to
produce, finance, transfer or threaten or use weapons of
mass destruction. To achieve that, the Committe should
optimize its communication, assistance and advice to all
States Members of the United Nations, with particular
emphasis on those countries that need greater support.
We commend the work of the Chair of the Committee
with the support of the Group of Experts.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full commitment and
support to the work of the Committee in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), with the aim of preventing
terrorist groups from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, through cooperation among Members
States and the support of the relevant international
organizations.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for the very
thorough briefing he has just made on the activities of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past quarter, as well
as for his observations.
The proliferation of radiological, biological,
chemical and nuclear weapons and the risk that they
may fall into the hands of terrorists are very real
dangers, as the Ambassador has very aptly reminded
us. The crimes committed by Daesh in Syria and Iraq,
which seem to know no bounds, means that we cannot
rule out such a possibility.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), 11 years
ago, marked a decisive step in preventing those dangers
by requiring, via a resolution under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, that States take specific
measures to prevent such weapons from falling into
the hands of terrorists. The setting up of the 1540
Committee has since ensured the ongoing monitoring
of the implementation of the resolution, and encouraged
cooperation among Member States in that fight. We

15-4465311/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

have seen undeniable progress in implementing the
resolution over the course of the past 11 years.
First, the vast majority of Member States have
adopted measures to translate the provisions of the
resolution into their national legislation, including
informing thе Committee of such measures via
implementation reports. I commend the Group of
Experts for analyses and outreach efforts, which are
essential to the Committee’s work.
Secondly, today we see that an increasing number
of international, regional and subregional organizations
have adopted strategies to implement and promote the
provisions of the resolution. The European Union,
for example, has promoted the implementation of
the resolution since 2004; and that commitment was
renewed in July 2013 by the Foreign Affairs Council,
which adopted a decision on resolution 1540 (2004)
allocating €1.5 million towards regional efforts to
implement its provisions.
Despite the undeniable success of the past 11
years, much work remains. Given the emerging
technologies that terrorists may be able to exploit, all
Member States must further strengthen their export
and border controls, prevent and suppress the financing
and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
ensure that sensitive goods and materials are as secure
as possible within their territory. The comprehensive
review of the implementation of the resolution, which
the 1540 Committee has just launched in accordance
with resolution 1977 (2011), must meet those challenges.
As I already mentioned, the preliminary analysis by
the Group of Experts on the measures taken by States
Members pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) shows
improved implementation of the resolution, which is
very positive. However, the implementation is uneven,
depending on the region and the type of action. We
hope that the review will help identify priority areas
where the Committee can focus its efforts.
On the issue of assistance, I want to assure the
Council of the commitment of my delegation, which
coordinates the working group on the subject, with
the aim of improving the efficiency of the assistance
mechanism.
I cannot conclude my statement without saying
that the fight against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and against the risk that they will
fall into the hands of terrorists is also being conducted
in other forums. The Nuclear Security Summit to be
12/19

22/12/2015

held in Washington, D.C., in the spring of 2016 should
enable us to consolidate the achievements of the
process launched in 2010. We are firmly committed to
that, particularly in terms of securing high-intensity
radioactive sources, as any theft could have extremely
serious consequences.
The second International Conference on Nuclear
Security of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), scheduled for December 2016, will help to
define the IAEA’s upcoming nuclear security plan of
action for the period 2018-2021. It will also strengthen
the security of radioactive sources. We must emphasize
the broadest possible participation at the ministerial
level to ensure the success of that important conference.
Again, the risk is real. Mobilizing all of energy of
the international community is necessary to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists.
Lastly, my delegation joins you in advance, Madam
President, in echoing the words you will express later
to the outgoing members. It has been a pleasure and
privilege for us to work with Chile, Jordan, Lithuania,
Nigeria and Chad — which I list in French alphabetical
order. We have had two particularly intense years,
during which the contribution of all five members has
truly enriched the history of this venerable institution.
We have been very active, and even hyper-active at
times. We would like to thank them all very sincerely.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Let me begin by thanking
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassador Román Oyarzun
Marchesi, for his briefing and by commending him
greatly for his effective leadership.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), almost
11 years ago, signalled the Security Council’s
determination to respond robustly to the threat posed
to international peace and security by the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery. As the second Council resolution to
invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
outside of a country-specific context, resolution 1540
(2004) has been aptly described as filling a gap in
international law by addressing the unacceptable risk
of non-State actors obtaining and using weapons of
mass destruction. While the three main treaties on
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons address
non-proliferation, it is evident that they do not take into
account the possibility of such weapons falling into the

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

hands of non-State actors. Therein lies the significance
of resolution 1540 (2004) in its complementarity to the
three global treaties on weapons of mass destruction.
Today we realize that the emergence of extremist
groups has introduced a sense of urgency and the need
for the international community to take stock of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and close
the gaps that could be exploited by such groups to
obtain and use weapons of mass destruction. As the
Chair rightly underscored in his briefing, no State is
immune from the threat and consequences of an attack
with a weapon of mass destruction by non-State actors.
That should serve as a clarion call for us to vigorously
confront one of the key security challenges of the
century. Meeting this challenge and other evolving
threats to international peace and security requires that
we strengthen compliance with resolution 1540 (2004).
We welcome the engagement of the Committee
in regional partnerships and outreach activities,
including its collaboration with the African Union, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, INTERPOL, the
Financial Action Task Force and other relevant actors.
We commend the Committee for adopting an original
approach to improving its assistance to States with
challenges in meeting their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). It is our hope that that will yield positive
results in the effort to promote compliance with the
resolution.

S/PV.7597

did in Pelindaba, in parts of the world where they
currently do not exist.
As we respond to the challenges of today, we must
adopt a proactive approach that produces a long-term
strategy to deal with potential avenues for the illicit
acquisition and use of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons by non-State actors. We must remain
especially vigilant to developments that may threaten
international peace and security. Member States must
stay abreast of and remain seized of emerging issues
and maintain their commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).
As we make our exit from this hallowed Chamber,
I am reminded of Shakespeare’s metaphor in his play
As You Like It. In the monologue, he depicts the world
as a stage where all of the men and women are merely
players. They have their exits and their entrances, he
says, and each one, in his act, plays many parts. I believe
that, as we collectively leave the Council, the five of
us have indeed played our various parts. I believe that
team Nigeria has played its part, albeit with the support
of all of the Member States around this table. We pray
for the same measure of support for our colleagues from
the entering countries — the new actors on this stage,
the new actors in the Security Council cast — Egypt,
Japan, Senegal, Ukraine and Uruguay.

The introduction of training courses for national
1540 points of contact is a highly commendable
innovation. According to the Chair’s briefing, it has
promoted an understanding of the obligations of Member
States under resolution 1540 (2004). We express our
appreciation to China for hosting the training course
for national 1540 points of contact for the Asia-Pacific
region in September. We also thank Chile for its offer
to host the course for the Latin American countries in
2016.

In a world that is increasingly disturbed by
conflict, the Security Council is the body charged
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and the rest of the
world looks up to it as 15 voices of reason. The world
finds its anchor in this Chamber. For that reason, I want
to believe that the Council is an orchestra that is always
trying to play a symphony. Who writes the notes is left
to the imagination, but the symphony must be played
to alleviate the sufferings of so many people in dire
humanitarian situations, people who have left their
homes with nowhere to go, no bed to sleep on, no food
to eat. They look up to the Council. My prayer is that we
will always provide the succour that the world needs.

The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
across the world, we believe, is a potent tool to prevent
the vertical and horizontal proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Success in that direction would
promote transparency in non-proliferation — the
second pillar of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Nigeria will continue to support
efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones, as we

The President: I thank the representative of Nigeria
for her leadership on the Security Council. I would like
to say that in my two years representing my country in
the Council, I have noticed that whenever Mrs. Ogwu
talks, everybody puts down what they are doing and
listens to her. I wish I had what she has. I guess I will
have what she has been eating or drinking. She just
exudes wisdom, to her team and to her colleagues. It

15-4465313/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

has been a great privilege for me. I will say more about
Nigeria when we close.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful to
the Permanent Representative of Spain, Mr. Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, for his briefing on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We would like to thank
him personally and all of his Spanish team for their
successful and conscientious leadership of a difficult
subsidiary body of the Council this year. We are looking
forward to fruitful cooperation in future.
We note the important and useful work of the Group
of Experts and its Coordinator, Mr. Terence Taylor,
which has given significant support to the work of the
Committee on a daily basis. This year saw some major
outreach events in the work of the Committee. These
events, including the successful holding of a training
course for the 1540 points of contact in the Asia-Pacific
Region and the development of cooperation with the
African Union for the purposes of recruiting technical
assistance providers for African States, will help to
effectively implement the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004). It is fundamentally important for the
1540 Committee to be able to effectively play the role
of a central coordinator of efforts to implement the
resolution and to determine the aims and objectives of
this assistance.
There is no doubt that the main goal in 2015 of
the Council’s subsidiary body was to prepare for the
Comprehensive Review of the Status of Implementation
of Resolution 1540 (2004). The aim of this Review is to
identify existing shortcomings in collating, processing
and disseminating information, to improve the
predictability and systematic nature of work, to foster
coordination within the Group of Experts, and to find
ways to improve the effectiveness of the work of the
Committee as a whole. Currently, in cooperation with
Member States and specialized international agencies,
we have developed modalities for holding the Review.
In this regard, we hope that all the necessary work will
be carried out and conducted in an effective and timely
manner.
Resolution 1540 (2004), which was developed in
2004 by the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, is the main universal international document
in the area of weapons of mass destruction and
non-proliferation. It obligates all countries to establish
effective national control systems to prevent weapons of
14/19

22/12/2015

mass destruction and their delivery systems and related
material from being acquired by non-State entities. This
is of crucial importance, given the numerous regional
conflicts that are being exploited by the numerous
terrorist organizations for their interests as they strive
to gain access to weapons of mass destruction. This has
been confirmed, for example, by the challenges that
the Islamic State is posing for the world, and by the
challenges presented by other terrorist organizations in
Syria and Iraq.
We are against attempts to water down the central
role of the Committee or transfer part of its functions
to non-specialized and regional structures, the business
community and non-governmental organizations.
We consider that there is a need to clearly determine
the areas where such structures can make a concrete
contribution to achieving the aims and objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004), but we underscore that the
international and legal responsibility for implementing
this important Security Council resolution is borne by
States.
For our part, we are planning to continue to actively
participate in the work of the Committee. We are
counting on the constructive and fruitful cooperation
of all partners, in the interests of the fullest possible
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004), so that weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems are not obtained by non-State entities.
In the light of the upsurge of the terrorist threat and the
danger of toxic substances and other types of weapons
of mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State
structures, the aims laid out in the resolution are more
pertinent than ever.
If I may, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Permanent Representatives of Nigeria, Jordan,
Lithuania, Chile and Chad.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): I will be very brief. At
the outset, we would like to thank Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing, which contained
relevant information.
Like other delegations, we are concerned about
the possibility that non-State actors may manufacture,
acquire, possess, develop, transport, transfer or
use weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery, in particular for terrorist purposes. We
therefore agree with the idea contained in the briefing
that the world should prevent a surprise terrorist attack,
especially one using weapons of mass destruction.

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

As a member of the Security Council, Angola
reiterates its willingness to work with the Committee
towards the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile would like to thank you, Madam, for convening
this open meeting to examine the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we would like to commend
the work of the Ambassador of Spain in the Security
Council’s non-proliferation committees.
Resolution 1540 (2004) was a milestone whose
drafting my country contributed to in its prior
membership on the Security Council. We value the fact
that under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations it responds to the threat of the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons in the hands
of non-State actors. Almost 12 years later, the threat
continues to be as present as ever, and the very idea
that non-State agents could have access to weapons of
mass destruction is a source of great concern. In this
period, we have managed to raise the awareness of
the international community about the terrorist threat
and the serious dangers of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, thus facilitating implementation,
assistance and cooperation.

S/PV.7597

to focus on the financing of proliferation, a topic on
which much remains to be done.
In 2016, Chile will host a training course for
the focal points in the region, and we, together with
Colombia, will undertake the development of a
voluntary national plan of action and a peer review. We
also recently coordinated a retreat for Working Group
I on international monitoring and implementation. For
us, it is a matter of commitment, because whatever any
Member State does or does not do can have an impact
on collective security.
As Chile’s term as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council for 2014 and 2015 will end in a
few days, we would like to express our gratitude to all
those who have supported us in our effort to contribute
to maintaining international peace and security. I
would like to thank my colleagues, the Permanent
Representatives and their teams, the whole United
Nations system, particularly the Secretariat, the staff of
the Security Council Affairs Division, the interpreters
and naturally, civil society, which has provided us their
perspectives on the ground.

While we have made progress in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), there remains much to be
done, so we need to take advantage of the political
opportunity offered in 2016, when the Comprehensive
Review of the Status of Implementation of Resolution
1540 (2004) is carried out, in accordance with paragraph
3 of resolution 1977 (2011). The resolution requests
the same of all States, but no country is the same as
another. On the other hand, many countries have
reported on the measures adopted, but we know that
the adoption of measures does not necessarily imply
proper implementation. Those are issues to consider in
the comprehensive review.

Although we must continue moving forward to
address the effectiveness, transparency and coherence
of the Council, I believe we have contributed to
achieving that, in such measures as the adoption of the
code of conduct, the declaration on abstention from
the use of the veto, and the recent joint draft letter
of 16 November from the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Council aimed at moving forward on
the process of appointing the next Secretary-General.
We hope that the Council’s transparency will continue
to be reflected in the formal wrap-up sessions in the
Council Chamber, so as to allow Members States to
participate equally and record their statements, which
can accompany the respective presidency’s informal
briefing, interactively updated during his term.

The challenge that the resolution dealt with when
it was adopted has changed. In the course of the
comprehensive review, the Council will need to assess
whether it would be appropriate to agree, for example,
on a new mandate for the Committee and its Panel of
Experts that would grant them greater flexibility to
act more proactively. Indeed, a preliminary analysis
of the data reveals a disparity in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) among the various regional
groups. It is therefore necessary to enable a more
flexible and proactive role that would include a regional
focus on assistance and cooperation. It is also important

We trust that the Council will continue its in-depth
focus on the protection of civilians and the most
vulnerable populations and on resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions that maintain efforts
to eradicate the use and recruitment of children,
accompanied by the troop-contributing countries,
all within the perspective of the contribution that
inclusive development makes to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The critical situations
on the Council’s agenda require additional efforts
to make it possible to respond in a timely fashion to
the needs brought to its attention and to deal with the

15-4465315/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

abuses and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, guaranteeing and ensuring that it will
fight against impunity and reconciliation on situations
for which we assume responsibility.
The President: I thank the representative of Chile
for his leadership on the Council for the last two years
on a host of issues.
I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
the representative of the United States, with regard to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
I again thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun
Marchesi for his informative briefing and his deep and
personal commitment to this set of issues and for his
leadership as the 1540 Committee moves through a
period in which there is an appeal for more to be done
and for all of us to combine our efforts to ensure that
the Committee receives the support needed with regard
to enforcement and implementation.
There are few areas of such immediate and direct
relevance to the maintenance of international peace
and security as the efforts of Member States to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). The recent terrorist attacks
across the world have made clear the willingness of
violent extremist groups to inflict mass suffering.
Those attacks underscore why it is essential that
the international community keep weapons of mass
destruction out of their hands.
We have made important progress since resolution
1540 (2004) was adopted in 2004. Some 174 countries,
90 per cent of Member States, have reported on the
measures that they have undertaken to implement the
resolution. But I agree very much with other Council
members and with the Ambassador that, given the
human stakes and the demonstrable malevolent intent
of many non-State actors, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, we have to do more. Resolution
1540 (2004) has a global mandate, backed up by Chapter
VII obligations, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations. However, the Committee has not yet had to
rely on such measures in order to achieve its objectives.
Instead, it has engaged in dialogue with Member States
and incrementally built up support for an international
climate of non-proliferation through cooperation.
In the Security Council, where political infighting
all too often stands in the way of finding consensus, the
1540 Committee shows what can be achieved when such
16/19

22/12/2015

differences are put aside. The Committee is generally
united on key issues and works as a team to effectively
carry out its mandate. Under Spain’s leadership this past
year, the 1540 Committee has made significant strides
in promoting full implementation. For the first time
since 2010, the Committee completed an assessment
of all Member States on their implementation of the
resolution. That was an arduous and highly technical
effort. That monitoring and accountability allows
the international community to measure progress in
combating proliferation and the means of delivery of
WMDs and to identify those areas in which we are
coming up short, the areas to which we must pay the
most attention.
Furthermore, the Committee has made important
strides to increase transparency. It will soon publish
online its data set on Member States’ implementation
of non-proliferation obligations, creating one of the
world’s best information troves on the issue available
to the public. Again, that is essential for accountability
and for improvements. The Committee increasingly
uses social media and public-service announcements,
ensuring that the public is not only better informed, but
also that the key actors, such as parliamentarians and
civil-society partners, can help the Committee achieve
its aims. Under Spain’s direction, the 1540 Committee
developed and has started executing its plan for the
completion of a second comprehensive review of the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We look forward to robust participation of all States
and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and industry in the review
process.
The United States encourages the review to generate
recommendations in the following areas, among others:
closing the persisting gaps in implementation in the
areas of biosecurity, chemical security, export controls
and proliferation financing; making national reporting
and Committee monitoring more regular and more
robust; and improving the assistance process so that
more States can implement the resolution. I have heard
that a lot of States complain that they have been unable
to gain assistance to remedy their reporting problem.
In addition, we must develop better mechanisms for
effective engagement by the Committee and Member
States with parliamentarians, academics, industry
experts and civil-society members in combating the
proliferation of WMDs, especially to non-State actors,
and making the Committee more effective and efficient
in fulfilling its mandate, especially by identifying
15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

priority tasks for the Committee to complete by the end
of its current mandate in 2021.
Since the last briefing on non-proliferation before
the Council in June (see S/PV.7469), the United States
has continued to strengthen its efforts to combat
proliferation by ratifying four important international
non-proliferation instruments: the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism and two Protocols to the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation. As has been noted, the
United States will also convene the fourth international
Nuclear Security Summit beginning on 31 March 2016
to advance global measures to secure nuclear materials
and facilities. By meeting the obligations of the
resolution, every Government can do much to reduce
the vulnerability of the entire international community
to the threat.
The United States looks forward to continuing to
work closely with our colleagues and our allies and
partners and everyone on the Committee and on the
Council to deepen and broaden implementation of and
support for resolution 1540 (2004).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
December, although we are hoping to convene another
again shortly on Libya, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the United
States to the members of the Council, especially my
colleagues, the Permanent Representatives and all of
their staffs and to the secretariat of the Council for all
the support they have given to us. I am not sure that
this was the month that everybody bargained for, but
it was the month that fortune handed us, and we got a
lot of business done. The Secretariat, the interpreters
and others must be truly exhausted, so we would like
to thank them. I saw the Arabic interpreters fanning
themselves earlier, which suggests that it is even worse
up there than I thought. In 2016 we must deal with the
conditions in the interpretation booths. We thank them
all. As one of the faster speakers here, who tries to
cram a lot in, I feel great sympathy for the interpreters.
I feel I commit human rights abuses every time I give a
speech, so our thanks go to the interpreters, who have
done a tremendous job all of this month and all year.

S/PV.7597

On behalf of everyone here, I would like to wish
Uruguay the best. It is not easy to come onto the
Council and immediately take over the presidency, but
we have every faith in the great Uruguayan team and
all the support that all of us intend to give them as they
preside over the Council in January.
I would now like to say a few words to the Council
members who are departing. I often say to my own team
that life lived prospectively on the Security Council can
be very frustrating. One can feel as if one is watching
paint dry and that we are not making enough progress.
We are reminded of that every day by the human toll
that is taken when we are unable to reach consensus,
or when we reach consensus but our resolutions are not
implemented. Sometimes, however, it is better to live
life retrospectively, and to look back on what has been
achieved over a longer period of time. I think all of us
could benefit from doing that more often. I would like
to single out each of the departing Council members.
Chad has focused on peacekeeping issues. It is a
country that knows of what it speaks, because it has put
its troops in harm’s way in extremely difficult missions,
particularly in Mali, where 18 Chadian peacekeepers
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali have been killed. Chad
has led the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
and we have just received another example of its
commitment, which we will work on until the end of the
month. We are not giving up on the month of December.
Chad has also emphasized — in my view, really moving
the ball down the field — the relationship between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, including through the open debate it
organized (see S/PV.7343). Although we were not able
to take a trip to Burundi this month as we had hoped,
it looks as if we will be taking one in January, and
not a moment too soon. I think that trip will bear the
hallmark of Chad’s influence on the Council, because
we are thinking very carefully about how to do it in
conjunction with the regional and subregional efforts
that are under way. Even though Mr. Cherif will not
be on the Council next year, his voice will be with us
inside our heads.
I would also like to commend Chad for the steps
it has taken at home to eradicate the problem of child
soldiers, which has given it a position from which it
can lead. It is a very difficult issue, and Chad has done
a great deal to ensure that its army does not include
child soldiers and that recruits meet the minimum age

15-4465317/19

S/PV.7597

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

22/12/2015

requirements. Chad has taken that issue and has led
with it here on the Council and in the broader United
Nations community, and that is very important.

steps we are taking. I believe we have only just begun
to think about what it means to really target our efforts
to that population.

Chile has made international justice a hallmark
of its time on the Council, and that could not be
more important. Its work culminated in resolution
2256 (2015), on the international tribunals, which we
adopted today, but it has also banged the drum in every
context on the issue of the protection of civilians. In the
Arria-Formula meeting held earlier this month, Chile
took up the issue of the responsibility to protect and
non-State actors, which has not had enough attention.
The open debate it organized during its presidency on
the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7374) was on an
important subject, but so was Chile’s voice in every
discussion we have had, reminding people of the fates
of civilians. For Haiti, although the work is not done and
the elections have gone forward, Chile has also been
one of the most important voices here, helping to lead
and shape the trip that we took to Haiti as a Council
13 months ago. I do not know whether we would have
predicted that the elections would have gone as well as
they have, but I commend Chile for its leadership there
and regarding the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti itself.

I did not think, when Ambassador Murmokaitė
joined the Council, that her part of the world would take
centre stage. It is unfortunate that it has and that events
in that region turned so dark and deadly, although,
fortunately, not in Lithuania. However, I can say that
her courage and her voice will be remembered by the
people of Ukraine, I know, in addition to whoever the
groupies are who watch United Nations Web TV. Her
performance and truth-telling has been a signature
feature of her leadership here. I would also like to thank
her for breaking a seal, in terms of Council meetings,
by convening the first-ever meeting of ministers of the
interior to look at border controls and foreign terrorist
fighter flows (see S/PV.7453). I think we are going to see
more and more of that happening at the United Nations,
and it will always be Lithuania that led the way.

In addition, I will always value the privilege I had of
presiding together with Chile over the first-ever Council
meeting on lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
(LGBT) issues, and I am eternally grateful for Chile’s
leadership on that. It was a harrowing briefing on what
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is doing to
LGBT persons, and not one that anyone in the United
Nations community will forget, I think.
Having Jordan on the Council, reminding us of
the human toll that the Syrian conflict is taking and of
the fact that Jordan has shouldered such an enormous
burden, along with Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq, is
extremely significant. The fact that Jordan was also a
penholder on the Syrian humanitarian resolution was
one of the main reasons we were able to secure the
international border crossings in the way that we did.
Having now renewed the agreements on those border
crossings, we credit Jordan greatly for its leadership.
I would also like to thank Jordan for its leadership
on the signature issue of violent extremism, and for
the way it has drawn the attention of the Council and
the United Nations family to the issue of youth and
extremism — pointing out that if we do not get that
right, we will not have success with any of the other

18/19

In addition, Ambassador Murmokaitė has given
much attention to the protection of journalists. Her work
organizing the meeting on small arms (see S/PV.7442),
over which she presided, along with the support of many
Council members here has been tremendous, and she
has been incredibly vigilant on the sanctions issue as
it relates to some very serious crises in Africa. I know
that she will be working right up until 31 December to
try to ensure more progress.
Finally — and I am grateful to all for indulging
me, but the people who are leaving the Council are
amazing — I turn to Nigeria. Ambassador Ogwu is the
voice of reason — as she just described, she is the only
person here who quotes Shakespeare from memory,
and I have never heard her repeat a Shakespeare quote,
which suggests that she has memorized the complete
works, and I congratulate her on that. This past year of
Nigeria’s time on the Council has been a very difficult
period for the country, with the advances of Boko Haram
and, of course, the urgent need to mobilize international
support for Nigeria’s efforts to fight Boko Haram in
every area, not just militarily. In addition, Nigeria
has just shown the world something very important
through its peaceful transition of power from President
Jonathan to President Buhari. That role modelling is
probably more important than any resolution we adopt,
as it shows a leader handing over power democratically
and in accordance with term limits. That is inherently
stabilizing. During its time on the Council, Nigeria has
given attention to security sector reform and to dignity.

15-44653

22/12/2015

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Nigeria showed its leadership on Ebola, both within
the country — by acting as a role model in eradicating
the epidemic when it briefly sneaked in, showing the
world how it could be done and giving people confidence
in how the epidemic could be defeated — and also by
using its leadership in the Council to rally the United
Nations community around the issue.
I just wanted to thank all those Council members.
Those are just a few of their achievements. I am sure
they have different versions of their own narrative
history, but this is from just one observer who has had
the privilege of listening to them. I became Ambassador
to the United Nations in August 2013, so it was just

S/PV.7597

in January 2014, when the five who are departing now
came onto the Council, that I was finally learning my
way around. I feel that I have grown up in the Council
with them and could not have learned more or dreamed
of having five better colleagues for the past two
years. They care so much, and it shows in everything
they do. I thank them and wish them well, as I do the
incoming members, who will, I hope, amass the kinds
of achievements that these great leaders and public
servants have amassed in their time on the Security
Council.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

15-4465319/19
