UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2487’”

MEETING:

NEW

25 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. ... ... .. ... .. ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ...

1

. ... .. .. .... .. ... .. ... ... ... ... . .... ... .. ... ...

1

The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16067) . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2487)
Adoption of the agenda

WPV.2487

~_

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2487th
Held
President: Mr. Abdullah

MEETING

in New York on Tuesday,
SALAH

25 October

(Jordan).

from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua to the President of the Council. The first is in document S/16067. Members of the Council have received
photocopies of the second, which will be distributed as
document S/16072 at 0600 hours tomorrow.

Present: The .representatives of the following States: .
‘China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

4. The Council has before it document S/16068, which
contains the text of a letter dated 25 October from the
representative of the Libyan’ Arab Jamahiriya to the President of the Council, and document S/16069, which contains the text of a letter dated 25 October from the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua to the Council Resident.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2487)
1. Adoption

1983, at 3.15 p.m.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16067)

5. Council members have received photocopies of the
following communications, which will be distributed as
Council documents at 0600 hours tomorrow: two letters
dated 25 October from the representative of Saint ,Lucia,
which will be issued under the symbols S/16070 and
S/16073, respectively; a letter dated 25 October from the
representative of Grenada to the President of the Council,
which will be issued as document S/16075; and a letter
dated 25 October from the representative of the United
States of America to the Council President, which will be
issued under the symbol S/16076.

The meeting was cahed to order at 11.10 p.m.
Adoption of tbe agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 irom tbe Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragtia addressed to tbe
President of tbe Security Council (S/16067)

6. The first speaker is the representative of Mexico. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letters from the representatives of Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Grenada, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico and Venezuela in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

.7. Mr. MmOZ
LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, I welcome the fact that you are
presiding over our work with the effectiveness and impartiality which have always been your hallmark.
8. I wish to thank the members of the Council for being
so kind as to meet the request of the Government of Mexico so that we could take part in this debate, which is of
direct concern to the countries of our region. The events
that bring this about call to mind painful precedents in the
history of the Latin American peoples and come in the
wake of conflicts and tensions that severely affect peace
and security in Central America and the Caribbean.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacobs (Grenada),
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Roa Koun’ (Cuba), Mr.
Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico) and Mr.. Martini
Urdaneta (Venezuela) took the pIaces reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

9. The Council has been convened in an acute emergency. It would have been desirable for this meeting to
have been held before the events that, we regret, actually
happened. There are important antecedents of preventive
action by the Council which, although they may not
always have prevented the rules of the Charter from being
violated, have served to alert international public opinion
and to guide the subsequent action of this body.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
3. The Security Council is meeting in response to
requests contained in two letters dated 25 October 1983
1

10. We shall continue to stress the need for the Council
to take up, in due time, consideration of imminent events
which fall within its purview. For about a week things were
happening in the southern Caribbean which led one to
suppose that there was a threat to the integrity of Grenada.
Unfortunately,
the Council was in no position to act as
early as would have been desirable. We are facing fairs
accomplis. A military force of the United States, supported
by Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica, Jamaica,
Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, has
disembarked on the territory of Grenada and begun hostilities against. its inhabitants, invoking arguments, both general and particular, which are totally unacceptable.

17. The events to which we refer are part of a cycle of
threats and pressures designed to limit the exercise of
national rights by peoples in the region. Appeals to harmony and the promotion of a multi-faceted order which
could reconcile and include the processes proper to each
Central American nation and each Caribbean nation seem
to be less and less heeded by those who seek to impose
from without an order suiting their own interests.
18. We are living through a particularly difficult time,
when the tendency to use force in the quest for new balances of power is becoming more acute. This is happening
because of an alleged fragile nuclear paralysis and takes
the form of continual acts of aggression against developing
countries which lack the means necessary to provide for
their own defence. Should such escalation continue, the
enforcement of the Charter of the United Nations as a
whole would be left pending. Expectations for independence and progress among the developing countries would
be null and void. Collective security would be in disarray
everywhere and the possibilities of universal conflagration
would be increasingly close.

11. What we have here is a clear violation of the essential
norms of international law. This is a flagrant act of aggression against the territorial integrity of a State. It is obvious
interference in the internal affairs of another country and a
manifest denial of the right of peoples to selfdetermination.
12. Mexico unreservedly condemns the intervention ‘and
the military invasion, which lack any justification. The
events to which I refer are unquestionably a violation of
the basic principles of the United Nations, in particular
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter, where it is set forth
that Members shall refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State.

19. It is essential to put an end to this race for strategic
and military dominaiion by the imposition of political
models and the dominance of ideological dogmatism. Political reason must be brought to bear, together with a spirit
of civilized coexistence; and diplomatic means and the
norms of international law must be invoked as invariable
guidelines for the conduct of inter-State relations.

13. Under regional agreements, there can be no way to
,legitimize such events. The charter of the Organization of
American States, in article 18, provides that “No State or
group of States has the right to intervene, directly or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or external
affairs of any other State.”

20. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (inrerprerationfi-om Spanish): Today international public opinion has been shocked
by international press dispatches concerning the implementation of previously formulated plans by the United
States Administration to invade the small island of Grenada, with the political assistance and the symbolic presence
of military forces of other countries in the region, designed
to give its action the appearance of legality-legality which
it obviously lacks.

14. No convention or subregional understanding can run
counter to those rules. The act of the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) only provides for collective defence measures against external aggression, based
explicitly on Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides as a requirement for such measures the existence of an armed attack from outside, which
clearly is not the case. None of those instruments authorizes,.furthermore,
the intervention bv another State in the
.
internal affairs of the region.

21. This is a manifestation of the principles on which
United States foreign policy rests. It is-an expression of the
danger that the concept of “vital interests” of the United
States has come to constitute for countries that, for reasons of their own development, have removed themselves
from the sphere of United States domination and have
become independent nations. But, above all, it is a concrete form of the concept of international legal order that,
with the mentality of the present United States Govemment, takes into account only the security of that country,
to whatever degree its leaders, with their idea of morality,
wish to take it.

15. The international community has repeatedly appealed
to all States to make a positive contribution to a peaceful
negotiated settlement to the disputes in Central America
and the Caribbean. The efforts made by various Latin
American countries to this end must be supported by the
cessation of foreign interference and a total prohibition of
the threat or use of force..

22. Grenada is a State in the international community, a
member of the Organization of American States (OAS)
and a Member of the United Nations. The fact that it
belongs to sub-regional organizations does not in any way
detract from or affect its duties and rights under the Charter of the United Nations and other norms of international
law. It is not, nor could it be, the purpose of these subregional organizations to encourage or facilitate the violation of the principles and norms of international law or to

16. Considering the delicate consequences that these
events might have on future developments in the region
and on the internal processes of the Latin American countries, we urge the Security Council to take the necessary
measures to have foreign troops withdrawn immediately.
The people of Grenada alone is allowed freely to decide its
form of government; without foreign interference.
2

make distorted and ill-intentioned
ties and conventions in force.

interpretations

of trea-

23. The President of the United States, in a desperate
attempt to give legality to the interventionist military
actions against Grenada, has invoked the Treaty Establishing the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, of
which Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Monserrat. Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines are members. It is unacceptable to invoke or interpret that treaty as allowing for the
creation of a situation of intervention in Grenada’s internal affairs.
24. It is significant that today the United States is. as
President Reagan himself said this morning, basing its
invasionist activities on a treaty to which the United States
is not a party.
25. It might be worth asking the United States delegation
this question: since when, according to the international
legal order, has it been lawful for several countries to get
together and agree to invade another country with which
they are not in a state of war and to which only internal
difficulties can be ascribed?

30. Nor can we disregard the risk that all the independent countries of the world run when, against all legal
logic. absolutely irrelevant treaties are invoked to support
de fucro situations that constitute infringements of all universally accepted concepts of sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence, while, on the other hand,
agreements and treaties that call for a certain kind of international behaviour are ignored.
31. It is clear that in this case all the pretexts adduced by
the United States Administration
are inadmissible-that
is, the protection of United States citizens on the island,
the prevention of greater chaos and helping in the restoration of order, governmental institutions and democracy.
32. Yesterday, President Reagan’s spokesman said that
United States citizens were not in any danger in Grenada.
Furthermore, relatives of the United States citizens resident in Grenada asked the United States President not to
take any steps that might put’their lives in danger.
33. It would be hard for interventionist troops to avoid
eventual chaos and restore order in Grenada when their
real purpose is to impose plans for subjection and forms of
Government which meet the strategic American interests.
We must recall that these are the purposes of the restoration of democracy, “American democracy”; they are the
same as those which underlay the American interventions
in Guatemala, Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Chile
and which at present underlie the overt and covert actions’
being carried out against the State of Nicaragua.

26. Might it not then be logical to think that the recent
meeting at which the Central American Defence Council
(CONDECA)
was reorganized-the
meeting held in Guatemala under United States auspices-was
the prelude to
an invasion of Nicaragua and El Salvador, which could
open the way to a prolonged war between the Central
Americans and the United States?

34. In any case there is no possible argument to justify
this shameless intervention against a sovereign State.
There are means and methods sanctioned by international
law of which a State can make use in situations of disputes
among two or more States, but none of these contemplate
the right of intervention. The United States has available
to it a number of legal instruments, treaties and conventions that it could use in a civilized manner to settle the
disputes or difficulties in which it considers itself involved.

27. The United States has called for a meeting of CONDECA this week in Tegucigalpa. The military leaders of
Guatemala and Honduras, together with the head of the
Southern Command of the United States in Panama, have
an appointment in that city at the very moment when
thousands of United States soldiers are occupying Honduras and there are 17,000 other troops in the fleet of ships
stationed off the coasts of Nicaragua.

35. Article IV of the Convention of 23 December 1936,
to which the United States is a signatory and by which it is
therefore bound, establishes the rights of States in the
event of disputes. Perhaps it is not too late to learn lessons
applied elsewhere in the world. Article IV states:

28. I revert now to the attempts to justify action that is
indefensible from any point of view. Article 14 of the charter of the Organization of American States states: “The
right of each State to protect itself and to live its own life
does not authorize it to commit unjust acts against another
State.” We do not understand how the United States
Administration
can try to evade the real meaning of that
rule, set forth in a legal order of which it is a signatory.

“The high contracting parties further agree that, in
the case of a dispute among two or more of them, they
will seek settlement in a spirit of mutual respect for their
respective rights, being able for this purpose to have
recourse to direct diplomatic negotiations or alternative
processes of mediation, commissions of inquiry, commissions of conciliation, arbitration courts and courts
of justice, according to what is provided for in the treaties to which they are parties. They further agree that, if
settlement of the dispute is impossible by diplomatic
negotiations and if the States in order to reach a settlement must have recourse to the other procedures provided for in this article, they shall inform the other
signatory States of that fact and of the progress of the
negotiations.”

29. We maintain that to prevent the State of Grenada
and its people from exercising the rights conferred on them
by the OAS charter, in article 3, and to prevent them from
enjoying the protection of Articles 2 and 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations and the protection of other relevant
provisions of international law, is obviously unjust; and
those who allow the United States to carry out such an
interventionist-invasionist
act on their behalf share the
historic responsibilities flowing from the commission of
such an act.
3

,

36. By intervening militarily in Grenada, the United
States has also violated the Anti-War
Treaty (NonAggression and Conciliation),’ signed at Rio de Janeiro on
10 October 1933, article I of which states:

“The American States bind themselves in their international relations not to have recourse to the use of
force, except in the case of self-defence in accordance
with existing treaties or in fulfilment thereof.”

“The High Contracting Parties solemnly declare that
they condemn wars of aggression in their mutual relations or against other States and that the settlement of
disputes and controversies
shall be effected solely
through the peaceful means established by International
Law.”

39. Finally, Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations states:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”

Article III of the same Treaty of Non-Aggression and Conciliation, to which the United States is a party and by
which it is therefore bound, reads as follows:

40. All the aforementioned treaties and conventions have
been duly signed and ratified by the United States, whose
State Department has included them among the treaties in
force at present. This means that, in accordance with Article VI of the United States Constitution, these are the
supreme law of the land, a concept which involves the
obligation of members of the Government of the United
States to abide by them and to implement them. Hence it
derives from their violation that the present United States
Administration
has not only placed the United States in
the category of a State which is internationally delinquent
but also has led the United States to violate its own Constitution and laws.

“In case any of the States engaged in the dispute fails
to comply with the obligations set forth in the foregoing
Articles, the Contracting States undertake to make
every effort in their power for the maintenance of peace.
To that end, and in their character of neutrals, they
shall adopt a common and solidary attitude: they shall
exercise the political, juridical or economic means authorized by International Law; they shall bring the influence of public opinion to bear; but in no case shall they
resort to intervention either diplomatic or armed. . . .*’
‘37. The Government of the United States, with this invasion of Grenada, has also violated the Convention for the
Maintenance,
Preservation
and Re-establishment
of
Peace,2 of 23 December 1936, which has been in force and
binding upon the United States since 25 August 1937. Its
Additional Protocol relative to Non-intervention3 states
the following in article I:

41. The fact that the use of force is increasing is alarming, together with the use of military intervention and
interference in the internal affairs of States. Governments
hostile to the emancipation of peoples continue to violate
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries.
42. As this time, we only have to remember some of the
most relevant aspects of the history of acts of aggression
and intervention by the United States against Latin America. I shall be very brief and give just a few fundamental
examples. In 1846, President Polk ordered troops to
occupy the territory claimed by Mexico in what is now
Texas, thus beginning the Mexican war. The United States
annexed the land under dispute, besides California and
New Mexico, after its victory in 1848. In 1854 American
Marines destroyed the Nicaraguan port city of Greystone
in order to avenge the holding of an American minister in
that country. In 1855, the freebooters of William Walker
came to Nicaragua for the purpose of annexing the whole
of Central America to the southern states of the United
States. Walker proclaimed himself president and established slavery in Nicaragua-real
slavery. That same year,
Colonels Kinneys and Fabens, in active service, proclaimed the so-called independence of San Juan de1 Norte,
sovereign territory of Nicaragua.

“The High Contracting Parties declare inadmissible
the intervention by any one of them, directly or indirectly, and for whatever reason, in the internal or external affairs of any other of the Parties.”
38. Furthermore, the United States has violated the following provisions of the charter of the Organization of
American States. Article 18 states the following:
“No State or group of States has the right to intervene, directly or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in
the internal or external affairs of any other State. The
foregoing principle prohibits not only armed force but
also any other form of interference or attempted threat
against the personality of the State or against its political, economic, and cultural elements.”
.

In invading Grenada, the United States has also violated
Article 20, which reads as follows:

43. In 1873-just to give a few of the most signal datesduring the struggle of Panama to gain independence from
Colombia, American troops intervened in that country.
There were similar disembarkations
in 1885, 1901, 1902
and 1903. In 1898 the navy blockaded Cuban ports in the
Spanish-American War, in which the army and volunteers
were also involved. In 1904, the Marines disembarked in
Ancon and other points in Panama. That was the year that

“The territory of a State is inviolable; it may not be
the object, even temporarily, of military occupation or
of other measures of force taken by another State,
directly or indirectly, on any grounds whatever. . . .”
That means: not even for five or six days. Article 21 of the
same charter reads as follows:
4

Theodore Roosevelt drew up the “Roosevelt Corollary”,
in other words, the policy of the-great stranglehold. In
1909, the United States intervened in Nicaragua in order to
overthrow the Government of General Jose Santos Zelaya
through the “Knox Note” of ill-fame. In 1914, in order to
ensure Haiti’s payment of a loan, the navy disembarked on
the island, marched to the National Bank and took half
the gold to the’united States. In 1914, President Wilson
ordered the navy to bombard and take the city of Veracruz
during undeclared.host.ilities against Mexico.

47. The representative of the United States in this’council on 25 March 1983 [2423rdmeetz$+this
year, in other
words-in
accepting the interventionist, ill-fated policies of
her country said that, fortunately, it was a new nation and
had set aside any interventionist practice a long time ago.
She similarly stated that “the United States indeed has no
intention of invading anyone or of conducting an armed
action against anyone, or of occupying any other country”* [ibid., pm-a. 1681. Those words were spoken just a
few short months ago in this same Security Council in
reference to the region of Central America and the
Caribbean.

44. In 1926, after abandoning the country for a few
months, the Marines came back to occupy Nicaragua. This
new military occupation lasted until 1933, when the Yankee troops were obliged to withdraw in the face of the
heroic resistance of the defending army of national sovereignty led by August0 Ctsar Sandino. In 1954, the United
States, through the Central Intelligence Agency, overthrew
the Government of General Jacob0 Arbenz in Guatemala.
In 1961, the American military mission led a coup against
a civilian-military junta in El Salvador of a nationalist
character, and there was an invasion of Cuba in the Bay of
Pigs by an army of exiles under the auspices of the United
States which ended in failure. In 1964, American troops
based in the Panama Canal Zone attacked a nationalist
demonstration and murdered 30 Panamanians. In 1965,
22,000 troops disembarked in the Dominican Republic
during civil unrest in that country. In 1979, the Secretary
of State of the United States, at the 17th OAS meeting for
consultations, called for a military intervention in Nicaragua to foil the popular Sandinist victory. American helicopters landed in Costa Rica in a plan to interfere in our
war of liberation.

48. It is also worth recalling the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
which highlighted the importance of giving special attention to and persisting in endeavours to find peaceful settlements to disputes arising among member States of the
Movement. It was stated that many such disputes and
differences were exacerbated by former colonial Powers or
were the outcome of imbalances imposed from outside,
rather than a deliberate intent on the part of the States
concerned to kindle animosity between them. Efforts to do
away with such conditions and to establish equitable relations among States were one of the main motivations for
the establishment of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
49. Today, mankind as a whole has witnessed the sincerity and “good will” expressed by the United States in the
Security Council a few months ago. Grenada has been
invaded and its people are being massacred. Innocent
blood is being shed and the security of all the people of
Grenada is imperiiled.

45. This history of interventions, placed side by side with
the treaties and conventions under which the United
States is bound and which it has violated, leads us to ask:
by what right have we been so vexed? by what right have
we been invaded? by what right has the status of protectorate been forced upon us? It has always been on the theory
of the national security of the United States, excusing its
acts of intervention for the protection of United States
citizens, the protection of innocent lives, holding back
chaos, helping to restore order and to create United Statestype institutions, thus bringing, as a result,.such policies
and doctrines as manifest destiny, the Monroe Doctrine,
the great stranglehold and dollar diplomacy.
46.

50. In this regard, I should like to read out the communique issued by the Ministry of External Relations of the
Republic of Nicaragua as a result of today’s events. It
reads as follows:
[The speaker
S/16069.]

read the text of the annex to document

51. The United States has shown its true colours once
again. How long will mankind passively stand by in the
face of these genocidal acts? The invasion of Grenada is a
direct and inexcusable attack on peace-loving peoples and
countries. We vigorously urge the Security Council to condemn that flagrant violation of the basic principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

General Smedley D. Butler vaunted the following:
“I spent 33 years and four months in active service as
a member of the mobile military troop of my country:
the Marine Corps. During that period I spent most of
my time working in high financial affairs for Wall Street
and bankers. In sum I was an extortionist at the service
of capitalism. I helped make Mexico safe for American
oil interests in 1914. I helped make Haiti and Cuba
decent places for the National City Bank boys to collect
revenue in. From 1905 to 1912 I helped purify Nicaragua for the international banking -house of Brown
Brothers. I brought light to the Dominican Republic for
American sugar interests in 1916. I helped to make
Honduras ripe for .the American fruit companies in
1903.”

52. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I
obviously listened with interest to the extraordinary statement of the representative of Nicaragua which we have just
heard. I should like to say that the United States does not
accept as accurate, as a description of our role or of any
conditions in the world, the statements of the Government
of Nicaragua either in their letter to the President of the
Security Council or in the remarks they just made.

*Quoted

5

in English

by the

speaker.

53. The United States would have preferred not to speak
at all tonight and would not have, had there not been such
an extraordinary distortion of our history, our policies and
practices, and also of theirs. We are interested that the
Government of Nicaragua is so agitated tonight, and agitated once again with fantasies of being invaded by the
United States. I should like to say that in the realm of
psychopathology
those concerns are well understood.
They fall in the realm of projection, and those who are
subject to them are countries, for example, which cannot
imagine behaving in any other way than in the ways they
accuse others of behaving.

group. Once again, of course, the familiar disregard of
history was present. The United States did no such thing. I
found it interesting to hear him reproach the United States
for lack of respect for the sovereignty and national independence of neighbouring States. In fact, the United States
is meticulous in its respect for the sovereign rights of our
neighbours and also for their national independence. We
respect even the rights of our neighbours to make serious
mistakes, as when they choose governments like that of the
Government of Nicaragua.
60. We listened with interest as we heard the representative of the Government of Nicaragua reproach the United
States Government today with every act ever committed
by any citizen or even any inhabitant of our country since
we either were or were not discovered by Columbus some
500 years ago. He mentioned William Walker, the interventions that-this
is amusing-presumably
prevented
Panama’s successful rebellion against Colombia. Of
course, he forgot then to mention that the United States
had also intervened in an earlier phase to help Panama
establish itself in a rebellion against Colombia and to help
it establish itself as an independent State.

54. It is doubtless true that the Government of Nicaragua cannot imagine a Government having great strength
and not using it against hapless, helpless neighbours. The
Government of Nicaragua, having small strength, uses it in
an uninhibited fashion against its neighbours and, imagining that everyone and ail countries would behave in that
way, is obviously concerned about having more powerful
neighbours. It is trapped in the fantasies of dictatorships
and locked-as
Thomas Hobbes said-in a restless striving after power that ceases only in death.
55. The fact is that the United States really does not
require lectures in constitutional law and the observation
of treaties from the Government of Nicaragua. We are
quite aware of the status of treaties in our own constitutional system, and we are a Government of laws. We freely
and resolutely submit ourselves to our laws, to the disciplines of our laws and our courts, our legislatures and our
populations who elect those legislatures to hold us to our
own values and our promises.

61. The fact is that the relevance of these historic events
in our country-some
of which are indeed reprehensible,
some of which are not reprehensible, and all of which
constitute an absolutely biased and hysterically distorted
history of the western hemisphere-again
testifies only to
the lack of any capacity for history as well as for present
analysis. It never occurred to me in my most reflective
moments, or condemnatory ones, as I reflected on the
policy of the current Government of Nicaragua, for exampie, to reproach it with all of the crimes of the Somozist
predecessors. It never really occurred to me to reproach
the current Government of Nicaragua with all of the
crimes of the oligarchs who governed that country for
centuries and who repressed the peasants of that region. It
never even really seriously occurred to me to reproach our
Soviet colleagues for the excesses of some of their czarist
predecessors.

56. As I have said here before, we could hope nothing
better for the people of Nicaragua than that they be permitted, as a free electorate, to discuss their public issues, to
choose their representatives, to elect their governors, to
discuss public issues and to make their decisions.
57. I found it very interesting to hear the representative
of the Nicaraguan Junta describe the various provisions of
the Rio Treaty and the treaty of the OAS to which his
Government, as well as mine, is a signatory. The Govemment of Nicaragua will, of course, have an opportunity to
discuss those questions tomorrow in the OAS, where the
OECS will be discussing the issues involved in the tragic
events in Grenada.

62. But the representative of Nicaragua has introduced
into our considerations here new standards of relevance.
And so, at midnight tonight, we can reflect not on the
events in the eastern Caribbean, not on the organization of
the Government of Nicaragua or of its policies, and not on
its more recent history, when it made solemn promises to
the OAS, which promises it exploited and then discarded,
and when it made solemn promises to its own people,
which promises it profited from and then has cast aside
and forgot. Frankly, it would not have occurred to me to
discuss any of these issues at midnight, nor do I propose to
linger over them. I do recommend, however, that if our
colleague from Nicaragua is seriously interested in these
questions of the application of the amendments and provisions of the Rio Treaty and the OAS founding act, that he
pursue that in the appropriate arena, which, of course,
happens to be the OAS.
--.
~-63. Finally, I should like to say simply that the United
States regrets the fact that we are meeting here tonight in
clear violation of bourgeois conceptions of fairness to dis-

58. I found it interesting to hear the representative of the
Government of Nicaragua describe as unacceptable the
decision of the States of the eastern Caribbean to invoke
the treaty which binds them in a pact of mutual assistance
as well as mutual respect for sovereignty, and he seemed to
suggest that their size, the fact that they are small States,
somehow rendered it inappropriate for them to have
linked themselves to each other by treaty relationship, and
even more inappropriate for them to have invoked the
treaty which they had written and signed for their mutual
protection.
.---. .------ _._..-.. -------.
--. - --~__
59. I found it interesting to hear him refer to the United
States having convoked a meeting of the CONDECA
6

cuss this issue. We would have thought it more appropriate, as I said to my colleagues in informal consultations, to
have conducted our discussions tomorrow morning, perhaps tomorrow afternoon, even to have honoured the normal practices of the Security Council and to have provided
the head of State of the presidency of the OECS the opportunity to be present at the debate in which they are so
deeply involved and by which they are affected.

Community
community.

(CARICOM)

and in the wider international

70. As a general principle, Guyana is willing to participate in the mobilization of CARICOM
forces to defend
the integrity of any CARICOM
State against an external
aggressor. We are no less willing to participate in any
CARICOM
peace-keeping force in certain circumstances
and under agreed terms of reference.

64. The Security Council in its wisdom decided otherwise, reminding us once again perhaps that bourgeois conceptions of fairness are just that-bourgeois,
liberal,
democratic conceptions of fairness. But so then, of course,
is the conception of the Security Council itself a residue of
a liberal, democratic, bourgeois civilization and dream-a
dream of nations meeting together, committed to peace,
dedicated to the pursuit of fairness, ready to judge one
another by the standards to which they are willing to
submit.

71. With specific regard to Grenada, however, we were,
and continue to be, opposed to participation in any military invasion of Grenada, since such action constitutes
interference in the internal affairs of that State.
72. We were of the view that the despatch of a factfinding mission to Grenada, composed of CARICOM
nationals, could be a helpful step. The point of contact for
such a fact-finding mission would, of course, be the
Governor-General
as the legal authority of Grenada. We
believe that the fact-finding mission, or whatever mechanisms to be agreed upon, should rest on certain clearly
defined principles, among them: that no external elements
should be involved in the search for a solution to the
Grenada situation; that the solution should be regional in
character, that is, formulated within the framework
of
CARICOM;
that any solution must be fully in accordance
with international law and with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations; and that the primary purpose of
any regional solution would be the restoration of normalcy
in Grenada.

65. This meeting tonight, and most especially the
extraordinary
statement of our Nicaraguan colleague,
reminds us that these may indeed be outdated notions. But
if these are outdated notions, so is this an outdated
institution.
66. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Mr. President, it gives me
pleasure to extend to you the sincerest congratulations of
my delegation on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council in this troubled month of October. When
we consider your patience and your well-known
diplomatic skills, my delegation feels confident that the responsibilities of the Council under your stewardship will be
efficiently and effectively discharged. The satisfaction
which my delegation feels at seeing you presiding now is all
the greater because of the relations of great friendship and
solidarity which happily exist between the Governments of
Jordan and Guyana.

73. The hostility which the United States Administration
has felt towards the Government of the late Prime Minister
Bishop and American concern about who Grenada’s
friends were are no secret to anyone in this chamber. What
my delegation finds painfully disturbing is the fact that, at
a moment when the States of our region are intensifying
their efforts to have the Caribbean recognized as a zone of
peace and to strengthen the security and independence of
the States of our region, some of my CARICOM
colleagues appear, by their action, to be endorsing this hostility towards Grenada and to be concurring in outside
intervention in the affairs of the region. Such action can
only be harmful to our region.

67. I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my appreciation to all those delegations which have paid
tribute to me for my discharge of the duties of the presidency during the month of September.
68. In a statement issued in Georgetown on 20 October
last, my President, Forbes Burnham, made public the deep
grief and sense of shock which the people of Guyana felt at
the death of the Prime Minister of Grenada, Mr. Maurice
Bishop. Since those events, the situation in Grenada has
deteriorated materially. There is now on Grenadian soil a
foreign invasion force whose actions have led to great loss
of life and extensive damage to property. Guyana, therefore, considers the convening of this meeting to be most
timely. My delegation wishes to express its sympathy to the
bereaved people of Grenada and also of Cuba on the
losses they have today sustained.

74. A policy of choosing governments for others and
meting out punishment to those which are considered
unacceptable is as alien to the political traditions of the
Caribbean as were the disturbing events which occurred in
Grenada last week. Guyana is not aware of the existence
of any instrument or arrangement which authorizes intervention in any Caribbean State. Grenada posed no threat
to any of its neighbours. My delegation understands that
all foreigners on the island were safe and that at no time
was their welfare in question.

69. Guyana has maintained a principled approach to
the recent tragic events in Grenada. While expressing our
profound grief at these developments, we nevertheless
nourished the hope that the people of Grenada would
seek to heal its wounds and, as a united nation,
tetermine its future destiny within
the Caribbean

75. According to the Chancellor of St. George’s Medical
College, American students had begun leaving the islands
since yesterday afternoon without harassment or intimidation. The action being taken against Grenada is therefore
in clear violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations, which states:
7

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.‘*

79. This Declaration enjoys the total support of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries beca& its principles are principles which have historically been a cornerstone of the Movement. We felt it was necessary to set
them out in lucid declaratory form, as another protection
for small States which are invariably the victims of aggression and intervention.

76. My delegation has had cause to state in this forum in
the past, and feels the need to so repeat, that in the relations between States, the strictest respect must be shown
for the principles of international law. That is our only
guarantee of peaceful and stable inter-State relations.
Intervention as an instrument of State behaviour was long
ago outlawed by the international community.

80. My delegation has this evening introduced a draft
resolution [S/Z6077J which approaches the current situation in Grenada strictly from the perspective of the Charter of the United Nations, the time-honoured and sacred
principles which lie at the heart of otir international Organization, and the obligations on all States strictly to abide
by these principles in their international behaviour.

77. In 1970, the General Assembly, by resolution 2625
(XXV), adopted the Declaration on-Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. That Declaration, taking the Charter
as its point of departure, solemnly proclaimed the principle
that States shall refrain in their international relations’
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United
Nations. It also sets forth the principle that States shall
settle their international disputes by peaceful means in
such a manner that international peace and security and
justice are not endangered.

81. Among other things, the draft resolution condemns
the armed intervention in Grenada and calls for the immediate withdrawal
of the invading forces. It calls on all
States to show the strictest respect for Grenada’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and requests the
Secretary-General closely to monitor the development of
the situation and to report to the Council, within 48 hours,
on the implementation of the resolution.
82. We are convinced that this draft resolution represents
a worthy and credible response by the Council to the dangerous and critical situation existing in Grenada today. We
remain open to receiving comments, observations and suggestions which could enable us to enhance the effectiveness
of this response.

78. In December 1981, the Genera1 Assembly, by resolution 361103, adopted the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs
of States. That Declaration sets out, in unambiguous language, the duties comprehended in the principle of nonintervention and non-interference. Those duties include:

83. The tragic events of today give rise to implications
and to concerns for all members of the international community. It is patently clear from the history of the Latin
American region, dating back to the start of this century,
that military interventionist policies do not resolve problems; in fact, those policies most often serve to perpetuate
and to exacerbate problems and to create new problems.
The real danger is that militaj actions mightr result in the
creation of a new hotbed of tension, thus generating
greater instability within the region.

“The duty of States to refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force in any form
whatsoever to violate the existing [international] . . .
boundaries of another State, to disrupt the political,
social, or economic order of other States, to overthrow
or change the political system of another State or its
Gdvemment, to cause tension between or among States
or to deprive peoples of their national identity and cultural heritage;

84. The members of the Caribbean Community, which
includes all the members of the OECS and other members
of the expeditionary force, have long stated their acknowledgement that ideological pluralism is a reality and must
be respected. The explanations advanced are at great variance with that stated belief for today’s intervention. The
need to tolerate other people’s choice of developmental
paths and choice of political strategy is the basis of respect
for ideological pluralism. Thus the view expressed that the
Government of Maurice Bishop was alien to the political
environment of the Caribbean is a thinly disguised attempt
by some States to impose their choice of political strategy
upon another State. It is no coincidence that the chosen
instrument for their imposition and intervention was the
very super-Power which is diametrically opposed on ideological~grounds to the Bishop Government. The question
which now arises is whether the intervention is a reaction
to events taking place after Mr. Bishop’s death or whether
it is designed to ensure the total demise of his legacy.

6‘
.

.

.

“The duty of a State to refrain from armed intervention, subversion, military occupation or any. . . form of
intervention and interference, overt or covert, directed
at another State or group of States, or any act of military, political or economic interference in the internal
affairs of another State, including acts of reprisal involving the use of force;
-. . .
“The duty of a State to refrain from any action or
attempt in whatever form or under whatever pretext to
destabilize or to undermine the stability of another
State or of any of its institutions.“4
8

-

85. Guyana is genuinely concerned at the dangers which
the present intervention generates. For when States arrogate to themselves the right to seek help to destroy the
Governments of those States whose policies they find disagreeable, then who among us can feel safe? The claim has
been advanced that this intervention is in pursuit of peace
and democracy, but is not the true test of democracy in
international relations the ability to tolerate those who do
not follow our every whim or fancy, or the whims and
fancies of our partners? If the international system cannot
find it democratic and just that the small, the poor, the
weak be protected .from the powerful and from others,
then I fear that, far from being democratic, we are instead
submitting to a Hobbesian system which recognizes only
the powerful and the fittest and their interests. Democracy
has thus been poorly served in Grenada today.
86. With regard to the future, my delegation sees the
adoption and implementation of the draft resolution we
have proposed as a first step towards restoration of the
normalcy in Grenada which we all desire.
87. The PRESIDENT
(interpreturion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Grenada. I call upon
him.
88. Mr. JACOBS (Grenada): I should like to start my
presentation by reading the text of a telex that was sent
from the Revolutionary Military Council of Grenada to
the Embassy of the United States in Barbados on 24 October. The text is as follows:
“It is our information that at a meeting of some
CARICOM
Governments in Port of Spain, Trinidad,
on Sunday, 23 October 1983, some of the participating
Governments decided on establishing a military force to
invade Grenada. In their decision they called for direct
participation of extra-regional forces in invading Grenada. We are concerned because in many reports the
name of the Government of the United States of America has been mentioned as participating in such a military force to invade our country. We also have concrete
information that for the past 18 hours two warships
have been patrolling between 12 and 15 kilometres off
the shores of Grenada, well within our territorial
waters.
“We would view any invasion of our country,
whether based on the decisions of those CARICOM
Governments, or on that of any other Government, as a
rude violation of Grenada’s sovereignty and of intemational law. Furthermore any such invasion can only
lead to loss of lives of thousands of men, women and
children. Therefore we strongly condemn such a
decision.
“The present situation in Grenada is of an entirely
internal and domestic nature, and presently peace, calm
and good order prevail in our country. For these reasons we do not understand the basis or the reasons for
the reported violent reaction of some Caribbean and
other Governments. We view any threat or the use of
force by any country or group of countries as a gross

and unwarranted interference in the domestic affairs of
our sovereign and independent country.
“Grenada has not threatened and is not threatening
the use of force against any country, and we do not
have such aspirations. Our armed forces and people are
fully prepared to courageously defend the sovereignty
and integrity of our country with dignity and determination. However, we are not seeking military confrontation with any country or group of countries, but, on the
contrary, we are prepared to hold discussions with
those countries in order to ensure good relations and
mutual understanding and with a view to maintaining
and strengthening the historic ties with all of these
countries.
“We are also concerned about the reports that the
Government of the United States of America is considering sending battleships to evacuate citizens of your
country presently residing peacefully in Grenada. We
reiterate that the lives, well-being and property of every
American and other foreign citizen resident in Grenada
are fully protected and guaranteed by our Government.
However, any American or foreign citizen in our country who desires to leave Grenada for whatever reason
can freely do so using the normal procedures through
our airport and commercial aircraft. As far as we are
concerned, these aircraft can be regular flights or charter flights, and we will facilitate them in every way we
can.
“We have been further informed that 500 parents of
American students studying in Grenada at the St.
George’s University School of Medicine today met in
New York and unanimously agreed on a resolution calling on the United States of America not to take precipitate and provocative action against Grenada. We have
also been informed during the last two hours”-at
that
time it was 2 a.m.--” by Dr. Geoffrey Bourne, Vice
Chancellor of the St. George’s School of Medicine,
where most of your U.S. citizens are based, that less
than 10 per cent of these students wish to leave Grenada
at this time. In fact Dr. Bourne stated this in his own
voice on Radio Free Grenada in a telephone conversation with the newsroom less than three hours ago.
“We further assure you that any U.S. and other foreign citizens who choose to leave Grenada in the coming days and who wish to return to Grenada in the
future are welcome to do so. We are for peace, friendship and for maintaining the historically established ties
between our countries and hope they would grow and
strengthen.
“We further take this opportunity to inform your
Government that the Revolutionary Military Council of
Grenada has no desire or aspiration to rule the country.
We are presently beginning the process of establishing a
fully constituted civilian Government within 10 to 14
days. Such a Government
would be broad-based,
expressing the interests of all social classes and strata in
our country. We have already held discussions with our

local Chamber of Commerceand industry, commercial

bank managersand hoteliers as part of the processof
constituting such a Government. Our civilian Government would pursue a policy of mixed economy, with
State,’ co-operative and private sectors, and would
encourage foreign and local investments within the
framework of the national interests of the country.
“In closing we wish to state once more that there is
absolutely no basiswhatsoever for any country launching an invasion on our beloved homeland.”
89. I said that that text was sent to the United States
Embassy in Barbados on 24 October. As we meet on the
morning of 26 October, we are faced with a very grave
situation in the Caribbean-one which has been directly
brought about by the intervention of the United States in
the sovereign and independent country of Grenada.

94. Nevertheless, let us explore that latest justilication.
There are some very interesting facts which have emerged
and which we need to be clear on in regard to this alleged
treaty. In the first instance, in referring to the treaty, Mr.
Reagansaid that it had beeninvoked by the easternCaribbean parties to it becausethose Stateshad thought it necessary to intervene in Grenada in order to restoresomesense
of democracy there. Such a concept cannot be acceptedin
this body becauseno one personor one nation hasa detinition of “democracy”, as our friends from Guyana have
correctly pointed out. This body has ,on many occasions
accepted the principle of plural ideology among nations
within it.
95. But, more than that, we must also look at the spurious explanation that was presentedby Mr. Reaganin the
company of Eugenia Charles for the intervention by the
United States in association with some of these eastern
Caribbean States.They said they were invoking article 8 of
this treaty. The text of that article has been circulated to
many membersof the Security Council and I know that
many of them have read it and are very baffled at how and
under what pretext or circumstancesit could be invoked as
an excuse to intervene in Grenada.

90. Many of us have been hearing various excusesput
forward for such action. Perhaps the most frequent is the
statement that United States citizens were in danger in
Grenada. Of course, from the text of the telex I have just
read out, it is very clear that we had already assuredthe
United States that no such danger existed. But further
evidenceexists suggestingthat it waswell known that there
was no such danger to any United States citizens in Grenada at this time.

96. As outlined in article 8, it is very clear that intervention can come only if there is a request from a member
Government for such intervention and only if there is a
threat of external intervention against that particular
Government. I ask all members’ofthe Security Council to
look at that article for themselves,and they will have to
search extensively to try and find any justification within
that article for intervention by forces of easternCaribbean
States in association with the United States.

91. I can quote to the Council this evening a radio messagetelephoned from the sameChancellor of the University in St. George’s, when he spoke to radio and televison
reporters today here in the United States, in which he once
again said unequivocally that there was never any danger
to United States citizens or students associatedwith St.
George’s Medical School. Chancellor Modica said that
any lives that may be lost in Grenada could only be on the
hands of the President of the United States.

97. However, I think that isjust another smokescreenfor
what is really happening in Grenada today, and I believeit
is very important that we all be very clear on what is going
on. There is no doubt in anyone’s mind as to who is really
behind the invasion of Grenada. Talk of a multinational
force is a joke-an absolute joke-because over 95 per
cent of the forces presentin Grenada tonight are from the
United States, and those forces are there in keeping with
what has been the policy of the United Statestowards the
people and the revolution of Grenada since 13 March
1979.

92. I think it is very clear that the pretext of protecting
United States citizens was nothing more than a smokescreen that was put forward by the United States Govemment as an excusefor intervening in Grenada. In fact, this
morning the President of the United States, Mr. Reagan,
made a statement in which, despite the evidence, he once
again said that one of the main reasonsfor United States
troops having intervened in Grenada was to protect the
safety of American citizens-in the face of the statement
by Mr. Modica, in the face of the statementsthat had been
coming over radio and television for sometime, in the face
of the statements of his own offtcials who visited from
Barbados just two days ago and confirmed the safety of
American citizens in Grenada.

98. I should like to sharewith the Council a brief chronicle of some of the reactions of the United States to the
Government and the people of Grenada during that
period, if there is any doubt in anybody’s mind about what
has taken place and for what reason. Nobody should be
surprised tonight at what has happened in Grenada.
Nobody should be surprised that it is the United States
that is in the forefront of the attack on the Grenada revolution. We simply have to look at the facts. Take the 1980
plot which was revealed in 1171e
WashingtonPost just six
months ago-a plot which detailed an attempt by the
United Statesto organize and execute the overthrow of the
Government of the People’s Revolutionary Government
of Grenada. We have to keep in mind too “Ocean Venture
1981” and “Ocean Venture 1982”, which included, among
other things, “Amber” and the “Amberines”-an exercise

93. But deception has becomethe nameof the game,and
so it was not surprising that Mr. Reagancarried the deception one step further. He has now tried to convince the
world that he has intervened with United States troops
under the alleged clausesof the Treaty Establishing the
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States-to which,
incidentally, as our Nicaraguan friends mentioned, the
United States has never been a signatory.
IO
\

that involved the mock invasion of an island off the coast
of Puerto Rico called Vieques, an island very similar to the
island of Grenada. It is not mere coincidence that the
troops of the United States that are in Grenada tonight are
those same troops that took part in those activities in
“Ocean Venture 1981” and “Ocean Venture 1982”, the
Rangers.

allowed to pursue its policies without the dictates. of
another country, much bigger, thousands of times the size
of our country, trying to tell us what we must do?
105. All of us must ask ourselves this, all of us, because
the United States is one of the biggest countries in the
world, and Grenada is one of the smallest, and many of
the countries represented by those present in the chamber
tonight, though bigger than Grenada, are much smaller
than the United States. If today the United States can
invade Grenada and impose a Government to its liking,
international law has collapsed and the world will turn to
anarchy. We cannot allow ourselves to sit back idly and let
that happen.

99. We must be very clear on what is taking place in
Grenada tonight, and we must understand very clearly
that this is part of the activity and the plot the United
States has been pursuing for some time. That is very clear.
100. But we do not have to look to the ancient historyif one may so describe it-of the past two or three years to
see the evidence of what the United States is about in
Grenada today. We must look at statements coming out of
the Administration
itself. I listened to President Reagan’s
press conference yesterday morning, and I assume that
many members of the Security Council also listened to it. I
heard him state specifically that the invasion of Grenada
involving United States troops had been carried out at the
request of the OECS. He said that he had received that
request on Sunday and that he acted immediately. Yet
within an hour the Administration
publicly admitted on
radio and television that as long ago as last weekWednesday-preparations
for the invasion of Grenada
had been finalized. That is a matter of public record.

106. Speaking on behalf of the people of Grenada and as
a Grenadian, I am appealing to the international community to examine the situation very, very carefully. Whatever has happened in Grenada is an internal affair.
Whatever arms the Grenada people and revolution have
are arms to defend Grenada and the people of Grenada.
We do not have the tanks, the navy and the air force that
the United States is throwing at our people tonight, but we
do feel that we have an international reputation, which we
have demonstrated in international organizations over the
past four and a half years, that deserves consideration
when people look at what is happening. We have fought
consistently and with principle in all international organizations, as many of those present tonight know.

101. Later yesterday an Administration spokesman, Mr.
Speakes, was quoted on radio and television as saying that
actions against Grenada of both a covert and overt character had been stepped up considerably in the past two to
three weeks in anticipation of what took place in Grenada.

107. We have no desire to tight with the United States.
We have repeated that on many occasions, and, of course,
we repeated it again on 24 October this year. However, it is
very clear that in today’s world the United States has
decided that might is right, that nobody has the right to
decide his destiny unless the United States feels that it is
the correct destiny.

102. The evidence is very clear, and it all points in one
direction, the direction of the United States.

108. We appeal to the international body tonight to look
at that situation. I ask those present to search their souls
deeply and to ask themselves whether we can allow the
world to run in this fashion. In making that appeal I ask
the Security Council to condemn in the strongest language
possible what has taken place in Grenada.

103. As a result of this gross, flagrant violation of Grenada’s territorial integrity, the people of Grenada are tonight
suffering untold hardships. Despite reports being issued by
the United States, we have other reports that indicate
many deaths. We have been receiving reports from our
embassies around the world that as many as 700 people,
many of them civilians, have been killed as a result of the
attack launched by the United States.

109. More than that, on behalf of the people of Grenada,
who are tonight suffering an onslaught of untold terror, an
attack that is costing hundreds and perhaps thousands of
lives, I am asking the Security Council please to call for an
immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from our country. It is the only thing we can do. It is the only right thing.
It is not fair for us to be subjected to this vicious and
obviously planned attack. Twenty-one ships from the
United States are present in our territorial waters. Tanks,
bazookas and all kinds of sophisticated arms are being
thrown at our people.

104. It is well known that Grenada is a very small and
poor country. It is well known that we could never be
expected to be able to fight a country as big and as sophisticated as the United States. Therefore, it is not surprising
that we are suffering heavy casualties. But, despite these
things, we are continuing to fight and to resist the actions
of the United States, and we look to our friends and to the
international community generally to examine carefully
what is happening in Grenada today and to ask themselves
whether this is fair, whether it is the way in which to deal
with international affairs in 1983. Are we to return to the
period of the 1950s and 196Os? Are we to allow size and
power to determine whether or not a country has the,right
to pursue its policies as it has chosen? Have we reached
such a stage in the world today that no country can be

110. Reports tell of resistance, and I know that the
people of Grenada are resisting tonight. But we must ask
this international body to express its strongest condemnation, because, if we do not do that, what has happened in
Grenada today could happen to any one of us tomorrow,
and nobody can stop it once it starts.
11

111. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba, whom I invite
to. take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

United States consul at Saint George’s stated that the
United States citizens there, including the medical students, were perfectly well. The representative of the Grenadian Government stated the same to the diplomatic
representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom, affirming that anyone who wanted to leave the country would be able to do so without any problem as soon as
international flights were resumed on Monday.

112. Mr. ROA KOURf (Cuba) (interpretarionfiom
Spanish): On 20 October 1983, only five days ago, in the communique of the Communist Party and the Revolutionary
Government of Cuba-which
informed the Cuban people
of the unfortunate events which had taken place in Gtenada as a result of serious differences within the New Jewel
Movement led by Mr. Maurice Bishop and which came to
a tragic head on 19 October with the death of that individual and of several of his close assistants, all of them leaders
pf the Grenadian revolutionary process-Cuba
stated its
conviction that the situation brought about by these tragic
events would be exploited by imperialism against the
Grenadian revolution.

118. Not a single press report of the last five days! not
excluding those of United Press International, Assoaated
Press and other well known United States press agencies,
has indicated that a single United States citizen had in any
way been attacked, injured or so much as touched in
Grenada.
119. Furthermore, no Grenadian revolutionary has yet
appealed for help from the Caribbean countries which
have now leapt onto that country, like thieving jackals
onto the prey of the tiger, and much less from the Yankee
Government. These have all been the well-known
and
declared enemies of the Grenadian revolution since 1979.
No Grenadian revolutionaries have even turned to their
friends, to friendly countries, to help them solve the internal problems which have arisen in the last weeks and
months.

113. That conviction became a bloody reality in the early
hours of 25 October, when forces of the United States
Army and Marine Corps, along with a tiny group from
some Caribbean States which had disgracefully joined in
this act of aggression against a sister country, landed by air
and by sea in the city of Saint George’s and at other points
on the island with the intention of overthrowing the Grenadian revolution and of returning the country to its previous abject condition of a puppet of Yankee imperialism.

120. How can a treaty to which Grenada itself is a signatory be invoked to call on the imperialist Yankee Govemment to invade that tiny country when there is not a single
article in its text which can justify this perfidious aggression? Where is the threat to the security of the other States
signatories? Where are the foreign mercenaries-unless
they are the Yankee troops and the jackals unleashed by
their reactionary hangers-on and miserable lackies against
the people of Grenada-which
are referred to in article 8
of the treaty being invoked? Was that treaty, indeed, ever
registered with the United Nations? Everything points to
the contrary. Therefore, in accordance with Article 102 of
the Charter of the United Nations, that treaty cannot be
invoked before any organ of the United Nations. There-.
fore, even the shabby and minuscule fig-leaf with which
they are trying to hide their interventionist shame is useless
for their unspeakable purposes.

114. In a press conference held this morning, the President of the United States stated with unheard-of cynicism,
“This morning, forces from six Caribbean democracies
and the United States began to disembark on the island of
Grenada in the eastern Caribbean.” This, according to the
Yankee leader, was in response to the “urgent, formal
request of five nations members of the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States to help them restore order and
democracy in the island of Grenada.‘*
115. It was with such an altruistic motive, and at the
request of some members of an organization of which
Grenada is a founding member-but
to whose meeting
last weekend it was not, of course, invited-but
with the
express opposition of Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago and
Belize, that the imperialist United States Government,
along with Barbados and Jamaica-which
are not
members of that organization but have acted as supemumeraries in the aggression-recklessly
launched its
Marines and soldiers, who are, to use a word of President
Reagan’s, the real gangsters of his so-called democracy,
against the heroic people of little Grenada.

121. I shall not now make reference to the cries of the
hyenas that we heard this morning from Washington or
that were heard in the parliament in Kingston. The hyenas
will not doubt feel satisfied with the kind applause of the
tiger and the courtesies proffered in the retinue of
treachery. It will not be long before they have to settle
accounts with the peoples of the world, but we cannot fail
to condemn as cynical and false the various statements.
made today, in an attempt to justify the unjustifmble, by
the Secretary of State of the United States and by the
President of that country himself.

116. With characteristic impudence, the gentleman who
sent Yankee troops, so he said, to defend the independence
of Lebanon and who is now deeply mired in a shameful
intervention in the internal affairs of that country, said this
morning that he was taking action “constrained by events,
and in order to protect American lives”.

122. What is beyond question is that Grenada-an
independent, sovereign and non-aligned country and a full
Member of the United Nations-has
been the victim of an
act of armed, unprovoked, unjustified aggression in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law. It is beyond question that its territory has been

117. If what the representative of the Grenadian revolution said today before the Council were not enough, we
might also recall that yesterday-or,
I should say, the day
before yesterday, for we are now into 26 October-the
12

treacherously and brutally invaded by foreign forces led by
a permanent member of this Council, the United States of
America, which had not the slightest shame in once again
trampling under foot the principles of this Organization.

127. Thus Mr. Kissinger headed a mission to Central
America precisely in order to declare that the only solution
to the problems of Central America was the military one.
And let the representative of the United States deny this if
she can.

123. With incredible gall, its representative in this Council informed the Secretary-General today in a letter
[S/Z6076J that the United States was intervening to fill the
“‘dangerous vacuum of authority now existing in Grenada”, which was considered to be “a threat to the peace
and security of the eastern Caribbean*‘. What section of
the Charter author&s a State or group of States to
intervene in the affairs of another-state on the basis of a
supposed “vacuum of authority” in that State? What international legal instrument characterizes a supposed powervacuum in any country as a threat to the peace and
security of another State? Where does contemporary psychopathology piace such arguments?

128. It was the same United States that lauched the mercenary invasion of the Bay of Pigs against my country,
where it received its first great defeat in our continent. It
is the same United States which is the close partner of
the Israeli zionists and South African racists; yesterday’s, .
today’s and tomorrow’s enemies of the peoples of Asia,
Africa and Latin America; the defenders of aparzheid, the
Ku Klux Klan, the “Big Stick” policy and the policy of
force; the same country that dropped the atomic bomb on
Hiroshima because the Japanese are not white; the same
ones who dropped more bombs on the heroic martyred
people of Viet Nam then were used in the Second World
War; it was the same United States which in its “Ocean
Venture I” and “Ocean Venture II” in the occupied Puerto
Rican island of Vieques, as just recalled by Mr. Jacobs of
Grenada, rehearsed in minute detail today’s sinister invasion of Grenada.

124. Article 2, paragraph.4, of the Charter of the United
Nations unequivocally states:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.**

129. Those are the hangmen of the people of Grenada.
Look them in the face, because one day they will be
judged, just as the Nazi war criminals were at Nuremburg.

125. It is plain that the Government of the United States
and the countries that serve as its henchmen in this ignominious chapter of American history have grossly, forcibly
violated the political independence and territorial integrity
of Grenada, acting in a manner inconsistent not only with
the purposes but with the very letter of the Charter.

130. In the 20 October communique which I mentioned,
the Communist Party and the Revolutionary Government
of Cuba warned that we would not remove the group of
about 1,000 Cuban workers-among
them doctors,
teachers, technicians and the members of a small military
mission advising the Grenadian defence forces and giving
assistance to the country-so as to avoid disruption of
services essential to the population, although we would
carefully examine future political relations with the new
leaders of Grenada. It was precisely that group of Cubans,
to whom Prime Minister Maurice Bishop had given light
arms so that they might defend themselves against the
oft-repeated threat of Yankee invasion, who in the early
hours of today were the object of a cowardly, treacherous
suprise attack launched by the Yankee army and navy,
equipped with artillery, infantry, helicopters and airplanes.

126. One need not have a very good memory to recall
how, in much the same way as it has acted in Grenada, the
United States invaded the Dominican Republic in 1965;
how it used other Latin American henchmen to justify its
intervention under so-called collective action; how, finally,
it utilized the docile rubber stamp of its worn-out colonial
office-also known as the OAS-to justify with the heading that insults the honour of our peoples its crime against
the Dominican people. It was the same United States that
invaded Mexico, taking more than 40 per cent of its territory, despite the protestations that we have heard today
concerning the United States alleged respect for its neighbours. It was the same United States that trampled underfoot the nations of Sandino, Hostos and Mart& conspired
in the last century against the great Latin American homeland of Simon Bolivar and set up house in Panama. It
occupied Haiti and attacked Honduras; it overthrew the
Governments of Jacob0 Arbenz in Guatemala and Salvador Allende in Chile. The same United States shores up
genocidal Governments in El Salvador and Guatemala
and shamelessly commits acts of aggression against Nicaragua from neighbouring territory, threatens Cuba and
proclaims military solutions for Central American problems in response to the peoples’ rebellion against the famine, poverty and exploitation to which they have been
subjected by the dominant oligarchies and Yankee monopolistic interests.

131. The Revolutionary Government of Cuba has issued
eight reports concerning the situation of the construction
workers and advisers. The first indicated the commencement of the aggression, announcing that ‘at 0904 hours,
Cuban time, on 25 October, an undetermined number of
Cuban personnel were killed or wounded*‘.
132. Beginning with that first report, the Revolutionary
Government has kept the Cuban people informed of developments, as is its custom, stressing the heroic resistance of
that small group of Cubans who had gone to that sister
country to help it build a just and democratic society after
the overthrow of the corrupt Yankee puppet Mr. Gait-y.
Together with the Grenadian people, they were steadfast
in their defence of Grenada’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence, even in the face of superior forces and equipment.
13

133. At 2000 hours New York time on 25 October I
received the following messages which had appeared in an
official communique to the Cuban people, and which I
read out this afternoon--or
rather, yesterday aftemoonto the Secretary-General, on instruction of my Govemment:

their own future and to work for the political, economic
and social system which they have freely chosen, and
demands the unconditional and immediate withdrawal of
American troops and their henchmen from the territory of
Grenada.
137. The Security Council cannot allow the policy of
aggression of the present United States Administration to
govern the fate of the international community, whether in
the Middle East, in southern Africa or in Latin America.
The Council must see that the rule of law and justice prevail, for the security of all States, including the small,
heroic island of Grenada which has been invaded. The
monstrous events of today can be repeated tomorrow in
any other country, in any other part of the world, unless
the hand of the aggressor is stayed. The crime committed
today in Grenada can be repeated tomorrow in Nicaragua,
in Cuba, in El Salvador, in Angola, in Namibia, in any
other place. The international community must give
serious thought to the risk involved for all Member States
if this act of aggression against a Member State is left
unpunished.

“As a follow-up to earlier information, the people are
informed that at 1345 hours the chief of the Cuban
construction workers and advisory personnel, Colonel
Pedro Tort016 Comas, who had arrived in Grenada on
a working visit yesterday, Monday, to take charge of all
the Cuban personnel, reported that Yankee troops had
taken one construction worker prisoner; they stated
that they were not looking for problems with the
Cubans and that therefore they were proposing the surrender of all Cuban personnel Colonel Tort016 confirmed, however, that they would not surrender but
would await the Commander-in-Chiefs
instructions. A
few minutes later, jeeps armed with machine guns and
cannon approached with Cuban hostages in front of
them. Cuba responded: ‘we congratulate you for your
heroic resistance. The Cuban people is proud of you.
You must not surrender for any reason. If the enemy
sends Government representatives, listen to them and
make your views known.’ The reply of Colonel Tort016
at 1423 hours, Cuban time, was: ‘Commander-in-Chief,
we shall carry out your orders and will not surrender.
Fatherland or death. We shall overcome.* ”

138. Cuba-which,
together with the vast majority of the
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
alerted world public opinion to the danger of invasion and
aggression which hung over the Republic of Grenada just
a few weeks ago, at the ministerial meeting at United
Nations Headquarters-cannot
but express indignation at
the constant flouting of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and the repeated use or threat of force by
the Government of the United States. That Government,
further, violates instruments that the United States itself
has brought into being, such as the Inter-American Treaty
of Reciprocal Assistance, signed at Rio de Janeiro in 1947’
and already smashed to pieces when it joined with the
United Kingdom in its military venture against the Malvinas Islands.

134. At 2300 hours, New York time, on 25 October, just
a few minutes ago, I received communique no. 8 from the
Revolutionary
Government of Cuba, which reads as
follows:
“The people were informed at nightfall of the continuing heroic resistance of our construction workers and
advisers in the face of the attacks of the Yankee armed
forces. The revolutionary morale and the determination
to defend themselves with dignity were unswerving.
According to various reports, the Grenadian combatants are continuing to offer tough resistance.”

139. We hope that members of the Security Council will
fulfil their obligations under the Charter and that, like
Mexico and Guyana today, Latin Americans firmly condemn this act of aggression against a small American
country which, in the highest tradition of Juarez, Marti
and Bolfvar, has rejected the degrading yoke of servitude
in favour of “the star that illuminates and kills”. We hope
to see the Council adopt the draft resolution submitted by
Guyana.

135. That is the attitude of the Cuban construction
workers and advisory personnel. Our people sent them to
Grenada to work with our brothers on that island to build
a better future, free from exploitation, illiteracy and unemployment and from subjection to imperialism. We sent
them there to build, together with the unforgettable Maurice Bishop, an airport so ardently desired by the people of
Grenada-the
airport which the United States had refused
to finance and whose soil has been spattered with Cuban
blood. All that blood, together with that of the Grenadian
patriots, will forever suffocate, like that of Danton, the
representatives of empire and those who join them in their
crafty and cowardly aggression against our Caribbean
brothers.

140. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
141. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (inferprefation from Arabic): Mr. President, I thank you for giving me
this opportunity, as representative of a small country and
small people, to express our opinion concerning these dangerous events which we are witnessing.

136. Cuba unequivocally condemns the invasion carried
out by the United States against the Republic of Grenada
as a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and of international law. Cuba reiterates the right of the
people of Grenada, and of all peoples, freely to determine

142. I ask myself-because
I am indeed baflled-are
we
at the end of the twentieth century? Is this really the end of
the twentieth century or are we in the eighteenth or nine14

teenth century? Are we living in a jungle, or are we living in
a civilized world? What are the laws which govern us? Are
they international laws, international norms, the Charter
of the United Nations, or the law of the jungle, the law of
the cowb,oys? It is our right and it is the right of everyone
to pose such questions.
143. What is the future of the Charter which has been
desecrated and trampled by the feet of the aggressors, the
invaders who, until this very moment, are butchering the
sons of the people of tiny Grenada? What is the meaning
of peace? What is the meaning of principle and freedom?
144. We have heard the voice of the victim. We have
heard the representative of the people of Grenada, 100,000
people who are being subjected to murder, who are being
massacred on their own land. Their only sin is that they
have chosen their own system, a system which does not
satisfy the United States of America, the largest Power on
earth, because the United States wants these small peoples
to become their agents. They want to stifle the voice of
those
small
-__-_-.--..-.--countries._ _._.__...__..__...___ _. ~~.
145. Grenada, this small country, is constructing an airport so that it may be exploited for tourism. This is a great
crime, a crime because the United States cannot permit
Grenada to construct an airport, and the President of the
most powerful country in the world has repeated the
danger posed by the airport of that small country whose
population does not exceed 100,000. The danger posed to
the United States, to the security of the United States? This
is indeed a shame and a farce. If I were the representative
of the United States, I would be ashamed to speak and to
defend such a policy.
____
146. How does the United States justify its invasion of
Grenada? To defend its citizens? Its citizens, according to
the reports of its emissaries, are facing absolutely no
danger. Arc they defending democracy, restoring democracy to Grenada? What kind of democracy? Is this the
democracy of Bishop who, from the beginning of his revolution up to the last moment, faced plots hatched by the
American Administration? He visited this country personally so as to establish normal relations with the United
States, but this was rejected; he wascondemned and plots
were fomented against him. What is the democracy which
the United States wishes to restore to Grenada? The
democracy of the jungle? The democracy of the Marines?

gain an easy victory-and this easy victory will be Grenada, a small country with a population not exceeding
100,000,which is lessthan the population of one or two
New York skyscrapers.The United States must achieve a
victory becausethe President requiresthis for his electoral
purposes. Of course, he does not shrink from sacrificing
.thousands of Grenadians on the altar of American elections. This is the law of the jungle. What useis there for
values and principles?
148. The United States Administration says that it was
called upon to take this action by neighbouring countries.
This is a new rule in international law that could be used
tomorrow against Libya, if a certain country requestedthe
United States Administration’s intervention to changethe
regime in Libya, or Nicaragua, or any other small country.
As the representative of the Grenadian people-the
victim-has said, there are countries representedhere that
are larger than Grenada, but they are small when confronted by American imperialism. That is true. We shallall
face the samefate if this aggressionis not halted and condemned. What is the significance of the Security Council
after all this? The security of whom? The security of the
United Statesof America. If the task of the Security Council is to protect the United States in its perpetration of
aggressionand invasion, then it will have lost all meaning
and should no longer exist. If, on the other hand, its task is
to preservethe security of the peoples,of small countries,
then it should clearly say so and dischargeits duties under
the Charter-that is, if we can even say that there is a
Charter anymore. What kind of a Charter is it that is
trampled by the United States Marines in a small country
with a population not exceeding 100,000and with a surface not exceeding a dozen square kilometres?
149. What is the future of peace and security in the
world? What is the future of those peoples?Yesterday we
celebrated an anniversary of the United Nations. What
kind of gift did the United States give the United Nations?
A typical cowboy gift: attacking a small country with a
small population, butchering thousands of persons in .”
Grenada and occupying that island. This is indeed an
excellent gift from American imperialism. That is the way
the United States celebrated United Nations Day. These
are the values defended by the United States Administration.
150. I do not think that this is the time to talk about the
Charter-a time when the forces of evil and oppressionare
killing thousands in Grenada. I shall not even refer to
international conventions which have not been respected
by the American Administration but rather were trampled
under the feet of its soldiers,not in defenceof the rights of
Namibians against South African imperialism, not in
defenceof the Lebaneseunder the occupation of Israel, the
strategic ally of the United States, not in defence of the
right of peoples struggling for freedom; but to suppress
freedom and to kill weak human beings.

147. A few days ago we heard the United States President, Mr. Reagan, say that the French were defeated at
Dien Bien Phu becausethey did. not have the warship New
Jersey. But two days after he said this, over 200 Americans
fell victim to their Government’s policy-and yet the warship New Jersey was not very far away. The United States
President forgot to remind us that his country too was
defeated in Viet Nam at the hands of the Vietnamese
heroes.But the American defeat in the Middle Past at the
handsof the Lebanesepeople, in Lebanon, has shakenthe
United States Administration at home. The American
people and their representativesare crying out against this,
policy of international gangsterismand intervention. So
the United States Administration must find someway ‘to

151. Sometimes power is a source of self-respect and
deterrence. Where the United StatesAdministration is concerned, however, might is merely international gangsterism
and colonialism, the killing of Lebanese,and ultimately
15

the annihilation of a small country with a population not
exceeding 100,000. This is American policy. How much
longer will this continue? Yesterday Nicaragua and Libya,
the day before yesterday Viet Nam. Today Lebanon, today
the people of little Grenada, whose voice we just heard.
We are aware that this is perhaps the last time we shall
hear a free voice from Grenada. Tomorrow the United
States Administration will come up with a new, democratic Government to represent the Grenadian people, a
Government installed by the Marines. We do not know for
how long this American Marine Government will be in
power, but the representative of that people is their last
voice.

155. I do not think this is a time for words. It is a time for
deeds. I do not want to prolong this statement, as I do not
want to give additional justification or more time for the
United States troops to kill -more people of this small
nation.
156. Before concluding, I should like to read out a message addressed by the leader of our revolution to you, Mr.
President, and the members of the Council and to the
Secretary-General:
“What is unfolding today in Grenada has snuffed out
any hope for the peoples of small countries, such as the
people of Grenada, to live free on this earth. What is
taking place in Grenada is not only killing the freedom
of the people of Grenada but also murdering the civilization of the 20th century. It shows that it is a fraudulent civilization.

152. The representative of the United States has critized
the Security Council for meeting this evening. She says
that it should have waited until tomorrow. Indeed it
should have-because the operation has not been completed, because resistance continues, and the United States
Administration
needs some more time to discharge its
lofty humanitarian
task and kill the largest possible
number of people in Grenada. The Council was indeed
wrong to meet this evening; it should have met tomorrow
afternoon, as requested by the United States representative-and I would have hoped that she would be here to
listen to my remarks.

“The existence of a person like President Reagan at
the helm of a super-Power is an omen of the setting
back of humanity and a return to the era of barbarism,
the jungle and absurdity. The civiiization and freedom
of mankind are in their death throes and can be salvaged only through a worldwide international alliance
to confront the United States itself and to reaffum the
principles of humanity, freedom and justice in it, and to
exorcize the evil spirit and nazism from it, as they have
become a peril to the small nations and for intemational peace.”

153. Let us speak the truth, however bitter, however
dificult-especially
when the poor and the weak are
involved. How difficult it is to speak the truth. But we
must be courageous and speak the truth. We must say this
to the United States: you have committed aggression
against a small country. lhis aggression must be condemned. We must denounce the killing and destruction of
a small population. Condemnation may not suffice We
have heard repeated condemnations here. The United
Nations has adopted many resolutions condemning
United States policy. Has the United States complied with
any of them? Has it complied with resolutions of the Security Council, which it has paralyzed through use of the
veto? The United States Administration continues to com‘mit aggression and to encourage aggression.

157. The delegation of my country firmly condemns this
ferocious and barbaric invasion by the United States
Administration against the people of the small country of
Grenada. We demand the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of the invading forces from Grenada. We call
on the Council to establish a fact-finding committee, so
that the facts will be crystal clear to everyone and reveal
this barbaric invasion. We demand the right of indemnity
for the victim&d people of that small country as a result
of this barbaric invasion. Finally, I call upon you, Mr.
President, and the members of the Council to shoulder
your responsibilities at this critical moment, because not to
take any action could mean the beginning of the end of the
United Nations, its Charter and its principles and could
start a new phase, the phase of the law of the jungle, with
the strong gobbling up the weak, and hence the end of
humanity.

154. Angola is unable to have recourse to its Cuban
friends in order to defend itself against the South African
invasion, but the United States Administration is entitled
to restore and to defend democracy and individual freedom. The representative of the United States, instead of
telling us what indeed has happened in Grenada and why
it sent its navy to kill the people of Grenada, has tried to
gain time and to make accusations against another victim
of United States policy, the people of Nicaragua. The representative of the United States has delved into psychoanalysis and history. Perhaps the Grenadian. people are
psychologically sick and the United States wishes to treat
them with the remedy that the United States seesfit. Who
is really sick: one who has megalomania and the lust for
power, who sends his forces everywhere to kill the innocent? Or is it the representative here of a small nation
whose people are being butchered with the most sophisticated weapons, whose only fault is the desire to build an
airport and to have a government that does not please the
United States?

158. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): At this time the
Security Council is convened as a matter of urgency for the
consideration of an act of aggression committed by the
United States against Grenada. What we have here is an
open, armed interference by the huge military machine of
the Pentagon against a small sovereign State of the Caribbean, a non-aligned State and Member of the United
Nations. The massive invasion of the island carried out by
the United States Administration is a flagrant violation of
the most elementary rules of international law and the
lofty principles of the Charter of the .United Nations.
159. It is well known that yesterday the United States
perfidiously invaded the smallisland State, using large con16

tingents -of ground, air and naval forces. According to the
information received, the overt, completely unprovoked
and totally unjustified intervention against the people of
Grenada involves two United States operational and tactical groups which include approximately 20 naval vessels,
90 military aircraft and more than 2000 Marines. Having
been planned in advance, these operations are supported
by detachments of airborne units of the United ,States
Army. Mercenaries recruited in a number of the countries
of the region are also taking part in these operations.

Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet; Yuri Andropov, in describing the
foreign policy course of the present United States Administration, called it a militarist one which represents a grave
threat to peace, the essence of which is complete disregard
for the interests of other peoples and States and the
attempt to secure for the United States a dominant position in the world. The aggression against Grenada is a
fresh example of this.
165. The representative of the United States made a
rather signlicant statement by declaring the Security Council, and apparently the United Nations, to be an outdated
institution. .The United States, of course, is entitled to
adhere to this or that opinion concerning the United
Nations. We merely wish to draw attention to the fact that
this terminology was used in the past as well. It was used in
the 1930s when first militaristic Japan and subsequently
Nazi Germany and fascist Italy were abandoning the
League of Nations, declaring that institution outdated as
well. They left it because they needed to have their hands
free for their aggressive actions. Apparently the laurels of
those regimes leave no rest to some of the people in the
present Washington Administration.

160. Again, for the umpteenth time, the principles of sovereignty and independence have found themselves under
the heels of the United States Marines. As the basic motive
for the gross military interference the United States
resorted to the false excuse frequently used by Washington
earlier in various parts of the world, that of the protection
of American lives, although it is well known that American
citizens in Grenada were not threatened with any danger.
In short, the American intervention against Grenada was
covered up with exactly the same excuses as the intervention of the United States against the Dominican Republic
in 1965, and of course many other similar examples can
also be cited.
161. Yesterday morning from the White House one
could again hear the usual cynical philosophizing about
the “defence of democracy”, American style. As in other
parts of the world where peoples are trying to follow their
own independent way, the path to such “democracies**, of
the Samozist and Pinochet type, is opened up with the
bayonets of the United States Marines. It is quite clear that
the actions of Marine units and of the airborne troops are
designed, first of all, to bring about a restoration of United
States domination of the island and the return to power of
the antidemocratic
regime that has been rejected by the
people. We have here an attempt by force of arms to
repress the will of the people of Grenada to independence
and its right to determine its fate independently.

166.. The Soviet Union most categorically condemns the
aggression of American imperialism against a small nonaligned country.
167. The Security Council has before it a matter of principle; if today, now, we do not resolutely rebuff the aggressive lawlessness of the United States, no non-aligned State,
especially if it has a policy, either internal or external, not
to the liking of the White House, can find itself safe.
168. The Security Council must most resolutely and in
the most emphatic fashion approach the present events in
Grenada. We have a deliberately planned armed invasion
by the United States carried out in cold blood. The United
States has brought down its military fist upon a peaceful
non-aligned country. The Council is called upon most
categorically to condemn the armed intervention of
Washington against Grenada as an act of aggression and a
violation of international peace and security-in
other
words, an action which is a gross violation of the
Charter-and
to call for the immediate withdrawal of the
interventionist forces of the United States and of their vassals from the island.

162. It is no secret to anyone that for precisely this reason Grenada for a long time has been the object of undisguised threats and pressure on the part of Washington.
163. This new criminal act of Washington is one further
element in the sharp exacerbation of tension in the whole
region of Central America and the Caribbean, together
with the uninterrupted military manoeuvres and unprecedented military preparations, which have been carried out
for more than a year. The purpose of all of this is to repress
the national liberation movements and to interfere in the
internal affairs of sovereign States. The direct military
intervention of the American forces poses a threat to Nicaragua, by the shores of Central America, where dozens of
naval vessels are standing by and military contingents of
United States troops are being transferred to the countries
of the region. As a result of the aggressive actions of the
United States there has been a sharp deterioration in the
situation in this part of the world, and international tension has risen sharply.

169. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jiom Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table.
170. Mr. AL-ASHTAL
(DemoCratic Yemen) (interpretafion@om Arabic): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you upon presiding over the Security Council
in this difficult month and to express to you our wishes for
success.
171. Some may ask, at’this late hour, why the representative of Democratic Yemen, which is continents away from
Grenada, comes to speak before the Security Council. The
answer to this question lies in the fact that the American

164. In a statement made on 28 September the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
17

navy which invaded Grenada is present in the Arab Gulf,
in the Mediterranean and everywhere. Everyone realizes
the danger. For this reason, we come before the Council to
speak about this new invasion, which is not the first of its
kind.
172. We have heard the renresentative of Grenada and
the other members of the Council, and we have heard the
facts. At this late hour, I do not want to dwell on them, yet
I would like to touch upon the realities. The first reality is
that there is an American invasion of Grenada. The
second reality is that the United States, throughout the
past four years, has tried to prevent the people of Grenada
from expressing their will and from enjoying relations with
all States. The third reality is that the United States for a
number of years has not ceased combatting Grenada politically and economically.
_ - - .._ ~.
173. I did not come here to discuss the number of American troops which have attacked Grenada, but I would like
to draw the attention of this Council to the justifications
directly or indirectly provided by the United States for this
invasion.
174. In the first place, we heard a few days ago from an
official source, that is, the White House, that there was no
danger facing American citizens in Grenada. Less than 48
hours later-or even 24 hours later-the United States
concocted a pretext, namely, that the American citizens in
Grenada were facing a danger. We in Democratic Yemen
are not host to any American citizens. Perhaps one of the
reasons is the fear that the presence of American citizens in
any country could be exploited as a ready excuse to intervene in that country.
175. Furthermore, the United States provided other pre* texts through the OECS, and a declaration was issued this
morning to justify its invasion. We heard the representative of Grenada refute those allegations on legal grounds. I
shall now deal with the political allegations as they refer to
the declaration, and I should like to raise a number of
points in that respect.

Is it not the right of every State, in accordance with the
Charter, to defend itself and to establish the system of its
choice? We heard the allegation concerning the upsetting
of the balance of power. Is it not the United States which is
attempting to tilt the balance of military power in the
Middle Fast in favour of Israel? It even boasts that arming
Israel will lead to peace and security in the region. How
can we accept that type of justification? What would be the
fate of any State that seeks to build and defend itself!
178. Thirdly, the United States claims that by virtue of
the declaration, those States, including one called Montserrat, which still has not attained independence, have sought
assistance from the United States because they did not
possess sufficient strength to intervene in the affairs of
Grenada. How can the United States present that pretext
in order to cover UP its operation, a pretext which could *
not find any justification in other- parts of the world?
179. Fourthly, the United States has attempted, by using
the OECS declaration, to justify its interference in and
invasion of Grenada by claiming that they were within the
context of a multinational force. Does that not remind us
of what is taking place in the Middle East, in general, and
in Lebanon in particular? If 95 per cent of the invading
force comes from the United States-the Ranger forceswhat kind of multinational force could it be? That is yet
another American ploy. Under the name of a multinational force, the United States is trying to camouflage its
invasion of other countries. Did not the United States
invade Viet Nam under the same pretext? At that time the
United States said there was a multinational force in Viet
Nam, whereas at the time of the final outcome it became
clear that it was the United States alone that invaded Viet
Nam and later bore the consequences of that invasion.

176. First, the OECS declaration was used to justify the
American invasion because, it was stated, the situation was
deteriorating in Grenada. Who is to decide whether an
internal situation in any country is deteriorating or
improving? Why did the United States not intervene in
Cambodia when the Pol Pot regime perpetrated the infamous massacre of more than 3 million people? That abhorrent situation required all the countries to close ranks in
order to intervene and save the Cambodian people. Not
one drop of blood had been shed in Grenada, certainly not
the blood of any American citizen. Nevertheless, the
United States felt it necessary, by referring to the OECS
declaration, to claim that the situation was deteriorating.

180. Fifthly, the United States has used the declaration
to attempt to justify its invasion by claiming that it wished
to restore normalcy in Grenada. We ask: what are normal
circumstances and what are abnormal circumstances? The
American invasion of the island of Grenada is the height
of political and military irregularity. It indeed contravenes
all international laws and norms. The political arguments
used in invoking that declaration reveal the flimsy grounds
upon which the United States stands. What is that normal
situation to which they refer? Is there a normal situation
obtaining in Montserrat, a colonized country which we
shall perhaps welcome in the United Nations in a few
years? Is that not an absurd situation? Decolonization is
the foremost task of the United Nations. The existence of
colonialism in a number of countries is indeed an example
of an irregular situation. When States exercise their right
to choose their own political life, that right stems from the
Charter, and that situation is indeed normal.

177. Secondly, the United States has attempted to justify
its interference in and invasion of Grenada by claiming
that Grenada had undertaken a military buildup in such a
way as to cause an upset in the balance of power in the
Caribbean region. How is the international community
expected to accept such grounds? Who can decide how any
State can arm itself or how it should carry out its policies?

181. Sixthly, by using that same OECS declaration the
United States has sought to justify its interference in and
invasion of Grenada by claiming that they are to preserve
peace and security. The declaration mentions that the
United States and the so-called multinational force shall
remain in Grenada until stability and peace are restored.

182. How can we understand such a concept? Is it the
concept which the United States has in mind when it
speaks about peace-keeping and when it brings up in all
the committees the need to maintain such a force, and
when it states that the main purpose of the United Nations
is to establish peace through peace-keeping forces which
are present here and there? Is this the example we and all
the other States must follow? How can we interpret the
role of the so-called peace-keeping forces everywhere if this
indeed is the manner in which it is implemented? If this is
indeed a peace-keeping force, is it not the right of the
Security Council to establish such a force in conformity
with the Charter, or does every State have the right to
launch invasions under such pretexts?

Prime Minister Bishop, whom we have heard extolled
tonight, who had, of course, already been murdered in cold
blood. We make no firm charges about who was involved in
the decisions to murder Prime Minister Bishop and his
ministers in cold blood, although there is suggestive information concerning those questions. The facts are that, on 13 ’
October, Prime Minister Bishop was placed under house
arrest and subsequently, on 19 October, after he had been
freed by a mass demonstration of Grenadians from house
arrest and surrendered to the socalled Revolutionary
Council, was shot in cold blood, along with live cabinent
ministers and 12 other political leaders, who were killed at
roughly the same time, creating one of the bloodiest struggles for power which the world has seen in some time.

183. These arguments and justifications presented by the
United States through the OECS declaration are the only
ones. In reply to a question this afternoon concerning the
reasons for America’s invasion of Grenada, Secretary of
State Shultz stated that the United States has intervened in
order to fill a vacuum. As if Grenada floats in outer space.
This theory is the very theory which has led to numerous
local, regional and world wars. If this theory of filling a
vacuum should reign supreme, there are many who feel
that there are lacunas which indeed need to be filled. The
consequences of such a policy will only lead to destruction.

189. The second question I would like to pose and
respond very briefly to is: what are the objectives that the
United States has in participating in this joint action?
Those objectives are clear. United States troops are
involved for the purpose of protecting United States citizens, to facilitate the evacuation of those citizens who wish
to leave, and to provide support for the eastern Caribbean
forces as they assist the people of Grenada in restoring
order and establishing functioning governmental institutions. Any continued political involvement in this cooperative effort will be guided wholly by the views of the
OECS and the Government being formed in Grenada. We
fully expect that the deliberations in the OAS, which are
scheduled to begin tomorrow,
will be constructive and
may prove useful to the future of Grenada.

184. The problem in Grenada is the result of the new
American Administration’s
policy under the Reagan leadership. Ever since the inauguration of this Administration, unprecedented tension has grown in the international
atmosphere. The Administration has sought to encourage
an increase in armaments and military buildups. It has
tried to impose its hegemony everywhere, to the extent that
American fleets have become like Trans World Airlinespresent everywhere. This policy has led to the rise in tensions which we see today in Europe. This policy has led to
the intervention in the affairs of Grenada, and this policy
will continue to jeopardize international peace and
security.

190. The United States was also deeply concerned in
evaluating the actual and potential danger to our citizens
with the existence of a shoot-on-sight curfew. The shooton-sight curfew which threatened anyone who was seen in
the streets of Grenada was, so far as we are able to determine, certainly the primary visible act of the so-called
Revolutionary Council and constituted a clear and present
danger to the security, safety and well-being of, among
others, the Americans who had the misfortune to be in
Grenada at the time these unfortunate events occurred.
Also, obviously, they constituted a clear and present
danger to the well-being of the Grenadians there.

185. These words, which are pronounced by the representative of a small country, reflect the viewpoint of many
countries which deem this American invasion of a small
island a sinister omen indeed.

191. Briefly, I should like to address the question: what
constitutes the legal basis for the United States’ action?

186. Democratic Yemen calls upon the Council to condemn unequivocally this American invasion. We call for a
complete withdrawal of the invading forces. And finally,
we exhort you to spare no effort to put an end to this
blatant aggression.

192. We responded to an urgent appeal by the OECS for
assistance. The OECS is taking an action created under the
treaty establishing the organization itself and consistent
with the provisions of that treaty for collective security. I
would note that the OECS member States are not a party
to the Rio Treaty.’ Their own organizational treaty is in
effect the regional equivalent.

187. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
The last remarks I made were by way of a right of reply. I
should like now to address the issue before the Council
tonight as briefly as possible, since the hour is really very
late.

193. We believe that the support by the United States of
the OECS is justified on a number of grounds. The OECS
determined, as I said, that conditions in institutions of
authority had degenerated and that a climate of fear, anxiety and acute danger to personal safety existed on the
island. The OECS determined that a dangerous vacuum of
authority constituted an unprecedented threat to the peace
and security of the entire eastern Caribbean. The United

188. I should like first to address the question: what were
the conditions which the OECS, Jamaica, Barbados and
the United States felt justified the action which is being
considered here tonight? Certainly, the conditions were not
_ any sort of abstract disapproval of the Government of
19

States Government believed that this judgement
OECS was accurate and justified.

by the

194. The objectives of the collective security force organized by the, OECS are, we think, equally clear. They have
been stated publicly on several occasions by OECS spokesmen, and presumably will be restated here tomorrow.
They have also been stated by United States Government
authorities, including the President of the United States
and Secretary of State Shuhz today. Those objectives are:
to restore law and order, to help the people of Grenada to
restore functioning institutions of government, to facilitate
the departure of- those who leave and, most especially, to
put an end to the situation of acute threat to peace and
security to the entire eastern Caribbean region.
195. We believe that the action is reasonable and proportionate to the deterioration of authority in Grenada and
the threat that this posed to the peace and security of the
eastern Caribbean, We believe it was and is consistent with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Charter of the Organization of American
States, since it aims only at the restoration of conditions of

law and order fundamental to the enjoyment of basic
human rights, which were so clearly not only in jeopardy
but flagrantly violated in Grenada.
196. The United States is co-operating fully with the
OECS countries in seeking a meeting of the Permanent
Council of the Organization of American States to review
the situation. We expect, of course, to continue to cooperate with our colleagues on the Council and with the
spokesmen for the OECS when they arrive here to continue this discussion tomorrow.
T&e meeting rose on Wednesday, 26 October, at 2.25 am.

NOTES
’ League of Nations,
Treaty
Series, vol. CLXIII,
No. 3781.
z Ibid., vol. CLXXXVIII,
No, 4350.
’ Ibid,, No. 4351.
’ General Assembly resolution
36/103, annex, part II, para. (II), (c)
and {e).
5 United Nations,. Treury Series, vol. 21, No. 324.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupms de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
I&AK I-IOJIYYkITb

RJAAHWI

M3~1aHmt
GpraHliSatlIiU
OBaenuHeHHbtx
a &UeHTCTBaX
BO Bcex ptiOHaX
.mpa.
Mara3HHe
mm nmmTe
no aapecy:
IIpOAiSlCe
li3AZiHlitt,
HbtO-fiOpK
Wtll

OPI-AHIiJAW
Hau~li
HaBonuTe
Gpra~rr3ama
%eHeBa.

.OEbEAI?HEHHbIX

HAIIIII;I

Kyt’tHTb
B KHWKHbIX
MaramHaX
CtIpaBKu
06 H3naHHRX B BaAEM YHUXHOM
06bemiHeHHbIX
Ha&l,
CeKtWt
no
Moxmo

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estlln en venta en librerfas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

90-60205-April

1992-2.050
