UNIT.‘..

NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

17 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2435)

. . ,.,,..I...............~.....

. ,.* * . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . , . , . . . . . . ..*.,*,......,.*..,.,.*..,....*....

I

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2435

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Record of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been apptied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fuIly operative on that date.

2435th MEETING
Held
President:

Mr. UMBA

in New York on Tuesday, 17 May 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
di LUTETE

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2435)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings
devoted to this item [2431st to 2434th meetings], I invite
the representative of Honduras to take a place at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Panama, Sao
Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela and Viet Nam to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr. Albdn Holgufn
(Colombia), Mr. Zumbado Jimknez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa
Kourf
(Cuba), Mr, Resales-Rivera (El Salvador), Mr. Brahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. QuifionesAmPzquita (Guateniala), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Vongsaly (Lao People’sDemocratic
Republic), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Traor& (Mali), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr, Mur7ozRedo
(Mexico), Mr. Ozores Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Cassandra

(Sao Tome and Principe), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles),
Mr. de Pini& (Spain), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela) and Mr. Le Kim
Chung(Viet Nam) took theplaces reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Congo
and Uganda in which they asked to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda, In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mangouta
(Congo) and Mr. Otunnu (Uganda) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
first speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
4. Mr. MARTINI
URDANETA
(Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the Government of
Venezuela I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. We wish you every successin your work
to further international understanding and peace. On
behalf of my Government I wish also to congratulate the
representative of the United States of America, Mrs.
Jeane Kirkpatrick, on the excellent and important work
that she accomplished as Council President during April.
5. The situation in Central America is a source of great
concern to Venezuela. Venezuelan democracy has over
the years made wide-ranging efforts, both alone and
together with other countries, in strict fulfilment of the
principles of international
social justice and nonintervention, to contribute to the political, social and
economic development of the Central American countries and so to contribute to peace in the region as a
whole and in the countries that compose the region.
6. Injustices, inequalities and imbalances persisting
over many years have generated situations of growing
tension and conflict. Furthermore, explosive and disruptive elements alien to Central America have been prolif-

extended a formal invitation to the five Central American Foreign Ministers to hold a working meeting in Panama on 28, 29 and 30 of this month, thus making it
possible for the Central American countries “to help
attain the goal of peace and, to that end, to apply their
political will to the search for ways leading to dialogue
and understanding, to settle their current differences”

erating in the region, to the detriment of the internal
peace, freedom and sovereignty of the countries of the
region.
7. Venezuela has participated very actively in all the
sincere initiatives aimed at achieving peace in connection
with the Central American conflict and at ensuring a
strictly regional solution to Latin American problems.
We possess the necessary skills and the maturity, and the
necessary will also, as has been demonstrated in the decisions reached on 12 May [see S/15762, Imnex] by the
Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela-the
Contadora Group-which
undoubtedly
will contribute to achieving d6tente and Iasting peace in
the region.

[ibid.].

13. We should like to take this opportunity to recall,
just as the Ministers of the Contadora Group have done,
that the international community must uphold, infer aliu,
the principles of self-determination and non-intervention
in the internal affairs of other States, respect for the territorial integrity of States, the obligation not to allow the
territory of a State to be used for acts of aggression
against others, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the prohibition of the threat or use of force to resolve
conflicts.

8. The Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela met at Panama City on 11 and 12
May this year in order, first, to consider the request of
the Costa Rican Government for the establishment of an
observer commission; secondly, to follow the course of
the debate in the Security Council; and, lastly, to consider a programme of work for the next meeting of the
Contadora Group Ministers with the five Foreign Ministers of the Central American countries, to be held at
Panama beginning on 28 May.

14. On behalf of my Government, I pledge that we shall
do all in our power to attain those goals and fully comply
with these principles. Venezuela has been reaffirming
them for a long time and has implemented them, as is
acknowledged by the international community.
15. Peace is not only an aspiration of all the countries
of our region. It must also be the commitment of all,
equally and without exception.

9. With that agenda before them, the Ministers held
various lengthy meetings which answered the questions
that had been raised and the expectations which had
been aroused. It was agreed that an observer commission
should be sent, composed of two representatives of each
of their countries, to carry out a fact-finding study in silu,
evaluate the circumstances and submit whatever recommendations were considered appropriate. Likewise, the
Contadora Ministers noted “with deep concern the development of the Central American conflict . , . and the
repeated violation of essential principles of the international legal order” [ibid.].

16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Colombia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
17. Mr. ALBAN HOLGUfN
(Colombia) (interprefaSpanish): Sir, I thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving my delegation the
opportunity to participate in this debate. We are pleased
to join in the expressions of congratulation extended to
you on your assumption of the Council presidency for the
month of May. We are certain that your experience and
your skill will help you greatly in guiding the work of the
Council efficiently.
lion from

10. We consider it fitting to reaffirm once again Venezuela’s readiness to continue to participate actively in
regional peace initiatives in pursuance of the goal established by the Contadora Group: to seek a stable and
lasting peace in the region. That goal explains our decision not to take a position on a draft resolution which,
involves matters under discussion that might affect our
mediation function. We believe that we must pay attention to that very important aspect of our work in order to
maintain the natural balance required for any mediation.

18. Once anain rhe international community is concerned with i situation which is developing and growing
worse with unusual speed. The Council is once more devoting its attention to the problem of Nicaragua and the
Central American region. The sufferings of so many people
and the loss of lives are of deep concern to my country,
which sees in all these events a serious threat to the peace.

11. I should like in this statement, on behalf of my
Government, to express thanks for the many expressions
of interest and encouragement addressed to the members
of the Contadora Group with regard to the concrete
desire, already partially translated into specific measures,
to seek peaceful solutions.

19. The origins of the situation predate our own generation; they include the backwardness of countries and
regions that face the tragic realities of the world in which
we live-a shrinking world because of existing means of
communication
which have helped create an awareness
of such unjust situations-realities
which have shown
some nations that they are obliged to face them and to
seek urgent solutions.

12. That encouragement calls for commitment on our
part. We cannot evade our responsibilities and must
move forward as long as the parties concerned so desire.
It is for that reason that the Contadora Group has
2

20. . Our delegation has followed this debate with interest and., care and, wishes to make the following
observations.,
:,
21. Colombia has always trusted in the effectiveness of
dialogue and negotiation, even at times of serious turmoil and violence. Dialogue with a view to-understanding and coexistence is irreplaceable and constitutes a vital
element for orderly relations between States and for the
maintenance, of peace and security.

generations from the scourge of war. We must accept the
basic rules without which,. it is impossible to preserve
peace and security. Failing that, our world may suffer a
global conflagration.
28. Among these rules are the equal sovereignty of aI1
nations large and small, self-determination and nonintervention in the affairs of other States, respect for the
territorial integrity of States, prohibition of the use of the
territory of one State for acts of aggression against other
States, the peaceful settlement of disputes, prohibition of
the threat or use of force to resolve conflicts and the duty
to fulfil in good faith the obligations that stem from
treaties and other sources of international law.

22. What the countries of the so-called Contadora
Group,‘have done is to fulfil the diplomatic function of
promoting constructive dialogue among all the parties
concerned in the conflict besetting the Central American
region.. But for this diplomatic mission of dialogue to
achieve positive results there is a need to harmonize interests, overcome differences, seek formulas for bringing
views closer together and, most important, secure the
willingness of the countries concerned, without which
there can be no mediation and no good offices.

29. The international golden rule of non-intervention
allows for no skilful interpretations by anyone to the
effect that what is ethical is what satisfies one’s own interests, nor should it be ignored for incidental advantages.
Only good faith and sincere good will can guarantee
effective and lasting peace.

23. It is in order to avoid a worsening of the situation
that the countries of the Contadora Group have in a
spirit of full co-operation devoted their best efforts in
terms of active and constant steps, familiar to CounciI
members, in order to bring all the countries of the region
to the negotiating table in a joint search for the paths
towards understanding, mutual respect and peace among
States.

30. My country has noted with concern the worsening
of the situation in Central America as a result of the
repeated violation of those norms of international law.
Not only Nicaragua and Honduras, but all the countries
of the region complain of those violations. For that reason the Contadora Group is seeking a comprehensive
solution in the region, but it is in no way opposed to
bilateral negotiations.

24. The Contadora initiative, which is taking place on
the basis of a regional solution avoiding East-West confrontation, has received the support of all countries that
have taken part in this debate. The wish has been
expressed that it be strengthened and that it be given a
chance for success, in view of the willingness regarding
dialogue and negotiation clearly expressed by the representatives of the countries directly involved in the
conflict,

31. My Government has also stressed economic and
social development, because in so far as that aspect is
emphasized, and in so far as priority is given to the
serious economic problems of all countries, the attainment of international peace will be more feasible.
32. There is a real rebellion against backwardness and
poverty. Those are the enemies that must be vanquished.
Economic and political solidarity requires that we cooperate urgently to find solutions to the problems of
injustice and instability that afflict the peoples of our
hemisphere and of the third world.

25. None the less, as has been stated, the problems of
the region are multifaceted, and a series of specific questions must be resolved.
26. With a view to developing its objectives, the Contadora Group has carried out individual consultations with
each of the Central American countries in successive
stages, and rules of procedure have been studied to make
it possible to establish a work programme covering a
series of general and specific topics which could be discussed bilaterally or in a multilateral framework of
regional scope.

33. That obligation is all the greater today, when the
world is experiencing one of the worst economic crises of
all times, when the greatest minds work in vain to find
solutions. Development plans, growing unemployment,
reduced commodity
prices in the developing world,
reduced demand on world markets-ah present a discouraging picture that is unprecedented and has of
course affected and threatened to disrupt institutions,
democratic systems, freedom and international peace.

27. But Colombia-which
considers itself before anything else a State of law, one which perseveres in the task
of replacing war and violence with a code of agreements
reached in good faith that would make mutual relations
possible-understands
that the doctrines, principles and
systems of the civilization to which the peoples of America belong compel us to respect the purposes and principles of the charter of our regional organization and that
of this world body, which was set up to save succeeding

34. Naturally, the growing inequality and the absence
of conditions of stability and well-being contain the seeds
of rivalry and conflict. The magnitude of the gap
between the rich nations and the less developed nations
continues to increase. We must make no mistake: it is in
the growing economic imbalances that the greatest
dangers to peace reside. We have before us the great task
of pacification,
as well as a great commitment to
development.
3

42. In connection with the deliberations taking place in
multilateral bodies, particularly the debate now under
way in this Council, the Contadora Foreign Ministers
feel that there should be a strengthening of principles
which should guide the activities of States in the international arena. In this connection, the Foreign Ministers
have extended a formal invitation to the five Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Central America to hold a working meeting at Panama on 28, 29 and 30 of this month,
There is, therefore, a concrete working method, with a
timetable for tackling these matters, their discussion in
working groups and their consideration in plenary session. We urge Nicaragua and Honduras to conduct
serious and constructive negotiations, taking advantage
of the Contadora framework which has been established
to facilitate this type of work. We would view with great
interest other bilateral dialogue between the parties
involved that might take place at that time.

35. As the Foreign Minister of my country, Mr.
Rodrigo Lloreda, has stated, peace can be obtained not
through magic formulas but rather through persevering
and dynamic action.
36. To Colombia the situation in the Caribbean region
is of direct and immediate interest. For many geographical and historical reasons we have irrevocable commitments to that region’s destiny. Social imbalances in
Central America are profound; its economic injustices
are unbearable. That part of the hemisphere presents a
disturbing picture that warrants our efforts and the crusade for peace that has been undertaken by the Contadora countries.
37. The Contadora diagnoses join fundamental values
and a realistic position. As was indicated in the statement
made by the President of Colombia, Belisario Betancur,
on the Mexican island of Cozumel:

43. This is the direction taken by the Contadora
Group, and we believe it could lead to positive results,
Colombia, a consistently peace-loving country, will not
tire in its efforts and sincerely hopes that calm dialogue,
prudence, political negotiation and mutual understanding will lead to reconciliation so that, together with the
economic and social recovery of those countries, peace
may be a lasting reality.

“Our vatues are based on Latin American claims.
Just like Mexico, Colombia views with deep concern
the crisis in the Central American isthmus, a crisis
whose roots should not be soughtin East-West confrontation but rather in the distressing reality of their
peoples rising up to overcome the past and to pave the
way for a future of social change, economic progress
and national development.”

44. The Contadora Group has not so far requested the
intervention of other multilateral
bodies because it
wishes to utilize all the peace-keeping measures avaiIabIe
to it, but it does not in any way oppose requests for such
involvement from the countries concerned or debates
within those bodies. We believe that in due course, in
view of the complexity of the process of restoring peace
to Central America, the participation of those multilateral bodies may be necessary. Therefore, we believe that,
when circumstances warrant it and when it is the consensus of the countries concerned that this is desirable, the
Contadora Group could request the co-operation of the
Secretary-General in helping to bring peace to Central
America.

38, As the members of the Council are aware, and as
has already been stated by several preceding speakers,
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Contadora
Group, at their meeting in Panama on 11 and 12 of this
month, studied the following topics: first, the request of
the Costa Rican Government for an observer commission; secondly, the progress of the debate in the Security
Council; and thirdly, the programme of work for the
next meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Contadora Group, which will be held with the five Foreign Ministers of the Central American countries in Panama, starting on 28 May.
39. In this connection the Contadora Foreign Ministers, acting within the framework of the principles that
guide their conduct, considered the Costa Rican proposal
to be related to the efforts to create conditions for peace
in the region, and they decided to send an observer commission, consisting of two representatives from each of
their countries, with the task of carrying out a study in
situ in order to establish the facts, evaluate the circumstances and submit appropriate recommendations.

45. My country wishes once again to express its admiration and support for the Secretary-General for the work
he has accomplished in complex situations and grave
conflicts to guide the international community along the
path of peace. It is a source of pride for us that an eminent Latin American with such excellent intellectual and
human qualities should be guiding in such a dignified
and intelligent way the Organization in which mankind
has placed its highest hopes.

40. The Government of Nicaragua, in a note addressed
to my Government signed by its Deputy Minister for
External Relations, stated that it had no objection to the
observer commission.

46. On behalf of my Government I should like to
express appreciation of the international support given to
the Contadora initiative, in particular to the Governments of Sweden, Argentina, Spain, Egypt, Ecuador,
Yugoslavia, France, Peru, Brazil and the Federal Republic of Germany and the other countries of the European
Economic Community that have sent messages of
support.

41. In view of the establishment of that observer commission, the Costa Rican Government spontaneously
decided to postpone its debate before the Permanent
Council of the Organization of American States,
4

47. Colombia supports any measure that will strengthen development, justice, peace and stability in Central
America.
,
48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
49. Mr. ZUMBADO

the development of our people. In the international
sphere, our limitations have been overcome by the moral
force of ideas, by our respect for the principles of international law, by absolute trust in the principles of law, and
by use of the institutions which are entrusted with the
preservation of the peace and security of nations.
54. Whenever our peace has been threatened, our sovereignty attacked or our territorial integrity violated, we
have always, without exception, had recourse to the
invincible force of law in order to face senselessbehaviour. Costa Rica has been a member of the Organization
of American States (OAS) since its establishment and
therefore feels that the peoples of the Americas should
strictly live up to their commitment to strengthen a
regional order which guarantees peace in our hemisphere. The OAS, we believe, is the proper lega mechanism for the promotion of peace and security.

(Costa Rica) (interpreI should like to
express my delegation’s pleasure at the fact that these
delicate deliberations are being guided by a person of
your known skill and experience.
tation from

JIMBNEZ

Spanish): Mr. President,

50. As members of the Council know, the Government
of Costa Rica reiterated the principles that underlie its
foreign policy on 27 April last. In the document distributed under the symbol S/15749 there is a summary of
those fundamental guidelines and some considerations
which I should like to supplement today with an analysis
of facts relevant to these deliberations.

55. Three times we have appealed to the OAS in
defence of peace and law. We did so in 1949 to guarantee
our territorial integrity. We did so again in 1955 for the
same reason. In 1979 we appealed to the OAS to demand
respect for our rights and to guarantee our neutrality in
the face of the civil war which was afflicting the fraternal
people of Nicaragua. Recently, we appealed to the OAS
to guarantee and verify our neutrality vis-d-vis the forces
opposing each other in Central America. Whenever we
have appeared before the regional body we have found
receptive attitudes, and we have been able to channel the
efforts of our people to promote its highest interests.

51, The Government of Costa Rica reiterated at that
time its unshakeable will, first, to respect and promote
the right of all peoples to choose their own destiny and to
establish the government and the institutions that they
deem necessary, and secondly, to observe and promote
strict compliance with the principle of non-intervention
in the internal affairs of States. Thirdly, it reiterated its
conviction that disputes between States should be
resolved peacefully and said that it would support any
step to that end. Fourthly, it stressed its conviction that
the principle of ideological pluralism, which prevails
among our people, should be applied to international
relations in order to promote dialogue, dCtente and peace
among nations, whatever the ideological orientation of
their Governments. Fifthly, it reiterated its desire that
human rights be respected and its determination to strive
to achieve that. Lastly, my Government reiterated its
desire to apply and guarantee the right of asylum.

56. That historical background justifies our obligation
to strengthen regional legal mechanisms. We defend
them too in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which, in paragraph 2 of Article 52, states:
“The Members of the United Nations entering into
such [regional] arrangements or constituting such
[regional] agencies shall make every effort to achieve
pacific settlement of local disputes through such
regional arrangements or by such regional agencies
before referring them to the Security Council.”

52, Our resolve strictly to respect those principles,
which are the basis of international peace and security,
has two natural consequences: first, our readiness to participate, as we have been doing, in all efforts, without
exception, aimed at the promotion of peace and the coexistence of fraternal peoples; and secondly, our calling to
maintain the policy of neutrality, which has characterized our history as regards the military conflicts that have
pitted Central American nations against each other and
the internal turmoil that has characterized the region’s
history.

57. It should be clear that Costa Rica is interested in
strengthening any mechanism that might help in the
maintenance of peace and security and in the development of law. In the face of the upheaval afflicting Central
America, not only have we placed our energies at the
disposal of the OAS, but we have given our full support
to the work of sister nations which are responding to the
turmoil and despair of the Central American peoples.

53. The disbanding of the army as a permanent institution, raised to the level of a constitutional principle, has
not been fully understood, Perhaps the most important
aspect of this is that it demonstrates the will of the Costa
Rican people to live in peace and to rely on internal legal
machinery and international law for the settlement of all
its disputes. Internally, we have already had nearly 35
years of stability, years dedicated to the cultivation Of
peace and democracy and to allocating our resources to

58. The Governments of four fraternal countriesColombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela-have,
through their Foreign Ministers, established a goodoffices group in order to bring about the peace and stability so urgently needed by the peoples of Central America.
That group has come to be known as the Contadora
Group, Once more we Costa Ricans have felt compelled
to encourage and strengthen any effort made in the interest of peace and security.
5

/
I

59. We have placed on the shoulders of the Contadora
Group the task of verifying and guaranteeing Costa
Rica’s neutrality. We have received from it generous
actions and a readiness for sacrifice: such are the good
offices of four countries whose actions have deserved the
applause of all Governments of the region, without
exception. Today, Costa Rica and the world at large have
one more mechanism to promote peace and the observance of law. We Costa Ricans feel in duty bound not to
cease our efforts to strengthen it in its quest for peace and
stability.

Council for giving my delegation this opportunity to participate in this important debate. My delegation also welcomes your assumption of the Council presidency for
this month. We believe that your qualities and your vast
experience as a diplomat will make an effective contribution to the success of the Council’s work.
66. It seems appropriate to mention in our modest contribution to this debate that it is indeed ironic, and a
matter of shame to my delegation, to hear once again of
the duplicity of one of the Council’s permanent members
with regard to covert support for “Contras”, whose aim is
to overthrow the legitimate Government of Nicaragua.
Recent debates have called attention as never before to
the CounciI’s responsibility to do what seems necessary
to encourage dialogue between the countries involved
and have called into question the wisdom of surrendering
the important question of world peace and security.

60. When the Contadora Group accepted the task of
verifying and guaranteeing our neutrality, it sent a document to our Foreign Ministry in which the four Foreign
Ministers stated their view that “this initial phase should
be conducted within the subregional framework”-1
stress “subregional’‘-“which
has characterized the Contadora initiative, in which our countries are participating
with the sole aim of serving the cause of peace”,

67. In the face of developments in Central America, my
Government is increasingly concerned to note that an
infernal machine is being used against Nicaragua to
weaken its human and material resources and prevent it
from strengthening its true programme of national reconstruction. There is already a great deal of evidence available on the activities of these “Contras” and on those who
for selfish reasons continue to encourage them and also
finance them by all possible means to carry on their military operation, without the support or sometimes even
without the knowledge of their electorates. Instead of a
peaceful and negotiated resolution of the issue, the imperialist force continues to pursue a very dangerous course,
siding with the Somozist armed gangs and other counterrevolutionaries who are, like the arms they carry, available to anyone who can afford them.

61. Receptive to the appeal of the Contadora Group
Ministers, and in order to strengthen the initiatives which
are going forward at the subregional level, Costa Rica
has left pending its request before the OAS. That is
because of our conviction that the Foreign Ministers of
Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela will be able
to achieve substantial progress at the subregional level,
owing to their authority and their determination. It is
Costa Rica’s wish that the Contadora Ministers will have
the greatest possible autonomy in order to accomplish
their difficult task.
62. Accordingly, my country wishes to make very clear
its position in this debate. The concern of my country
and the peoples of Central America is for peace, security
and the strict observance of the principles of international law. Last week, we expelled from our territory
those who were endangering our neutrality. Also last
week, we appealed to the good offices of four sister
nations whose action is welcomed by the peoples and
Governments of Central America. We do not believe
that this Council should weaken subregional or regional
mechanisms. Nor do we believe that the Council should,
by issuing a mandate, limit the autonomy of the
Secretary-General, who enjoys our respect and our trust.

68. Is paramilitary activity to be permitted as a method
of evading ‘such public scrutiny as is provided by’ the
Boland Amendment?
69. Sao Tome and Principe, as a matter of general policy, does not like to interfere in the internal affairs of any
country. We believe that any State has the right to freely
choose its own political, social and economic system.
Likewise, we believe in the non-use of force and in goodneighbourliness and friendly relations between States.
Our solidarity and moral support for the people and
Government of Nicaragua at this crucial moment are,
above all, owing to the fact that it feels threatened by one
of the major Powers and because its sovereignty and territorial integrity have been violated.

63. The Council should leave the initiative in the hands
of the four Latin American Foreign Ministers. Out of
respect for the Charter of the United Nations, it should
wait until all the possibilities afforded by regional
machinery have been fully explored. That, Costa Rica
believes, would be the best way of promoting peace, security and the observance of international law in Central
America.

70. As stated by my Minister for Foreign Affairs,
“What credence can we place in words, when facts,
in their intolerable cruelty and provocation, mark the
frontiers between oppression and freedom, between
exploitation and social justice, between betrayal and
principles and, ultimately, between war and peace?”

64. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Sao Tome and Principe. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

71. In this context of claims and counter-claims, it is
the responsibility of the Security Council to distinguish
very clearly between the aggressor and the victim and,

65. Mr. CASSANDRA
(Sao Tome and Principe): I-am
grateful to you, Sir, and to the other members of the
6

furthermore, to affirm the real value of its role by assisting in bringing about the restoration of peace in the area
while denouncing the fascist morality of the paid killer.

common enemy and pursue the same ideals: peace, independence, freedom, democracy and social progress.
77. Of course, the radical social, political and economic
change brought about by the victorious Sandinist revolution in Nicaragua in July 1979 has not been at all to the
liking of the United States imperialists and their allies in
the region. This is very understandable, because these
circles were dreaming of restoring the dictatorial Somoza
regime. But it is regrettable that the United States
Administration
goes on ignoring the legitimate and fervent aspirations of the peoples of Nicaragua, Grenada,
Cuba, El Salvador and other countries to lead a peaceful
life and pursue a free and independent political, social
and economic development process. These are their fundamental and inalienable rights under the Charter and
other relevant international covenants. The United States
Administration
keeps accusing-baselessly-the
Government of National Reconstruction of the Republic of Nicaragua of subverting El Salvador, a charge which has
been repeatedly dismissed by Nicaragua. Very recently,
speaking before a joint session of Congress, President
Reagan said, among other things, that the United States
Administration
does not have any plan to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government. The Nicaraguan people and
Government would, perhaps, like to believe him. But the
actual facts and happenings on the spot, as described by
the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua before
the Council last week [2431st meeting] so comprehensively, clearly and convincingly, constitute formal denial
of what has been said by the United States Government
and its representative here.

72. Finally, my delegation wishes to join those delegations which have welcomed the initiatives already taken
by the Government of Mexico and other regional States
and the good offices of the Secretary-General aimed at
engaging .a11 the interested parties to the conflict in a
bilateral dialogue which will definitely contribute to the
relaxation of tension in Central America.
73. The PRESIDENT (interpreiationfrom French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,
74. Mr. VONGSALY
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): It is a great honour for me, after my assumption of office just a few days ago, to be able to present to
the Council the views of the Lao Government on the
question of extreme importance which it is discussing
today. My delegation would like to thank you, Mr, President, as well as Council members for granting it such an
opportunity. Please accept my warm congratulations on
your assumption of the prestigious post of President for
this month. I am sure that, thanks to your vast diplomatic experience and your wisdom, the Council’s deliberations will be led to a fruitful conclusion.
75. Once again, we are witnessing a large-scale aggression committed by remnants and mercenaries of Somoza
against the heroic Republic of Nicaragua. It is public
knowledge that that invasion, like the previous ones, has
been masterminded by the United States Administration
and launched from the territory of a neighbouring country, Honduras. This undeclared war of aggression, in
which, in addition to the barbarous Somozist counterrevolutionaries and mercenaries trained and armed to the
teeth by the Central Intelligence Agency and the United
States military, important units of the Honduran armed
forces were reportedly taking part, not only violates flagrantly the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Nicaragua, but also constitutes a very grave threat to peace and security in Central
America, the Caribbean, and the world at large. Needless
to say, these hostile activities, ranging from political pressure and subversion and economic blockade to armed
provocations and invasion, run counter to the sacrosanct
principles of the Charter of the United Nations governing
relations among States,

78. However, it is gratifying to note that the just cause
of the peopte of Nicaragua, under the wise and resolute
leadership of its Government, enjoys the unstinted support of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
peoples all over the world that love peace and justice.
The heads of State or Government of non-aligned countries, during their Seventh Conference in March 1983 at
New Delhi, strongly condemned the hostile activities to
which Nicaragua was subjected. Also in March, shortly
after the New Delhi ‘summit, while Nicaragua was the
victim of aggression from the same source, the Lao
Government issued a statement [S/15679, annex] in
which it expressed full support for the Nicaraguan people
and Government and condemned the United States
Government and its ally for their rash and vicious
actions.
79. My delegation expresses its fuIl support for the
peace proposals put forward by the Nicaraguan Government, which it finds to be comprehensive, constructive
and realistic. It should be emphasized that those proposals reflect the spirit and the letter of the Contadora declaration by the Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela last January.’ But this process,
which, inter afia, implies direct bilateral talks between the
parties involved, cannot be workable unless the acts of
aggression and other subversive activities of which Nicaragua is currently the victim are immediately and unconditionally stopped.

76. The Security Council, whose main, responsibility
under the Charter is to maintain peace and security in the
world, must, we believe, take urgent and appropriate
action in order to deal with this crisis situation. From the
very beginning, the Lao people and Government have
been following with great concern the events occurring in
that part of the world, It is true that Laos and Nicaragua
are thousands of kilometres apart, but our two countries
and our two peoples are bound together by close ties of
friendship and solidarity, since they shared the same
colonial and neo-colonial heritage, fought against the
7

against other States, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the prohibition of the threat or use of force to resolve
conflicts. Those are principles which the Government of
Spain has always defended. In particular, in the context of
the Central American crisis, we fully support the reaffirmation of those principles by the Contadora Foreign Ministers. They are also the principles that should govern the
Council’s deliberations and inspire any decision that results
from them.

80. The Lao delegation earnestly hopes that the Security Council
will take the appropriate
measures
demanded by the urgency of the situation. We believe
that the mission of good offices which the Council will,
we hope, entrust to the Secretary-General will happily
supplement the untiring efforts being made by the Contadora Group with a view to finding a peaceful solution to
the present grave crisis.
81. The Lao people and Government reiterate once
again their unshakeable support for and solidarity with
the heroic Nicaraguan people in their just cause of
defending their homeland,
preserving the glorious
achievements of the Sandinist revolution and carrying
out national reconstruction and development in the interest of the peace, stability and security of the whole region
and of the world at large.

87. The volume of the attacks against the territory of
Nicaragua and the growing number of troops used, apparently with the aim of destabilizing the Government of that
country, has caused a worsening of the situation in
Nicaragua.
88. The Government of Spain-which is particularly concerned at the escalating loss of human life and material
damage and feels as its own the suffering of the Central
American peoples, to whom the Spanish people are bound
by strong ties-considers it essential that all the parties
involved in the Central American problem make urgent
efforts to achieve a peaceful solution to all the problems of
the region, since that can only benefit all the peoples of the
American continent. We expressour most fervent hope that
the Foreign Ministers of the Contadora Group will be able,
through their work, which enjoys the complete support of
the Spanish Government, to find an acceptable basis for a
just and lasting solution to that problem.

82. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of Spain. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
83.

Mr. de PIN&

(Spain) (interpretation from Spunyour past experience in the United
Nations is serving you well as you now demonstrate your
skill in conducting the work of the Council. We are convinced that you will bring the discussions now under way
to a successfu1 conclusion. We congratulate you on the
assumption of the presidency.
ish): Mr. President,

89. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of El Salvador. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

84. On 24 March I expressed before the Council
[2422nd meeting] the serious concern that my Government felt at the crisis affecting the Central American
region, and on 20 April the Spanish Council of Ministers
published a declaration on this subject. Today we are
facing a situation which is perhaps graver than that facing us at that time, and the Government of Spain wishes
once again to express its views on the causes of this crisis
and possible ways of resolving it.

90. Mr. ROSALES-RIVERA
(El Salvador) (interpretution from Spanish): First of all, Sir, I should like to say
that we are very pleased to see you presiding over these
deliberations of the Council. Your experience is a guarantee that your responsible functions will be correctly
carried out,

85. I wish to emphasize once again that, in our view,
the Central American crisis is closely related to the processes of change in which that region is immersed. It
stems from the profound social and economic imbalances and the structural problems that have been neither
corrected nor resolved to meet the just social and political aspirations of the peoples, Therefore, an attempt to
place the Central American crisis within the framework
of East-West confrontation, in addition to disregarding
the real roots of the problem, might seriously hamper the
possibility of finding a solution.

91. Once again El Salvador is about to make a statement with the knowledge that we are taking part in a
debate that is to a great extent repetitive and sterile and
that there is no desire on the part of the party that called
for the meeting of the Council to find a solution to the
problems being experienced by Central America at this
time. Rather, this is another exercise in distracting attention and making propaganda with a view to silencing the
criticisms that are levelled at the Sandinist Junta in Nicaragua. This has been done at the expense of the effectiveness of this Organization. Even so, I have been instructed
to express certain considerations concerning the Central
American problems now under study.

86. The Government of Spain greatly appreciates the joint
efforts made by Colombia, Mexico, Panama andvenezuela
with the Governments of the countries of the region to seek
just and reasonable solutions. We welcome the fact that, at
the meeting at Panama City on 11 and 12 May, the Foreign
Ministers of the Contadora Group decided to send an
observer commission to the border region between Costa
Rica and Nicaragua and unequivocally reaffirmed the principles of self-determination, non-interference in the affairs
of other States, respect for the territorial integrity of States,
the non-use of the territory of a State for acts of aggression

92. First of all, in the present circumstances we cannot
think that this is the appropriate forum in which to try to
resolve the crisis situation in Central America, since the
countries of the Central American region do not have
confidence in it. Furthermore, it has become a forum in
which parties which are not qualified to deal with Central
8

American problems participate, many of them influenced by orders and alliances directed by a super-Power
from outside this continent. Setting aside diplomatic language, we must bluntly point out that that is El Salvador’s view.

deiicate diplomacy. Therefore the question arises, why
artificially tink that endeavour, as stated in a certain
paper that has been circulated, with activities of the
United Nations, when the introduction of this external
and extraregional factor will inevitably result in the failure of the efforts of the Contadora Group, which must,
as a sine qua non of its effectiveness, secure the consent of
each and every one of the Central Ameridan countries?

93. Compliance with the golden rule that regional problems shoutd be resolved in the regional framework
which has already been institutionalized and has proved
itself as the proper forum ‘becomes more imperative
every day, not only for reasons of compliance with the
charter of the OAS, under the rule ofpacta sunt servundu,
but also in pursuance of the guidelines of a policy which
prescribes that inter-American
problems should be
resolved through the mechanism established by those
countries themselves for that purpose. Similarly we Latin
Americans believe that the problems between African
States should be resolved by the Organization of African
Unity.

97. What I have just stated has been acknowledged
very clearly in the information bulletin [S/15762;unne~]
issued after the meeting held at Panama City on I1 and
12 May 1983. In two of its paragraphs, the following,is
stated:
“The Ministers for ExternaI Relations of the Contadora Group, acting in accordance with the principles
which guide their conduct, recalled that the original
and essential purpose of the formation of the Grdup
was to fulfil a diplomatic role designed to seek the
settlement of conflicts through political means,,relying
on the co-operation of the parties involved.“,”

94. Secondly, the convening of the Council at this time
is inappropriate, inopportune and unproductive. In the
present circumstances, from any standpoint, even if an
attempt be made to conceal the fact or excuse it with a
tnea culpa, this is an affront, to say the least, to the work
of the Contadora Group. Only two weeks before that
Group meets again to consider formulas for a constructive solution, this comedy is mounted in the Security
Council, a comedy that involves, at the request of Nicaragua, countries that are fifth-rate actors, at least morally
and politically. For example, this morning we heard the
representatives of Iran and Libya speaking out against
the Government of El Salvador. To the representative of
Iran we would say that we find the theory of Satan ludicrous, to say the least. We see that the outcast rCgime of
Iran, which is, of course, enjoying heavenly peace internally and with all its neighbours, and which has banished
the word “war” from its political lexicon, feels entitled to
intervene in our affairs with the authority deriving from
the thousands of summary executions it has carried out
of opponents of that rCgime, which is considered by our
region to be completely anachronistic. We shall make
reference to Libya later,

I stress the words “relying on the co-operation
parties involved”. Its goes on to say:

of the

“From this perspective, the Contadora Group
believes that its work should focus on the concentration of political efforts to promote dialogue, understanding and, in general, the development of political
machinery which, with the co-operation of the States
concerned, can ensure the full attainment of their
objectives.”
Again, I stress the words “with the co-operation of the
States concerned”.
98, If that is the real essence of the work of the Contadora Group, is it not the case that the introduction of this
external and extraregional eIement, which extrapolates
Central American problems and which puts into motion
the chain of cause and effect, is what is really sought by
Nicaragua and the countries that support it as the,final
destiny of the Group?

95. On Friday afternoon [2432nd meeting] we heard a
singular voice in this chamber. I am not referring to Seychelles, Algeria or Ethiopia-which
have nothing to do
with this matter and which would have done better to
adopt the prudent attitude of the overwhelming majority
of the Latin American countries, which even by their
silence are making a positive contribution to the Council’s deliberations-but
to a statement accompanied by a
publicity display which linked the Secretary-General, in
his official capacity, to the efforts of the Contadora
Group. That impertinent comment raises doubts about
the seriousness and impartiality of that Government,
which was certainly speaking for itself, and not on
instructions from others, That calls for the following
Commentary from us.

101. El Salvador has been pleased to note the view
expressed by the Contadora Group ?n the meetings.of
the Council. It was stated:

96. The members of the Council are aware that the
work of the Contadora Group was undertaken as a fragile hope, but nevertheless a hope, and as an effort at

“It would be highIy desirable that in the deliberations taking place in the aforementioned forups, and
especially those currently under way in the Security

99. If there are four Central American countries
opposed to the forcible introduction of extraregional elements in the working of the Contadora Group, what
then is the purpose of unreasonably insisting on that
point?
100. El Salvador has thus far supported the Contadora,
Group as it has been established. New elements. or
changes in the Group without our consent would compel
us to withdraw our willingness to co-operate.

9

.

and we express thanks for the hospitality extended to
us by the Government of Panama.“’

Council, there, should be a strengthening’of principles
which should guide the activities of States i,n the internatjonai arena.

103. An attempt to compartmentalize problems that,
because of the dynamics of the facts as they have been
presented, are necessarily interrelated within a regional
framework is to distort the political reality of the region,
El Salvador thus again rejects any bilateral approach
which might be suggested, even though it might be in the
guise of good-offices procedures.

“These principles in&de: self-determination and
non-interference in the affairs of other States, respect
for the territorial integrity of other States, the obligation not to allow the territory of a State to be used for
committing acts of aggression against other States, the
peaceful settlement of disputes andthe prohibition of
the threat or use of.force to resolve. conflicts.” [Ibid.]

104. As was stated by the Foreign Minister of El Salvador, Mr. Fidel Chavez-Mena, on 28 March in the Security Council, there exists an “accumulation of evidence
that the Nicaraguan Government has been one of the
primary factors of instability in Central America” [see
2425th meeting, para. 131. The Minister continued:

And nothing further was added to this.
102. In the same context, it is enlightening to read the
joint communique issued in Panama on 21 April. 1983,
which states:

“EI Salvador has been the victim of-among other
belligerent and hostile acts-the continued transfer of
weapons, the last link in the chain being our neighbour Republic of Nicaragua, which acts under the
aegis of a misunderstood international solidarity and
does not practise, and respects even less, the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of Central
American States. As we all know, that principle
includes not only one State’s individual relations with
another but also its relationships with various States
and even international organizations ‘themselves.

“Having met in Panama city, the Foreign Ministers
of the Republics of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, in response to the kind invitation
extended by the Foreign Ministers of Panama, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela, countries of the Contadora Group, issued the following joint communique:
“‘ 1. On Tuesday, 19 April of this year, we met in
this city, animated by the highest spirit of Central
Americanism and inspired by our sincere desire for
peace and concern at the regional conflict; in search of
solutions conducive to the restoration of harmony and
security in the region.

“Everyone is aware that the armed groups operating in El Salvador have their central headquarters in
Nicaragua. It is there that decisions are made and
logistic support is channelled--logistic support with-,
out which it would be impossible for them to continue
in their struggle and without which they would have
joined in the democratic process.” [Ibid, paras. 15 and

“‘2.
The meeting was convened in order to continue consultations begun by the Foreign Ministers of
the Contadora Group with each of the Central American countries during the brief, successive visits they
made to the Governments of the five Central American republics on the 12th and !3th of,this month.

16.1

105. For those who have closely followed the way in
which the regional situation has been complicated, it wi.lI
be clear that the truth about the arms traffic to El
Salvador-for
this has been prolonged and continuous
from Nicaragua, although other routes have been useddaily became more evident, to the astonishment even of
those who originally felt that ideological pluralism was
going to prevail in Nicaragua and that, consequently, this
pluralism would preserve in international relations the
principle of non-aggression and the principle of nonintervention in the internal or external affairs of States.

“‘3. ’ A relevant occur&r&prior
to ttie,beginning
of the meeting was a.discussion on the methodology to
be adopted for consultations
on the regional
problems.
“‘4.
As a result of the consultations at that meeting, the participating Governments will jointly discuss, at a forthcoming meeting, the procedure and the
agenda that wi!l serve as a. basis for the, talks aimed at
seeking constructive and peaceful solutions guaranteeing harmonious coexistence within the framework of
respect for the principle of non-intervention
in the
internal affairs of other States and the ,selfdetermination of peoples.
“‘5.
We reaffirm, our. readiness to continue to
make efforts to achieve effective understanding
between the Central American countries, and in that
spirit we are prepared to meet next May,

106. It is auite true that the truth cannot be concealed
for long. And to demonstrate that unassailable link
between the Government of Nicaragua and the guerrilla
forces in El Salvador, it suffices to mention the episode,
surrounded hy mystery, in which two guerrilla leadersthe two highest leaders, indeed, of a far-left faction-died
in Nicaragua.

“‘6.
Lastly, we record our appreciation for the
valuable conciliatory work done by the Foreign Ministers of Panama, Colombia, ,Mexico, ‘and Venezuela,

107. El Salvador, supported by sovereign right, reserves
the right to present evidence, in good time and before the
appropriate regional forum, of Nicaraguan aggression.
10

We should like to add that if, for each transfer of weapons from Nicaragua to El Salvador, we had convened the
competent body, that body would have had to meet in
permanent session as the result of the continuous nature
of that arms traffic.

tion of tons of weapbns into Central America with a view
to destabilizing rCgimes, in spite of their respect for the
policy of non-intervention and in spite of their consistent
neutrality with regard to Libya’s problems in Africa,
which has not prevented Libya from playing a role detrimental to the peoples of Central America. Aircraft speak
for themselves.

108. “The measure you use for others is the one that
will be used for you.” When Commander Ortega
Saavedra, the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of
Nicaragua, in disrespect of the principle of nonintervention, set himself up as leader of the radical opposition groups in El Salvador and recommended in several
international forums what he called a “negotiated solution”, he was far from imagining that, because of the
Sandinist Junta’s dogmatism and sectarianism and its
suppression of democratic values and principles, there
would soon develop in Nicaragua a militant, active and
powerful opposition.

114. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprelation $rom French):
The next speaker is the representative of Mali. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
115. Mr. TRAORB (Mali) (inrerpretation from French):
It is a particular pleasure for me to address to you, Sir,
my delegation’s sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. I do so with joy and with a certain degree
of pride, both because of the very sound relations that
link our two countries and because we are convinced that
the high office you have occupied in your country, Zaire,
will ensure that you give an African touch to our deliberations here in the Council. I should also like to take this
opportunity to congratulale your predecessor, the representative of the United States, on the skill with which she
led the work of the Council during April, and to thank
all the Council members for having allowed us to take
part in its work.

109. We would like to see now whether what he was
prescribing for El Salvador will be applied in Nicaragua,
for some ingenuous people are interested in the practical
results .of those political recipes in Central America. In
the mean time, the Government of El Salvador will be
conducting free elections for a new President of the
Republic in an open, democratic process provided with
all the necessary guarantees, in which it will be possible
for every political ideology, without any discrimination
whatsoever, to participate,

116. For the third time in little more than a year the
Council has been requested by Nicaragua to consider the
situation prevailing both in that country and in Central
America in general. The successive requests of Nicaragua
can surely not be motivated merely by a desire to subject
the Council to exercises in rhetoric, pure and simple. The
Republic of Mali endorses the initiative of any State that
calls the attention of the Council to a crisis rather than
simply let things slide and rely upon the dubious verdict
of arms. Broadly speaking, such an action bears witness
to faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter and,
more specifically, adherence to the provisions of Article
35, paragraph 1 of which states: “Any Member of the
United Nations may bring any dispute, or any situation
of the nature referred to in Article 34, to the attention of
the Security Council or of the General Assembly”, in
other words, a dispute or a situation whose continuance
“is likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security”.

110. The repetitive nature of this debate and the hope
that no senseless resolution will result from the Council’s
discussions that might hinder the work of the Contadora
Group prompt me to stress our own approach to the
problems of the region. Here I would recall the comments made by the Foreign Minister of El Salvador just a
few days ago in the Council on this same topic. In the
framework of the East-West confrontation, which undeniably exists, we cannot fail to condemn the role being
played in Central America by Libya by introducing massive amounts of weapons into the region, thus making
the conflict more acute and provoking an escalation of
arms.
111. This morning [243&h meeting] the representative
of Libya clearly acknowledged the diplomatic support it
gives to terrorist actions in El Salvador. There is therefore not only a supply of weapons and equipment but
also political backing for the ultra-leftist opposition in
my country.
112, We saw how difficult it was for the representative
of Libya to explain his link with the Soviet Union, No
one had raised that question, but it is undoubtedly of
considerable importance and it is obviously considered
necessary to soothe the conscience of the Libyan people.
He attempted to convince the Council that the Soviet
Union is the natural ally of the third world countries and
that the close relationship that exists today between the
Sandinist Junta and that super-Power is a corollary of
that fact.

117. The statements that have been made in this
chamber, during both this series of meetings of the Council and those held in March 1982 and March 1983, on the
same item which is still before the Council, and particularly the statements by representatives from Central
America, corroborate the analysis made at the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating.Bureau of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries held at Man&
gua from 10 to 14 January of this year with regard to the
serious conflicts and tensions that afflict the region and
the critical situation confronting the Latin American
region.

113. Libya’s view of the Soviet Union is its own affair,
but what is a violation of international law is its introduc-

118.’ The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government cif Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
11

Delhi from 7 to 12 March of this year, recalled that the
Managua meeting was convened taking into account the
grave situation existing in the region, especially in Central America and the Caribbean. Moreover, the Conference noted with great concern the continuing tension in
Central America.

sovereignty over its natural resources, in accordance
with the will of its people, without outside intervention, interference, subversion, coercion or threat in
any form whatsoever”.3
That Declaration

119. Once again, Nicaragua has brought information
before the Council attesting to the serious development of
the situation, despite the fact that it has also had recourse to
other bodies, for the Security Council, because of its nature
and its functions, has specific and wide powers with regard
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

speaks for itself.

123. The international community would not be fulfilling its international obligations were it to attempt to
assesssovereign policies drawn up and applied by States.
124. The question for discussion before the Council
therefore has two facets which, were they to reflect matters not germane to the subject, could serve only to
spread confusion and deflect the debate from its main
objective, which is to restore peace in Central America.
First, the situation in Central America is extremely disquieting and the events which have occurred in Nicaragua have tended to aggravate it. Secondly, as signatories
to the Charter, the members of the Security Council,
after concluding their debate on this matter, should seek
to solve the problem within the framework of the relevant provisions of the Charter on the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means.

120. Quite apart from economic and social factors, the
head of State of Mali, President Moussa Traort, in his
statement before the General Assembly on 2 October 1981,
drew the attention of the international community to the
reasons for the deterioration of the international situation,
particularly with respect to the third world. He said:
“Outside Africa, through non-respect of the universal principles enshrined in the Charter-non-use
of
force, settlement of international disputes by peaceful
means, non-interference in the internal affairs of others and the right of peoples to self-determinationhot-beds of war and tension, far from diminishing, are
spreading.“2

125. Regarding the second point, my delegation is particularly pleased that all the representatives of the Central American countries who have participated in the
Council’s debate have expressed the readiness of their
Governments to be open to constructive dialogue in
order that a pointless confrontation should not undermine the ties of friendship, brotherhood, solidarity and
co-operation of which they have spoken and are quite
legitimately proud.

This analysis of the international situation was recently
corroborated by the heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Countries at New Delhi, after they had considered the sources of the tensions now confronting Nicaragua and other Central American countries.
121. When he spoke in the Council on 9 May [2431sr
meeting], the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, after having described the situation in his country
and in Central America, went on to state that he had
come here to speak of peace and not war. Thus he
eschewed any attempt to find a solution to international
disputes by the threat or use of force and confirmed
before the Council his Government’s commitment to
respect the purposes and principles of the Charter and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on the
settlement of international disputes by dialogue, backed
up by a genuine political desire to preserve world peace.

126. In fact, this dialogue has already been initiated. In
this connection reference has been made in particular to
the initiative taken by Colombia, Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela at Contadora in order to bring about a ceasefire in Central America and thus make it possible for the
understandable interests of the region to prevail over destructive violence. Mali welcomes and supports this
peace initiative, because the quest for peace through
genuine dialogue is one of the essential components of its
own foreign policy and one of the major concerns of its
people, as has been proved in other circumstances.

122. The principle of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of States, which has been proclaimed by all
Member States, should therefore be applied without any
reservation calling into question the very essence of that
principle. The General Assembly meant just that when it
adopted resolution 36/103, containing the Declaration
on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention and Interference in
the Internal Affairs of States. In that annex to that resolution the Assembly, in order to safeguard that principle,
defined a set of rights and duties applicable to all States,
among which we would mention the following:

127. We are convinced that the Security Council will
not deviate from its peaceful mission. It will recall that it
was, indeed, in Central America that the ideasubsequently endorsed by the General Assembly--of
proclaiming a year of peace, a month of peace and a day
of peace originated. It will have to act to ensure that
there are several months of peace in Central America to
make it possible for the heads of State of the Contadora
Group to complete their work far from the noise and
rumblings of the machines of war. The foundations of
that noble undertaking can already be glimpsed in the
information bulletin which the Group published on 12
May at Panama City [S/15762, annex], foundations
which they propose to consolidate by holding a meeting
of the five Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Central Amer-

“The sovereign and inalienable right of a State
freely to determine its own political, economic, cultural and social systems . , . and to exercise permanent
12

ica from 28 to 30 May. It is also the duty of the Council
to lavite all the parties to the conflict in Central America
to refrain from vain accusatrons and unfounded suspicions so that in the name Of our peoples we may pledge
0urselves,in the words of the Charter, “to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours, and to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security”.
128, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
French):
The next speaker is Mr. Ebrahim, observer from the Pan
Africsaist Congress 0f Azania, which the Council
decided [243&h meeting]
t0 invite to participate in this
debate in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
129, Mr. EBRAHIM (Pan Africanist Congress of Azania); First and foremost, Sir, allow me to congratulate
you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of this
important Council for the month of May. We are confident that under your able leadership it will make a valuable contribution to the cause of justice and peace. Allow
me also to express sincere thanks to you and the
members of the Council for giving the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania this opportunity to address the
Council in this important debate.

132. We t00 are a national liberation movement. Our
emergence and subsequentdevelopment are due solely t0
the specific conditions in our country and not tO“outside
influence”. Britain, the Colonial Power, in 1910 handed
Over colonized Azania to European settlers, to the total
exclusiOn of the rightful ownersof that country the African majority. One of the first actsofthe a][-whi;eBritishinstalled administration wasto adopt the so-calledLand
Act of 1913, which gavethe settler minority 87.3 Pr cent
Of the total land area, although they numbered lessthan
one fifth 0f the total population. The African indigenous
majority was arbitrarily allocated 12.7 per cent of the
land, where currently the racist regime is establishing
bantustans. In addition to this arbitrary and wholesale
theft 0f the land, the British-installed regime systematicallY introduced and institutionalized racism in order
effectively t0 exclude the vast majority from the instruments and organs of government and to ensure maximum exploitation 0f the indigenous majority in the
interests Of foreign imperialist Powers, Hence it is not
surprising that profit returns in apartheidSouthAfrica
are among the highest in the world,
133. One does not need a degreein political sciencet0
appreciate the grossinjustice so blatantly prevalent in the
Union 0f South Africa Act adopted by the British Parliament and the logical evolvement of a racist, exclusivist
and discriminatory system. So repugnant to the human
conscience is the apartheid
system that the international
community has correctly come to describeit as a crime
against humanity.

130. The Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, the custodian of the legitimate aspirations of the oppressed, exploited and dispossessed people of Azania-the historical African name of apartheid
South Africa-decided to
make thjs statement after due and deliberate consideration. The motivating factor was our deep desire and
long-standing quest for justice, as well as a fervent hope
and call for a much needed recommitment to the sacred
and lofty principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Our humble statement, therefore, is not
aimed at castigating for the sake of castigating, or at
scoringdebating points; rather, it should be viewed as a
genuineplea for justice and the rights of all people to live
as freemembers of the human race under a system of
their own choice.

134. Academically speaking, the people of occupied
Azania under the given circumstanceshave two choices:
either to accept the imposed serfdom or to liberate themselves. But, in reality, they have only one choice,namely,
to liberate themselves from the tyranny of the fascist
oppressors, because no slave relishes slavery. Where
mankind is oppressed, there will be resistanceto that
oppression. This is an objective fact of life.
135. The irony, however,is that this legitimate struggle
by oppressed,exploited and dispossessed
peoplesis often
described by some self-styledexponents0f freedom and
democracy as “acts of terrorism”, while the blatant acts
of the real oppressorsand undemocratic forces-he they
in the form of torture, massacres,occupation 0r the very
violation of basic human rights-are condoned Or
encouraged by the self-sameexponentsof freedom and
democracy,
The truth is that such lofty principles asfreedom and democracy have been made subservient to
greedy subjective interests- currently the interests0f the
super-Powers.

131. The Sandinists only a few years ago were a national liberation movement, just like the Pan Africanist
Congressof Azania. They evolved as a national liberation movement not because of foreign or alien instigation
but becauseof specific conditions in Nicaragua itself.
The Somoza regime not only was oppressive, exploitative
and brutal but also loyally served foreign imperialist
interests,as opposed to the legitimate interests and wellbeingof ordinary Nicaraguans. The Sandinists succeeded
in overthrowing the corrupt and oppressive Somoza dynastY precisely because that dynasty no longer commandedany respect or support from ordinary Nicaragusas. The opposition
and hostility
of ordinary
Nicsraguansto the oppressive and subservient Somoza
r@me was so overwhelming that there was no alternative hut for it to collapse and for its leaders to seek refuge
abroad,

136, The Reagan Administration has made it abundantly clear that the interests of American big business

will prevail over everything else, even over the,al’iance
with Western Europe. Did the Reagan AOmm*stratron
not apply pressure on Western European cOuntriesOver
the gas pipelineissuet0 harm their interests?Indeed! the
Reagan Administration has declared itself the lnternational gendarme and, therefore, arrogated the “right” to
interfere globally.
13

137. ,There exists tangible evidence.pf the Administration’s active involvement in .Central America, in .particular and Latin .America and the Caribbean in general.. Jn
the specific case of .Nicaragua, the Reagan Administra,tion has not hidden the fact. that it ‘wants to destabilize
and eventually overthrow the popular Sandinist Government. The excuse advanced by the United States Administration is that the Sandinist Government, which is
fervently committed to the policy of non-alignment in
international relations and to the social prpgress of its
people internally, poses a “threat” to the United States.
It is inconceivable that an economically developing and
agricultural country could pose any kind of military
threat to a country which is the number-one producer of
all kinds of lethal weapons in the world and the biggest
arms merchant.

escalation of, the conflict. in that country and its,heavy
toll. of lives, holding the innocent people.of Nainibia hostage in the game of super-Power politics. The Reagan
Administration
similarly continues to deny the dispossessed Palestinian people their inalienable~and.legitimate
rights, while openly supporting Zionist terrorism, massacres, occupation and expansionism.
. ..
142. Apartheid has been correctly described and
branded as a crime against humanity: Hence if there is
any rkgime that needs to be totally eradicated, it is the
fascist regime in Pretoria. What has been the attitude of
the Reagan Administration towards the racist, fascist
apartheid rCgime? It has been one of encouragement and
consolation. We have been told that the Reagan Administration is pursuing a policy of constructive engagement.
Can there be a constructive dialogue with self-professed
racists? In essencethe policy of constructive engagement
means protecting the South African racists from international isolation and deserved condemnation. In our view
the Reagan Administration would do well and serve
mankind if it entered into constructive engagement with
popuIar
people-oriented Governments
rather than
rctgimes whose continued existence poses a very real
threat to world peace.

138. If liberated Nicaragua does not pose a military
threat, does it pose any other kind of threat? Yes, it does.
The Nicaraguan revolution, just as the American revolution once was, is a source of inspiration to all peoples
fighting for their national liberation and social emancipation. For instance, the expulsion of the South African
racists from Managua was a great source of encouragement to our people. However, the remedy to this “inspirational” threat is not the unleashing of mercenaries and
discredited bandits against popular and liberationoriented Governments, but a concerted war against corrupt, oppressive, dictatorial, racist and fascist rtgimes.
Therein lies the everlasting remedy.

143. As a national liberation movement we fully appreciate the need for peace after liberation to achieve the
ultimate
objective of the bitter struggle-namely,
national reconstruction and the economic and social
uplifting of the people as a whole. The Nicaragucxns too
want that peace desperately. Moreover, after having
waged a heroic national liberation war, they are entitled
to it. But equally we know that the overthrown oppressors and exploiters will still be used by interested parties.
In the final analysis their counter-revolutionary activities
will prove to have only nuisance value.

139. As an oppressed, exploited, discriminated-against
and dispossessed people fighting for a just cause which is
universally supported, we are greatly perturbed at the
huge sums demanded by the Reagan Administration
from Congress to wage a war against a people whose
only “crime” was to fight with singular determination
and courage for its national liberation and social emancipation. Such a precedent, if allowed to go unchecked,
could pose serious threats to all those still fighting for
their national liberation and social emancipation. The
United Nations-especially
the Security Council-has
a
special role to play in protecting victories scored by peoples against the enemies of mankind.

144. In conclusion, we know it is a futile exercise to ask
the Reagan Administration to join the people and fight
colonialism, oppression and racism, including zionism.
That would be tantamount to asking one to cut off one’s
nose to spite one’s face. However, the United Nations,
and especially the Security Council, has a responsibility
to end international terrorism unleashed by superPowers in their mad drive for global hegemony. The Reagan Administration’s
war against the people of
Nicaragua, the holding up of Namibia’s .legitimate independence by introducing extraneous and irrelevant issues
and the open support rendered to the twin evils of our
time, apartheid and Zionism, are part of the global strategy aimed at subjugating people. The United States, having itself fought against foreign domination
and
exploitation, should be suitably placed to understand this
truism-where
there is oppression there will be resistance. But it is equally true that some people have short
memories.

140. What is even more disturbing is that the American
President is openly advocating, and is conniving to
achieve, the overthrow of popular Governments, while at
the same time wilfully shirking the noble responsibility of
ending tyranny and removing illegal administrations and
occupation forces elsewhere. For instance, the United
States, itself a product of revolt against foreign domination and tyranny, has a special responsibility, as a leading
member of the contact group, to remove the illegal presence of racist South Africa from Namibia.
141. Instead of honourably working towards the overthrow of an illegal administration and a system declared
repugnant and a crime against humanity, the Reagan
Administration
has been openly encouraging racist
South Africa’s continued illegal presence in Namibia, the
continued subjugation of the people of Namibia and the

145. The oppressed, exploited and dispossessed peoples
have always looked to the United Nations for their salvation and protection. They did so when they were fighting
for their national liberation, as we are doing today, and
14

also ‘after I attaining it, as the Nicaraguans are doing
today; This’ trust the United Nations must preserve.
Should it fail it, it will be at its own peril.
,_‘,.
146, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The nett speaker’ is the representative of Viet Nam. I
in+ite him to take a place at the Council table and to
m&e his statement.
147, Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Wet Nam) (interpretation
from French): Permit me at the outset, Sir, to offer you
the warmcongratulations of the delegation ofthe Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and to
wish you every success in carrying out your important
task,,1 should also like to thank all the members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in
this important debate.
148. Scarcely six weeks have elapsed, and the Council
has to meet in order to examine for a second time the
critical situation in Central America, which is a serious
threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Nicaragua as well as to peace and security in that entire
region. After listening carefully to the various statements
that havebeen made since 9 May on this item, my delegation believes that it is necessary to analyse and classify
the latest military and political events that have occurred
in recentdays in Nicaragua and around it in order fully
to grasp their nature and causes and determine accurately the most appropriate way in which to tackle them.

151. At the same time, the’ American Administration
has ndt slackened the intensification of its lying and
slanderous propaganda campaign against Nicaragua
thus attempting to put strong pressureori Congressand
on the American people in the hope of winning their
support for the new bellicose escalation against Nicaragua, the revolhtionary forces in El Salvador and other
peoples of Central America. The President of the United
States himself went so far as to announce publicly the
support and assistancegiven by the American Administration to the Somozist invaders.
152. A quick perusal of theserecent eventssufficesto
reveal the nature and pernicious origins of the situation
as well as the identity of those responsiblefor it, It is ii
fact the preset? Administration of the United States
which is trying, by all means, to restore the dictatorial
Somoiist rCgime in Nicaragua as well as to maintain its
dictatorial agents in El Salvador.
153. These imperialist manoeuvresand attempts have
been exposed before the whole,world.As usual, however,
the American Adniinistration is trying to ascribeits own
misdeeds to others and to lend legitimacy to its own
adventurous enterprisesby falsely accusingNicaragua of
having transported weapons to the guerrillas in El
Salvador.
154. However, t’he objective and watchful sector of
public opinion, in America and elsewherein the world,
has not been fooled. As far asthe people of Viet Nam is
concerned, it has no difficulty in detecting the hand of
Washington which is stepping up its threat against the
sovereignty and teiritorial integrity of Nicaragua, against
the freedom and independenceof the Central American
peoplesand against international peaceand security in
Central America.

149. It is regrettable that since the last series of Council
meetings to consider acts of aggression against Nicaragua the situation in Central America has worsened still
further and that a fresh wave of events has taken place,
with even more serious consequences threatening to lead
to a direct confrontation between Nicaragua and its
neighbours and to create explosive tensions throughout
the region.

155& From its own experienceas a victim of a lengthy
war Of aggression foisted upon it by the United States
itself, Viet Nam is fully awareof the underlying reasons
which prompt imperialist circles desperatelyto pursue
their sinister designs,obstinately contriving to implement
them one after the other. After the American defeatsin
I&lo-china, the United States Government did in fact
promise the American people that there would be no
“second Viet Nam”. Nevertheless,weshould not conclude
from this that the American imperialists, aswell as other
reactionary fdrces on the international scene,will no
longer do any harm to the Vietnamesepeople or to other
peoples struggling for their liberation. The American
imperialists, in collusion with other great expanslomst
nations, are still doing it to us, but in a different way.Of
course, it is extremely difficult for them at the present
time to send American troops or others to wage war
directly and overtly against peoples; they now prefer to
pursue their ,activities of intervention and aggressionsub
rosa through mercenaries who are recruited, financed,
trai;ed and orga&ed in Ainerican territory and elsewhere in order then to be sent into whateverbattlefifld
the imperialistsmay choose. The latter are,a!so helpfng
to prom& the regrouping and military tralnmg of Vletnamdse counter-revolutionary qlements in order to use

150, According to official Nicaraguan sources, after the
attacks launched against Nicaragua
by Somozist
counter-revolutionary elements and after numerous viola!ions of the airspace and territorial waters of Nicaragua
between14 and 27 April, a further large-scale invasion
waslaunched on 30 April against Nicaragua. Thousands
of Somozist counter-revolutionaries
took part in that
invasion, launched from Honduran territory, and further
attacks took place last week against Nicaragua, attacks
whichwere denounced yesterday before the Council by
the .Nicaraguan External Relations
Minister himself
[2433rdmeeting].Furthermore, four American naval vesselshave been stationed in Nicaraguan territorial waters
off the Pacific coast. If we add to this all the SomoziSt
mercenaries who were recruited, armed, maintained and
irained in various parts of the actual territory of the
United States and whb have been placed by the Central
Intelligence Agency on the north-east frontier and along
the southe,rn frontier of Nicaragua, we have the picture
0sthe complete military encirclement which is currently
gravelythreatening the sovereignty and independence of
Nicdragua.
15

proposals for dialogue and negotiations with its immediate neighbours and also with the Government of the
United States in order to settle by peaceful means ail the
problems which divide them. A very positive step was
taken in the undoubtedly useful direct contacts between
the Governments of Nicaragua and Costa Rica. We can
only regret the singularly negative attitude displayed thus
far by the United States Government towards these
repeated gestures of good will and peace on the part of
the Government of Nicaragua.

them in the same dirty work assigned to other mercenaries engaged in schemes of destabilization, subversion
and aggression against Cuba, Grenada, Nicaragua and
other countries.
156. The Security Council must live up to its responsibilities under the Charter and more determinedly than
ever consider the seriousness of the situation in Central
America in order more vigorously to influence the quest
for a peaceful and negotiated solution of the crisis.
157. It would be necessary first of all, however, to reject
as totally baseless the allegation of the so-called “defence

162. The delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam wishes to give its warm and unflagging support to
this constructive and responsible position taken by the
Government of Nicaragua. We support especially that
Government’s proposal for discussions with the United
States on the normalization of relations between the two
countries, as well as its proposal that bilateral negotiations be held and that non-aggression treaties be concluded immediately with any country which feels the
need for them.

of the interests of the American nation”, an allegation
droffered by the United States in the hope of lending
legitimacy to its acts of intervention and aggression in
Nicaragua, El Salvador and throughout the region.
158. One need only listen carefully to that sector of
public opinion that cherishes peace and justice and that
has recently become more vociferous in American
society to realize just how far the escalation of warlike
plans and actions by the United States in Central America has been the object of disapproval and criticism,
American opinion has quite properly pointed out that
when war was waged by the United States against Viet
Nam the various American Administrations during that
time frequently had occasion to invoke “the defence of
the security of the United States and the free world” as a
pretext for their aggressive adventures. It might well be
hoped therefore that this time the American people will
not allow this same deadly mistake to be repeated in
Nicaragua or in El Salvador.

163. The analysis of the situation and the constructive
proposals put forward in recent days in the Council by
the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua accurately reflect this consistent desire for peace and for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Confident of the rightness and justice of its cause, the Government of Nicaragua is once again appealing for the hotheads in
Washington to cool down and requesting that the Security Council take effective steps to put an end to all acts
of intervention and aggression against Nicaragua and to
exert a positive influence on the process of dialogue
aimed at removing the threat to Nicaragua and resolving
the crisis in Central America by peaceful means, including the good offices of the Secretary-General, on the
basis of respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular non-use of force or the
threat of force in international relations, non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and respect for the
sovereign equality of States and for the right of peoples
to self-determination and independence.

159. Fortunately,

meeting at this time to study Nicathe Council has indeed rejected the
ridiculous allegation I have just referred to, has recognized the validity of the Nicaraguan action and has honoured its responsibilities under the Charter,
ragua’s complaint,

160. It is already crystal-clear who is carrying out
threats and aggression and who is their victim.. It is none
other than the United States which is engaged in constant
manoeuvres of encirclement and provocation and is carrying out acts of aggression, a kind of war of destruction
on various levels against Nicaragua with the obvious purpose of weakening the Sandinist National Liberation
Front and ultimately
toppling the Government of
National Reconstruction of Nicaragua. But the heroic
people of Nicaragua is fully determined to fight to the
finish to defend its freedom and independence. It is
indeed fortunate that the people of Nicaragua has many
friends throughout
the world, among them the Vietnamesepeople, which will stand behind them to the very
end.

164. Once again, the Vietnamese delegation expresses
its full support for this legitimate request of the Government of Nicaragua, the purpose of which is to guarantee
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Nicaragua, the
independence and freedom of the peoples of Central
America, and peace and security in that region of the
world.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

161. A whole series of initiatives, including those of the
Contadora Group, has already been taken-to try to put
an end to all acts of aggression and intervention against
Nicaragua and to find a peaceful resolution of the crisis
in Central America. With a commendable sense of
responsibility and remarkable restraint, the Government
of Nicaragua ‘in particular has constantly put forward

Noms
’ A/38/68,

annex.

2 OfJcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth
nary Meetings,
Vol. I, 23rd meeting, para. 32.
3 General

Assembly

subparagraph(b).
16

resolution

361103,

annex,

Session,
IYe-

pera.2, section1,

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications dcs Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agencesdepositaires
du monde entier. Inl’ormez-vous auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK I-lOnYHMTb

M3fiAHMR

ki3AallMfl
Opralw3a[[Irl-I
II arel{TCTBaX
80 Bcex

pa8OliaX

OI’~AHM3ALHIM

06scnm~ewrmrx
Mlrpa.

Haullfi
hhDOAHTe

OG’bE,!DIHEHHbIX

MOmO
CnpaBKW

Marasnne nnn nm.un~e no anpecy: Opratmsauria
npon%Ke usAamR,
HbIO-tiopK
nnu XelieBa.

KynrlTb

B KHUxHblX

HAIlI@
Mara3llHaX

06 I~3AaliARX D BaUIeM KIwKHOM
O6aenulrennLix HasuB, Cerunw no

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerlas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirtjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

90-60205-January

1991-2,050
