A /72/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

64th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 5 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Perera (Sri
Lanka), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 77 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/72/L.7)
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/70 and
A/72/70/Add.1)
Reports on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process for
Global Reporting and Assessment of the State
of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects (A/72/89 and A/72/494)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea at its eighteenth meeting
(A/72/95)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.18)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (A/72/L.12)
Mr. Kyota (Palau): We would like to begin by
associating ourselves with the statements delivered
by Mrs. Jane Chigiyal, Ambassador of Micronesia, on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States, and
Mr. Ali’ioaiga Feturi Elisaia, Ambassador of Samoa, on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum (see A/72/PV.63).
For small island developing States like Palau,
the health of the ocean is everything. It is our food
security, livelihood, culture and identity. People refer
to us as small island States, but in reality we are large
ocean States. Living on our island means one is born
a fisherman or fisherwoman. We are able to see and
live in the reality of depleted and declining fish stocks
and biodiversity of the ocean. However, it is no longer
a fisherman’s tale to tell. Science is proving the tales to
be true. It is informing us that we need to act now and
stop unsustainable practices that are causing harm to
our ocean. The ocean is like a sick person and will die
if we do not take action to heal it.
The journey of a thousand miles begins with a
single step. At the United Nations, we have begun the
journey to restore ocean health. Over the past year, we
have seen great progress in raising the critical issue of
the ocean on the world stage. We thank Fiji and Sweden
for their leadership during the United Nations Ocean
Conference and for its outcomes, the call for action
(resolution 71/312, annex), the partnership dialogue and
the voluntary commitments. We welcome the Secretary-

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-41843 (E)

*1741843*

A/72/PV.64

General’s announcement of Mr. Peter Thomson as his
Special Envoy for the Ocean; he will continue that
momentum. That work and the progress made with
respect to marine protected areas are a proven part
of the integrated approach to a sustainably protected
ocean. We truly need to pursue that path to enlarge
marine protected areas and ensure that they are there
to repopulate, regenerate and have a spillover effect on
other areas.
In Palau, we are doing our part. Eighty per cent of
our water — the size of France — has been declared
a sanctuary, which we have set aside as a marine
protected area. We have also enacted a total ban on
shark hunting and measures to protect turtles and other
marine biodiversity. However, that will all be in vain
if nothing is done beyond our borders. The vast ocean
beyond our national maritime borders, the high seas,
must also be wisely managed and regulated; otherwise,
our national efforts will be meaningless.
We welcome the launching of the intergovernmental
conference on biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction
to ensure that we are able to address the critical issues
of marine genetic resources, area-based management
tools, environmental impact assessments, capacitybuilding and the transfer of technology. We look
forward to the early conclusion of the negotiations.
Within the worldwide network of protected areas,
we must also take into account the need for sustainable
development and create opportunities for food security
initiatives in developing countries by enhancing smallscale and artisanal fisheries and building capacity in
sustainable fisheries, tourism and aquaculture. We
must also advance multi-country and multi-stakeholder
partnerships on whole-domain management and
partnerships to tackle illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, human and drug trafficking and
harmful fisheries subsidies and pollution. In that
context, I would encourage all States to immediately
ratify the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated Fishing.
As we have often said, the ocean does not divide us;
it unites us. In that spirit, therefore, we look forward to
uniting and working together to restore our ocean.
Mr. Vasylenko (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the delegation of the European Union (see A/72/PV.63)
2/31

05/12/2017

and would like to add the following remarks in its
national capacity.
At the outset, we would like to express our gratitude
to the Secretariat and the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea for their work and constant
support during the year.
Today my delegation is pleased to join many others
in sponsoring the draft resolutions entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea” (A/72/L.18), “International
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction” (A/72/L.7) and
“Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”
(A/72/L.12). We commend the coordinators’ excellent
facilitation of the preparation of these draft resolutions.
The marine environment continues to be a matter of
serious concern, owing to climate change, marine- and
land-based human activities, marine debris, overfishing
and illegal unreported and unregulated fishing. All of
those factors increase pressure on marine ecosystems,
leading to their gradual degradation. It is therefore
crucial to ensure that the international community pays
attention to these problems and takes concrete steps to
address them.
We also have to continue fulfilling our
commitments in accordance with the Sustainable
Development Goals, which provide internationally
agreed policy guidance, goals and targets. In that
regard, we believe that proper implementation of
Goal 14, which recognizes the importance of the
conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and their resources, is vital to countering the major
threats that the marine environment continues to face.
In this regard, the adoption at the Ocean Conference in
June this year of the outcome document “Our ocean,
our future: call for action” (resolution 71/312, annex)
served as a clear signal to all stakeholders of the urgent
need for cooperation and coordination of joint efforts.
We acknowledge the importance of enhancing ocean
governance as a cornerstone for the preservation and
protection of the marine environment and biodiversity,
as well as ensuring peaceful relations among States.
17-41843

05/12/2017

The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea (UNCLOS) is rightly considered by its 168
Member States parties, including my country, to be
the constitution of the oceans, reflecting customary
international law and establishing the overarching
legal framework for all activities in oceans and seas.
Unfortunately, the UNCLOS legal order is currently
facing great challenges, owing to the Russian
Federation’s occupation of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol. Ukraine’s rights
as the coastal State in maritime zones adjacent to the
Crimea in the Black Sea and the Kerch Strait have been
interfered with and usurped by the aggressor State. We
have been unable to fulfil international obligations under
the respective treaties and conventional instruments
in the maritime areas appertaining to the Crimean
peninsula, including those relating to the safety and
security of navigation, the regulation of maritime
traffic, the protection of the marine environment and
search and rescue operations.
As a result, the north-eastern part of the Black Sea
has become a dangerous grey area for international
shipping, as shown by the number of marine casualties
and incidents. In this context, acting in good faith,
Ukraine is taking reasonable and responsible steps to
deal with the situation caused by the armed aggression
of the Russian Federation by peaceful means, through
our institution on 12 May of arbitral proceedings under
UNCLOS. We are confident that the Tribunal will
arrive at an appropriate and fair decision.
Maintaining and enhancing the security of maritime
spaces is essential to the ability of States to maximize
the benefits from the oceans and seas and develop
a sustainable ocean-based economy. We therefore
condemn all incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea, transnational organized crime and terrorism in the
maritime domain, trafficking in persons, smuggling of
migrants, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
and other maritime activities that threaten global
security, stability and prosperity.
We are concerned about the incidents of piracy that
have occurred in Somalia in 2017, posing an ongoing
threat to the prompt, safe and effective delivery
of humanitarian aid to the region, to international
navigation and the safety of commercial maritime
routes, and to other ships, including fishing vessels
operating in conformity with international law. In this
regard, we commend the countries that have deployed
naval forces in the Gulf of Aden and the Somali basin

A/72/PV.64

to dissuade piracy networks from carrying out acts
of piracy.
Though we are encouraged by the achievements of
the international community in countering maritime
piracy, we want to underscore that no sustainable results
will be possible if we do not deal with the root causes
of piracy and robbery at sea and bring the perpetrators
of such acts to justice, along with their organizers and
facilitators on land.
In conclusion, we would like to echo the latest
report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/72/70), which emphasizes the necessity of
full and effective implementation of the UNCLOS and
related instruments at the global, regional and national
levels as key to achieving ocean-related objectives and
fulfilling ocean-related commitments.
Mr. Claycomb (United States of America): My
delegation is pleased to be a sponsor of the draft
General Assembly resolution on oceans and the law of
the sea (A/72/L.18). This annual resolution serves as
an important opportunity for the global community
to identify key ocean issues and develop constructive
ways to address them. The United States values the
platform that the General Assembly provides to elevate
those issues.
In particular, we are pleased that this year’s draft
resolution recognizes the significant and continuing
contributions of the Global Ocean Acidification
Observing Network to fostering scientific cooperation
and building capacity to monitor and study ocean
acidification. Scientists established that collaborative
international science network in 2013 to document
the status and progress of ocean acidification. The
Network’s membership now includes more than 400
scientists from 67 countries and continues to grow
rapidly. We encourage all Member States and their
scientists to participate in the Network.
We are also pleased that this year’s draft resolution
encourages the global effort to map the ocean floor.
Mapping the sea floor will lead to critical benefits for
the world, including the sustainable management of
living resources, safe navigation, understanding ocean
circulation patterns, and access to seabed resources.
Such mapping also provides scientific information for
models of tsunami inundation and storm surges. We
encourage all Member States to consider contributing
to that important effort.

17-418433/31

A/72/PV.64

Among the most important issues contained in
this year’s draft oceans resolution is the propoaed
declaration of an international decade of ocean science
for sustainable development, which will start in 2021.
The decade of ocean science will stimulate international
cooperation on marine science so that we can identify
and fill critical gaps in our knowledge. It will increase
our understanding of ocean dynamics and marine
ecosystems and their impact on society. The decade
will also allow us to seek science-based solutions for
sustaining benefits from the ocean.
In relation to the draft resolution’s references to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
were agreed on in previous years, the United States
recognizes the 2030 Agenda as a global framework
for sustainable development that can help countries
work towards global peace and prosperity. We applaud
the call for shared responsibility in the 2030 Agenda
and emphasize that all countries have a role to play
in achieving its vision. We also strongly support the
national responsibility that is stressed in the 2030
Agenda. However, each country has its own development
priorities, and we emphasize that countries must work
towards implementation in accordance with their own
national circumstances and priorities. At this time, we
cannot express support for every specific goal or target
of the Sustainable Development Goals.
In relation to the draft resolution’s references to
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, we note
that on 4 August, the United States communicated to
the United Nations that it intends to withdraw from
the Paris Agreement as soon as it is eligible to do so,
consistent with the terms of the Agreement, unless the
President can identify suitable terms for re-engagement.
Furthermore, the language on climate change in the
draft resolution is without prejudice to evolving United
States positions. We recognize that climate change
is a complex global challenge and we stand ready to
continue working with others on that issue.
We would like to thank Mr. Thembile Joyini of
South Africa for his coordination of the draft oceans
resolution. He did an outstanding job. We would also
like to thank Director Gabriele Goettsche-Wanli and
the staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for their expertise and support, and to express
our appreciation to delegations for their hard work and
cooperation in negotiating the draft resolution. It is our
hope that this spirit of cooperation will characterize our
4/31

05/12/2017

efforts to address the numerous and complex issues that
lie ahead for the ocean.
The United States was pleased to participate in
the Preparatory Committee established by General
Assembly resolution 69/292 on the development of
an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. In
particular, we welcomed discussions on marine
protection and environmental impact assessments, and
how a possible new treaty could be used to conserve
and sustainably utilize marine biodiversity.
While we were pleased with the Preparatory
Committee discussions, we were disappointed by
its outcome. In particular, we were disappointed that
the Preparatory Committee process did not enable
delegations to negotiate consensus-based elements
of a draft text for a new instrument, as the General
Assembly had mandated the Committee to do so. The
issues before us are difficult and complex. Without
a consensus-based starting point, my delegation is
concerned that we will be unable to find a path forward
and that, rather than reach an outcome that could be
supported by all, we will instead have a controversial
result that is not in keeping with the balance that was
so carefully achieved in the Convention on the Law of
the Sea.
For that reason, we strongly believe that the
intergovernmental conference should operate by
consensus. We believe that this is the best way to find
effective and lasting solutions on marine biodiversity
beyond the national jurisdiction that will be supported
by most States. Unfortunately, the draft resolution
before us does not mandate decision-making consensus.
For that reason, we are unable to support it. However,
we will not block a consensus. My delegation remains
hopeful that we can make progress towards our shared
goal of conservation and the sustainable use of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction, and
urges all States to continue working on the basis of
consensus as the best path to a meaningful and lasting
new agreement. The United States would like to thank
Kate Neilson of New Zealand and Pablo Arrocha
Olabuenaga of Mexico for their outstanding efforts in
coordinating the draft resolution.
Regarding the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries (A/72/L.12), the United States greatly
17-41843

05/12/2017

appreciates the efforts of the facilitator, Andreas
Kravik of Norway, for his tireless management of this
challenging negotiation. The United States greatly
values the important work being done throughout the
world on sustainable fisheries and supports almost the
entire draft resolution that we have before us. The draft
resolution represents significant work to address global
priorities, including achieving sustainable fisheries;
fully implementing international fisheries agreements;
combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
strengthening fisheries governance; and many other
policy themes.
Unfortunately, the draft resolution contains
language that the United Stations Administration is
unable to support, namely, paragraphs 119 and 120.
With respect to operative paragraph 120, the same
paragraph appeared in the outcome document of the
Ocean Conference in June (resolution 71/312, annex).
The United States dissociated itself from that paragraph
at the time, stating that
“[T]he World Trade Organization’s (WTO)
independence from the United Nations must be
respected, and we continue to believe that the United
Nations must not attempt to speak to ongoing or
future work in the WTO, reinterpret existing WTO
rules and agreements, or undermine the WTO’s
independent mandate and processes. Continued
attempts to do so at the United Nations will make it
difficult for the United States to join consensus on
resolutions and conference documents.”
We are dismayed that that paragraph now appears
in the draft resolution before us. The United States also
notes that paragraph 119 contains outdated references
to the Doha Development Agenda. At the Tenth WTO
Ministerial Conference in December 2015, members
of the WTO did not reaffirm the Doha Development
Agenda and are no longer negotiating under that
framework. We cannot join a consensus on language that
does not appear to reflect that important development.
It is with great regret that we must call for a
recorded vote on this draft resolution because we
continue to oppose those objectionable paragraphs. We
hasten to add that we continue to support the rest of the
sustainable fisheries draft resolution, which provides
critically important policy guidance on sustainable
fisheries management to Member States. The United
States remains committed to taking strong, cooperative
action to ensure the sustainability of shared marine

A/72/PV.64

fisheries and resources, as well as combating illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. We will continue
to work with other nations through the United Nations
system and within the regional fisheries management
organizations in order to advance the key issues
highlighted in the draft resolution.
Mr. Umasankar (India): This has been a landmark
year in the global engagement on oceans and the law
of the sea. Our understanding of the interdependence
of our oceans, the global climate, weather patterns and
the prospects for sustainable development continues to
improve. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
on these and related issues (A/72/70).
The United Nations Oceans Conference, held in June,
put the spotlight firmly on issues relating to oceans. This
was the first such high-level conference that focused
on the various interlinked aspects of the condition of
our oceans and its impact on the sustainability of life
itself. We welcomed the comprehensive call for action
issued by the Conference (resolution 71/312, annex),
as well as the voluntary registry of commitments, to
which India also contributed. The Indian delegation
was led at the ministerial level. On World Oceans
Day, we announced the establishment of the IndiaUnited Nations Development Partnership Fund, the
first project of which focuses on climate resilience for
Pacific island States.
In this context, the first World Ocean Assessment
report, presented in April, was very useful in
contributing to the science-policy interface. The report
was considered at the eighth meeting of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects. The Group’s subsequent meeting in
September considered the elements for the preparation
of the second World Ocean Assessment. The reports
submitted by the Ad Hoc Working Group are useful for
further deliberations.
The April discussions of the Working Group fed
into the deliberations held in May at the eighteenth
meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the
Sea. We welcome the report of the Group (A/72/95) and
support the continuation of this process.
While the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which was adopted
after decades-long negotiations, lays down the

17-418435/31

A/72/PV.64

basic framework of international law governing the
jurisdiction of coastal States over adjacent maritime
areas, what happens to the governance of areas beyond
such jurisdiction is becoming increasingly important,
especially in view of the rapid advancements in
technology and our scientific understanding.
In this context, it is important that the Preparatory
Committee on an international legally binding
instrument on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction (BBNJ) also reached consensus on a
recommendation to convene an intergovernmental
conference. The BBNJ process is expected to give shape
to global governance of an aspect that is of importance
to everyone.
As a country with a vast coastline of more than
7,500 kilometres, with more than 1,000 islands and
with one third of its population living along the coast,
India has a long-standing maritime tradition and an
abiding interest in ocean affairs. India is the world’s
third largest producer of fish and second largest
producer of freshwater fish. We have 12 major ports
and nearly 150 smaller ones. We are acutely aware of
the challenges and opportunities that oceans represent,
from sustainable fisheries to prevention and the control
of marine litter and plastic pollution, from affordable
renewable energy to ecotourism and early warning
systems for disaster risk reduction and management,
building resilience and adaptation to climate change.
We must work towards innovative technologies for
offshore renewable energy, aquaculture, deep seabed
mining and marine biotechnology, which will provide
new sources of jobs and competitive advantage.
Earlier this year, the historic first summit of the
Indian Ocean Rim Association, of which India is an
active member, recognized the blue economy as a
driver of inclusive and sustainable economic growth
and development. The need to green the ocean economy
is also becoming clear. India was an active participant
in multilateral efforts to develop the collective
management of ocean affairs and one of the early
parties to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
In addition to UNCLOS, India is party to the
Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982; the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
6/31

05/12/2017

Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks; the International Convention for the Prevention
of Pollution from Ships, of 1973, as modified by the
Protocol of 1978; the International Convention for the
Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and
Sediments of 2004, which protects the seas from invasive
aquatic alien species; the 1972 London Convention on
the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of
Wastes and Other Matter; and other agreements that
regulate various activities of the oceans, especially the
conservation and sustainable use of ocean resources.
India cooperates with its partners in the region
through its membership of the South Asian Seas Action
Plan of 1995, which is serviced by the secretariat of the
South Asia Cooperative Environment Programme. The
main focus of the Action Plan is on integrated coastal
zone management, oil-spill contingency planning,
human resource development and the environmental
effects of land-based activities.
The smooth functioning of the institutions
established under the Convention — the International
Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea and the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf — is key to the proper implementation
of the Convention’s provisions and to achieving the
benefits desired from use of the seas.
Three decades ago, India was the first country to
receive the status of a pioneer investor in the Indian
Ocean. Today, Indian scientists are collaborating
with research stations in the Arctic Ocean, studying
its links to the climate in our own region, and Indian
hydrographers are partnering in capacity-building
efforts with our maritime neighbours. Indian institutions
work closely with regional partners in improving early
warning systems for tsunamis and cyclones. Indian
naval ships are deployed in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, emergency evacuation and in patrolling sea
lanes against pirates.
India remains committed to the sustainable
development of its blue-economy partnership for the
2030 Agenda, including Sustainable Development
Goal 14.
Mr. Bukoree (Mauritius): At the outset, my
delegation would like to align its statement with
those delivered this morning by the representatives of
Ecuador, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and
17-41843

05/12/2017

Algeria, on behalf of the Group of African States (see
A/72/PV.63).
We wish to thank and show our appreciation to
the co-Facilitators from New Zealand and Mexico,
respectively, for their successful facilitation of the
modalities draft resolution, A/72/L.7, in view of the
forthcoming intergovernmental conference on marine
biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction
(BBNJ).
We would also like to sincerely thank Ambassadors
Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and Carlos
Duarte of Brazil for their stewardship and their expert
and elegant conduct of the work of the Preparatory
Committee established by resolution 69/292, on
the development of an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. Mauritius therefore warmly welcomes
the convening of the intergovernmental conference in
September next year and fully supports the current
draft resolution.
We are now about to take a giant leap forward by
launching the start of negotiations and the drafting
of the text of the new international legally binding
instrument, and we are confident that it will be widely
accepted. While my delegation believes that the new
instrument should have a clear focus on the protection
and preservation of the marine environment, by
restoring ecosystem integrity, protecting habitats and
conserving species and genetic diversity, among other
things, we are also of the view that provisions should be
made for using the best available science to ensure the
conservation and sustainable use of marine resources.
The new instrument should also ideally encourage
and enhance cooperation between States, by States in
international organizations and between international
institutions, and pay particular attention to the benefits
to developing countries.
We are at the dawn of something truly historic and
exceptional. Oceans are in the spotlight and rightly so.
Never has there been such a need for a comprehensive
global regime to better address BBNJ conservation
and sustainable use. As time is of the essence and
the international community wants to achieve all the
Sustainable Development Goals, there is a pressing
need to establish a global legal framework for the
conservation of BBNJ. At the same time, that framework

A/72/PV.64

must be supported by existing regional treaties. Right
now, BBNJ protection and conservation is fragmented.
While there are many international bodies and treaties
that manage ocean resources and human activity in
areas beyond any State’s national jurisdiction, their
jurisdictions often overlap and there are virtually no
mechanisms that coordinate across geographical areas
and sectors.
Moreover, although the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides for a
global legal framework for the conservation of marine
species, it has only a few provisions involving marine
biological diversity. Traditional methods, such as the
zonal-management and species-specific approaches,
have been inadequate to conserving marine biological
diversity, since they pay little attention to the ecological
interactions between marine species.
The intergovernmental conference next year will
also be an opportunity to clarify jurisdiction over the
marine biodiversity found in the water column over
the areas of the extended continental shelf, which is
not adequately covered by current legal instruments.
Mauritius believes that there should be legal clarity
and certainty on the issue and adequate provisions
for oversight of the matter. While existing legal
instruments maintain that States have custody of the
resources on the seabed and subsoil of their extended
continental shelves, they are silent on marine genetic
resources in the water column above the extended
continental shelves.
In addition, the new instrument should ensure
that the designation of area-based management
tools, including marine protected areas, is done in
full consultation with coastal States and with full
respect for international law and generally accepted
international practices. While the new instrument may
make de facto reference to the different types of areabased management tools and their criteria, it should
also seek to establish a global system of connected
and effectively managed marine protected areas,
including representative networks in areas beyond
national jurisdiction.
The protection and preservation of the marine
environment is a matter of urgency. The high seas, which
cover nearly half of the planet and make up more than
60 per cent of the global ocean, contain some of the most
biologically important and least protected ecosystems
in the world. In this regard, the new instrument will

17-418437/31

A/72/PV.64

help reinforce the existing provisions under UNCLOS,
while shifting the onus onto States to take action for the
common good and not their own national aspirations
alone. It is further hoped that the international legally
binding instrument will reinforce cooperation among
States and that there will be clear binding rules for the
protection and preservation of the marine environment.
We are therefore confident that the new instrument will
succeed in adequately complementing UNCLOS.
Before I conclude, I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General’s appointment of Mr. Peter
Thomson, former President of the General Assembly,
as Special Envoy for the Ocean.
Mr. Alday (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Thembile Joyini of
South Africa and Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway
for their outstanding work as Facilitators of the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/72/L.18)
and sustainable fisheries, respectively (A72/L.12).
As a matter of principle, Mexico reaffirms that
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) constitutes the international regulatory
framework within which all activities in the oceans are
carried out and is a central part of cooperation in the
marine sector at the national, regional and international
levels, and its integrity must therefore be maintained.
It is that principle that serves as the basis for Mexico’s
participation in the negotiations on the draft resolutions
we are discussing.
Mexico is fully committed to the sustainable
development of the oceans, including the dimensions
of sustainable use, on one the hand, and protection
and conservation, on the other. At the national
level, my country encourages the use of the seas for
peaceful purposes, the equitable and efficient use of
its resources, the conservation of its living resources,
and the research, protection and preservation of the
marine environment, thereby promoting economic and
social advancement.
In this regard, Mexico underscores the international
community’s commitment to preserving marine
ecosystems, reflected in both Aichi Biodiversity
Target 11 and in Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its specific targets.
Hence the importance of the success of the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14, which adopted the
8/31

05/12/2017

declaration “Our ocean, our future: call for action”
(resolution 71/312, annex).
In this regard, I would like to emphasize that my
country has far exceeded Aichi Target 11 and has made
a significant contribution to achieving target 14.5 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, since more than 22 per
cent of Mexico’s marine area is currently protected.
We are also committed to developing instruments and
coordination mechanisms in order to generate synergies
with other relevant stakeholders.
Moreover, my delegation is delighted to inform the
General Assembly that following the designation of
the Revillagigedo Protected Natural Area as a national
park by the President of the Republic on 27 November,
the area of the protected site in that marine zone has
increased by more than 2,000 per cent. In 1994 there
were around 650,000 protected square hectares; today
that number is almost 15 million.
Moreover, Mexico fully endorses the conclusions
of the eighteenth meeting of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and
the Law of the Sea about the urgency of addressing the
effects of climate change and ocean acidification in the
marine environment and marine biodiversity. Mexico
encourages States to continue to improve their scientific
research in order to better understand these effects
and study ways for adapting to them. In this context,
Mexico supports the UNESCO proposal to establish an
international decade of ocean science for sustainable
development in order to increase the capacities and
resources for research, in accordance with UNCLOS.
We urge relevant international organizations to
strengthen their cooperation to share and disseminate
information and to coordinate research efforts.
We also condemn the illicit trade in species via
the oceans and have increased our efforts to preserve
endangered marine species. In this regard, I would
like to highlight two specific cases. With regard to the
illicit trade in species, Mexico is working jointly with
other countries to define coordination mechanisms
that will enable us to curb the illegal trafficking of
totoaba fish at various points along the consumer
chain. Regarding the preservation of marine species,
Mexico has also taken a number of actions aimed at
halting activities affecting the vaquita porpoise and
continues to seek tools to help preserve it, including
through continuing communication with the relevant
international organizations.
17-41843

05/12/2017

A/72/PV.64

So far I have been discussing actions related to the
sustainable development of oceans from my national
perspective. However, in order to address the full
scope of this issue, we have to discuss the conservation
and sustainable use of marine resources beyond
national jurisdiction.

Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
reports under this agenda item (A/72/70 and A/72/70/
Add.1), which provide important information on the
recent developments relating to ocean affairs and the
law of the sea.

In this regard, we are pleased that the Preparatory
Committee established under resolution 69/292 has
concluded its work and recommended convening an
intergovernmental conference as soon as possible to
negotiate a legally binding international instrument
in the framework of UNCLOS. We congratulate
Ambassadors Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago
and Carlos Duarte of Brazil, as well as their respective
teams, for their hard work during the four sessions of
the Preparatory Committee.

We would also like to thank Mr. Thembile Joyini
of South Africa and Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway,
Ms. Kate Neilson of New Zealand and Mr. Pablo
Arrocha Olabuenaga of Mexico for their enormous
efforts in coordinating the informal consultations on
the important draft resolutions A/72/L.7, A/72/L.12 and
A/72/L.18, on which we are going to take action.

As noted by the representative of New Zealand
(see A/72/PV.63), our delegations had the honour of
facilitating the negotiations of draft resolution A/72/L.7,
resulting from the recommendation of the Preparatory
Committee to convene a negotiating conference. Mexico
reiterates its thanks to all delegations for their work
and support, and to the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea for its support during this process.
We acknowledge in particular the dedication and spirit
of camaraderie in which Kate Neilson conducted this
difficult joint task.
For my delegation, the added value of the draft
resolution — which has been endorsed by 133 Member
States to date — lies not only in the convening of a
negotiation conference based on the 2011 thematic
package, but also in beginning its substantive work in
2018, and in the fact that it offers clarity regarding the
conference’s working modalities. In that connection,
Mexico recognizes that the intergovernmental
conference must be an open, inclusive and transparent
forum in which States, international organizations, civil
society and other relevant actors have the opportunity
to express their opinions and ensure the establishment
of clear and efficient rules. This is why it is so
important for my delegation that the draft resolution
offers sufficient flexibility in terms of the time needed
to negotiate a legally binding instrument that is robust
and aspires to universality.
We are ready to work with the entire membership
on this task, the final objective of which is to preserve
our oceans and thereby our planet.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our deep appreciation to the General Assembly and its
subsidiary organs for their productive work on oceans
and the law of the sea this year. We also welcome
the outcomes of the 18th meeting of the Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea and the success of the 18th Meeting of States
Parties to the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), and acknowledge the
activities of the bodies established by the Convention,
including the International Seabed Authority and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf. We
attach special significance to the role, contribution and
jurisdiction of the International Tribunal on the Law of
the Sea and other dispute-settlement mechanisms in the
interpretation and application of UNCLOS.
Viet Nam is a coastal State and among those
countries most vulnerable to climate change, sea-level
rise and extreme weather events. At the same time, we
suffer from the adverse effects of maritime pollution
and marine resource depletion. We strongly support all
efforts by the international community to promote the
conservation and sustainable use of oceans, seas and
marine resources.
It has been heartening to witness the significant
developments relating to ocean affairs and the law
of the sea over the past year, in particular the great
success of the first-ever Ocean Conference. With its
declaration, entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for
action” (resolution 71/312, annex) and more than 1,000
voluntary commitments and partnerships registered,
the Conference has created important momentum for
addressing ocean issues and the effective implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14. It is now
time to turn our commitments into actions.

17-418439/31

A/72/PV.64

I would like to stress the importance of capacitybuilding and the transfer of modern marine technology
by developed countries to developing and least
developed countries, as well as coastal and small
island developing States, in order to help strengthen
their ocean-based economies and their resilience to
climate change and contribute to their fulfilment of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
We also welcome the work and recommendations
of the Preparatory Committee established by resolution
69/292, on the development of an international
legally binding instrument under UNCLOS on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ).
Viet Nam is of the view that biological diversity and
resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction should
be considered the common heritage of humankind. We
support the General Assembly’s decision to convene an
intergovernmental conference, under the auspices of
the United Nations, to consider the recommendations of
the Preparatory Committee on the elements and to draft
the text of an international legally binding instrument
on BBNJ with a view to developing the instrument as
early as possible.
UNCLOS provides a comprehensive and equitable
legal framework for all activities in the oceans and seas.
It has created a solid foundation for the maintenance
of peace, stability and security and the promotion of
sustainable economic development, including the
conservation and sustainable use of marine resources
in areas both within and beyond national jurisdiction.
The importance of UNCLOS has been highlighted in
the Assembly’s annual resolutions on oceans and the
law of the sea, especially in SDG 14 and the declaration
of the first Ocean Conference. The full implementation
of the Convention by all States parties will be key to
ensuring a peaceful environment for cooperation and
partnership in the seas and oceans. Viet Nam was among
the first countries to sign and ratify the Convention
and has always adhered to its provisions, respected
the legitimate rights and interests of other nations, and
actively participated in activities within the framework
of the Convention.
The East Sea, also known as the South China Sea,
not only plays a crucial role in the livelihood of the
peoples of its coastal countries but also hosts important
international shipping routes. The maintenance of
peace and stability, maritime security and safety, and
freedom of navigation and overflight in the East Sea
10/31

05/12/2017

is the shared interest and concern of the region and
the world.
Together with other countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Viet Nam calls
upon all parties concerned to exercise self-restraint and
settle disputes in the East Sea by peaceful means, in
accordance with international law, including UNCLOS,
fully respect diplomatic and legal processes, and
faithfully implement the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea. We welcome the recent
adoption by ASEAN and China of the framework of
the Code of Conduct and call for swift and substantive
negotiations to expedite the completion of an effective,
feasible and legally binding code of conduct, in
conformity with UNCLOS.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once again
the universal and unified character of UNCLOS. We
urge all nations to respect and fulfil their obligations
to ensure peace, stability and sustainable development
of the oceans, seas and marine resources for the benefit
of humanity — for all of us and for future generations.
Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): I have the honour of
conveying to the General Assembly the warm greetings
of Yokwe from the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the representatives
of Samoa and the Federated States of Micronesia, who
spoke on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum and the
Pacific small island developing States, respectively (see
A/72/PV.63).
While oceans and fisheries remain a topic of great
interest for many States Members of the United Nations,
for the Marshall Islands, ensuring sustainable oceans
and fisheries is of paramount and vital importance. One
need only look at a map to understand why. We are a
nation composed of more than 99 per cent water.
The Marshall Islands welcomed the high-level
meeting on Sustainable Development Goal 14 held
earlier this year. For us, oceans are not just a sector
but the primary basis of our culture, our environment
and our development. For a nation in a region that
helps supply approximately half of the world’s tuna
and is home to some of the world’s richest biodiversity,
ensuring sustainable development is not only to our own
national benefit but can also make a major contribution
to global food security and the world’s environment.
In this forum, we are not just a small island State but a
17-41843

05/12/2017

large and loud voice in wider global efforts on oceans
and climate change. It is time that other nations stood
with us, not just in words, but in actions that prove their
political will.
The Marshall Islands, and the other parties to the
Nauru Agreement, have benefited from our zone-based
management approach and the related Vessel Day
Scheme to ensure that conservation, economic
development and the allocation of fishing effort take
place within our exclusive economic zone on our own
terms. Our eventual expansion into the commercial
tuna-fishery industry is not picking a fight; it is
simply a question of basic economic survival for our
islands. Indeed, under the Fish Stocks Agreement, we
are moving forward to build our capacity to fish our
own waters, support vessels with onshore services
and process the catch. We have already accomplished
this in the purse-seine sector, and we now anticipate
moving forward into a Vessel Day Scheme approach
to longlining tuna-fishing boats, which will greatly
improve catch verification by independent observers
and other management systems.
We firmly reject the notion that distant fishing
nations somehow have flag-State rights to fish our
waters, and this will not change. At present, we license
distant fishing nations and give them the opportunity
to fish in our waters because, despite our status as a
coastal State, we have not yet built the capacity to fish.
But there will come a time when the Islands has the
capacity to expand fishing in its own zones, and others
will have to be prepared to give way. For other nations,
fishing our domestic waters — with the conservation
conditions and sustainable measures that we attach to
such fishing — is a privilege, not a right.
Domestic revenues from licensing have already
increased dramatically, allowing us to invest in our
own infrastructure, but we still enjoy only a small
fraction of the benefits produced by the industry as
a whole. We are increasingly building that capacity
in the Marshall Islands and the wider region. The
expanding domestic footprint in the industry is a vision
of the future. We are firmly committed at the highest
levels to rewriting the script. For us, sustainability and
development are not opposites, but one and the same.
While many nations stand with us on this matter at the
United Nations, we remain seriously concerned that in
regional negotiations sentiments can change quickly
behind closed doors, potentially leaving us with a

A/72/PV.64

lowest-common-denominator outcome that could leave
future generations behind. That would be unacceptable.
When we gather at the United Nations in May 2018
for World Tuna Day, we must do so with the strongest
possible commitment to achieving sustainable fisheries.
In this regard, we are confident that our progress will
result in the recertification of our purse-seine fishery
programme by the Marine Stewardship Council, the
world’s largest sustainable-fishing initiative. While
some distant fishing nations may be slow to wake up
to the new landscape, private-sector demand is already
charting a positive course for the sustainability of
our fisheries.
It is vital that we ensure that our people are not
passive bystanders or mere spectators when it comes
to our own resources; they must be directly involved in
our fisheries and our economic future. Continuing with
the status quo would prolong our outsized dependence
on foreign assistance and result in our missing a vital
opportunity to generate revenue and employment and
ensure sustainable practices. Put simply, advancing
in our own initiatives on our terms is the key to
dramatically transforming our entire region.
We remain strongly concerned about the overall
state of the ocean environment. It is true that we and
others are optimistic and see avenues for future success.
But we are concerned about the declining global health
of oceans. If the international community takes a step
forward, it is also taking two steps backwards at the
same time. We risk losing species that science has
barely begun to understand. We risk leaving future
generations behind if we fail to fully benefit from our
primary resource. In particular, we are concerned about
the fact that the effects and projected risks of climate
change are having an adverse impact on our primary
resource. Likewise, local drivers of ocean and marine
pollution have cut off our urban centres from the oceans
right in front of them. This tragic scenario is seen
around the world, and reflects not a dearth of reports
or a lack of international principles, but a failure of the
political will needed to turn words into action.
We look forward to engaging in focused
intergovernmental negotiations for a new instrument
to address biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction.
It is also vital that the United Nations system and
the international community continue to take steps
that prevent the oceans issue from being sidelined
and continue to mainstream oceans into our wider

17-4184311/31

A/72/PV.64

development planning and ensure that our young
people and future generations have a positive future to
look forward to, a future in which no one — and no
island — is left behind.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia is
pleased to welcome the three draft resolutions submitted
under the agenda item relating to ocean issues, and we
thank the Facilitators for their excellent efforts — South
Africa, for draft resolution A/72/L.18, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”; Norway, for draft resolution
A/72/L.12, entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including
through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of Straddling
Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and
related instruments”; and Mexico and New Zealand,
for draft resolution A/72/L.7, entitled “International
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction”. We would also
thank the Secretariat for its excellent and tireless
support throughout the negotiation process.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Ecuador on behalf of the Group
of 77 States and China (see A/72/PV.63).
In the past year, there have been various important
and crucial developments that are covered in the
draft resolutions under discussion. One positive note,
among others, is the recognition of the growing
number of transnational organized crimes committed
at sea, including trafficking in persons, drug crimes,
people-smuggling and the illegal trafficking of flora
and fauna. We agree that enhanced international
cooperation is required to address such crimes through
the application of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crimes and other
relevant instruments. Indonesia appreciates the work
and publications of the United Nations Office for Drugs
and Crime with regard to transnational organized
crimes at sea. They provide us with more evidence on
the emergence and interlinkage of different types of
crimes at sea and a formula to address them.
Another important aspect that is worthy of serious
attention is the relationship between illegal, unreported
and unregulated (IUU) fishing and transnational
organized crime supporting such activities. IUU
12/31

05/12/2017

fishing activities have decimated countless species
and impoverished coastal communities from Africa
to the Pacific. These illegal practices cause further
destruction to economies and social conditions and
undermine human rights through corruption, money
laundering, document forgery, forced labour and many
other crimes committed in the value chain.
Indonesia has launched tough measures against IUU
fishing and has also adopted a regulation barring slavery
and forced labour in the fisheries industries. Poachers
are now avoiding Indonesian waters. Indonesia has also
led in the effort to establish regional instruments to
fight crime in the fisheries sector, in which we included
coastal States, flag States and market States.
Another positive reference within the draft
resolution is to the outcome of the United Nations Ocean
Conference, one of this year’s instrumental and major
achievements, with its call for action (resolution 71/312,
annex) and more than 1,400 voluntary contributions
covering a number of important ocean-related subjects,
such as marine debris, marine protected areas,
sustainable fisheries, climate change and other areas of
common concern.
One important element that my delegation wishes
to stress here is the sense of urgency agreed on by the
leaders within the call for action, given that the situation
of the oceans has already reached an alarming level.
We would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to all Member States for recognizing that
sense of urgency. In fact, one quick result of the call
for action has been the completion of the preparatory
meeting on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction and the agreement to convene an
intergovernmental conference in 2018. The time is ripe
for action, and we call for the critical condition of the
oceans to serve as the impetus for the completion of the
process. We must stress that commitment means action.
To that end, we welcome the participation of States,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders in the process
on the broadest possible scale. The oceans are our
legacy, and we must show our ownership. Our oceans
and seas are facing critical challenges from just one
source — ourselves. The adverse impact of climate
change and oil pollution at sea, such as oil spills from
fixed platforms and collisions of vessels; marine plastic
debris floating like giant islands or eaten by fish and
17-41843

05/12/2017

ocean mammals; various forms of plundering the
oceans’ wealth, including IUU fishing; crimes and
transnational organized crimes in fisheries sectors; and
even the destruction of the pristine coral reef in Raja
Ampat, Indonesia, the global epicentre of coral-reef
biodiversity — all come from none other than human
activities. What we therefore need now are sincere
actions to save our oceans. Words and commitments are
important, but actions are vital.
We reaffirm the primacy of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) as the
main instrument that regulates activities in relation to
the oceans. Our view of universal ratification is that
it should be seen not only from the perspective of the
number of States parties, which now stands at 168
countries, but also from that of the size of the ocean
space covered by the UNCLOS regime, which was
adopted in 1982. While it would of course be ideal
to have all States Members of the United Nations be
parties to UNCLOS, at this stage what we all have to
consider is whether or not our ocean is covered by the
rights and obligations stipulated comprehensively in
UNCLOS — our constitution of the ocean.
Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy for the Ocean and fully support his
future work. We are ready to collaborate in all oceanrelated undertakings in future. In this regard, we want
to announce that from 29 to 31 October 2018, Indonesia
will host the fifth Our Ocean Conference, which will be
an important forum for mobilizing stakeholders such as
States, international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector on ocean issues, so
as to contribute to the safety and security of our oceans
with a view to achieving Sustainable Development
Goal 14.
Mr. Sisilo (Solomon Islands): I would like to join
earlier speakers in thanking our Facilitators from
Mexico, New Zealand, Norway and South Africa for
their able stewardship in bringing our negotiations on
the oceans, law of the sea, sustainable fisheries and areas
beyond national jurisdiction to a successful conclusion.
I would like to associate myself with the statements
delivered earlier today by the permanent representatives
of Samoa and the Federated States of Micronesia on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific
small islands developing States, respectively (see A/72/
PV.63).

A/72/PV.64

As a small island State, Solomon Islands has
an abiding interest in strengthening a rules-based
framework through the adoption of treaties, norms and
guidelines. We survive better in a world governed by the
rule of law rather than might alone, and in which there
are international norms that respect the sovereignty
of States. That is why we are a passionate advocate
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, which governs international conduct on maritime
issues, and why we call on States that have not yet done
so to ratify the Convention.
Solomon Islands sits on the largest aquatic continent
in the world. We have a vast maritime exclusive
economic zone of 2.6 million square kilometres,
much larger than our land territory of 28,000 square
kilometres. Our small-scale artisanal fishers provide
income and livelihoods to our coastal communities, as
well as important foreign investment and Government
revenue through exports and access fees. Our net worth
can be measured in the billions of dollars. Furthermore,
the ocean has always been our source of livelihood.
We depend on it for economic growth and sustainable
development. It is also part of our culture, gastronomy
and leisure. The ocean defines who we are; it must
therefore remain healthy if we are to survive.
Failing to protect the ocean from the scourges of
climate change, illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, acidification, plastics, oil spills, leakages from
war relics and other forms of pollution is failing to
protect ourselves and our survival. However, thanks
to the United Nations Ocean Conference held in
New York in June to support the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14, there are some rays
of hope — in the call for action that the Conference
adopted (resolution 71/312, annex) and in the more than
1,400 voluntary commitments that the call for action
inspired. Solomon Islands is among the many countries
that have made voluntary commitments.
In this regard, I must pause to commend Fiji and
Sweden, for successfully co-hosting the Conference,
and the Ambassadors of Portugal and Singapore for
delivering the call for action in such a transparent and
efficient manner. We also welcome the appointment
of Peter Thomson as the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for the Ocean and would like to assure him of
our support.
The Ocean Conference and the call for action have
set a good foundation to build on for the future, but

17-4184313/31

A/72/PV.64

it is imperative to ensure that the positive momentum
continues and indeed accelerates. The role of the
United Nations system will be important, and future
global ocean conferences held on a periodic basis can
support the progressive achievement of Sustainable
Development Goal 14. Ultimately, implementation and
its means — financing, technology and capacity — will
be key. As the Governments of the world proclaimed in
the call for action, our ocean is critical to our shared
future and common humanity, and we are determined
to act decisively and urgently to protect and restore the
health and resilience of our blue planet.
Not only through direct exports but also via fees
from access-to-fishing licensing agreements, fisheries
are currently the predominant ocean-dependent
industry in my country. Despite the relative abundance
of these national assets, we have somehow not really
gotten around to translating these resources into
something more meaningful and beneficial for our
people. Indeed, we are still struggling to get a suitable
and fair share of economic returns from the sustainable
use of our marine resources.
In our efforts to turn the tide and make a big
difference in the lives of our people, we have signed up
to a number of regional frameworks, declarations and
other policy statements aimed at deriving maximum
economic returns from our maritime resources.
Zone-based management of tuna fisheries in our waters
works for conservation and business development. We
have what is called the Vessel Day Scheme, which sets
a hard limit on the number of fishing days allowed by
purse-seine fishing vessels in our region.
Since the inception of the Vessel Day Scheme,
revenue accruing to countries parties to the Nauru
Agreement has risen from $60 million annually in 2010,
to close to $500 million this year. From the increasing
revenue, hospitals and wharves are being built, airports
and roads are being paved and Government operations
are being funded. It is not about cutting out the distantwater fishing nations, not at all. It is about developing
the capacity of our islands to fish our own waters and
process the catch. The Pohnpei Ocean Statement and
the Framework for Pacific Regionalism are testimony to
our efforts to turn the tide in our favour. After all, these
are our oceans, and whatever is within our exclusive
economic zone is ours by right.
We have demonstrated our strength in our ownership
and management of our fisheries resources through
14/31

05/12/2017

cooperation and regional solidarity. An excellent
example is the regional surveillance programme, where
countries in the region work together, and with our
partners Australia, New Zealand, the United States of
America and France, by sharing resources, expertise,
information and real-time intelligence to combat
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
But challenges remain. Climate change and
carbon-dioxide emissions keep staring at us in the face
as they continue to mercilessly degrade our oceans and
seas. As the Permanent Representative of the Federated
States of Micronesia said this morning (see A/72/PV.63),
climate change will be the defining security challenge
of this century. Indeed, an unstable climate and the
subsequent displacement and relocation of people can
exacerbate some of the core drivers of conflict, such
as migratory pressures, culture clashes and competition
for limited resources.
Those are threats to the very existence of
humankind and could very well morph into threats
to global peace and security. The Security Council
has already acknowledged that link in its adoption in
March of resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad
basin region, which included a paragraph recognizing
the adverse effects of climate change on stability in
that region, among other factors.
Unfortunately, the United Nations system is illequipped to respond. Our current reform efforts must
therefore take this growing threat very seriously. That
is why the Pacific small islands developing States have
been asking that the Security Council also address the
issue of climate change. And that is why I will once
again reiterate our call for the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on climate
and security.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As one of the leading seafaring nations, our
country pays close attention to the development and
enhancement of international cooperation on global
ocean issues. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for preparing his comprehensive report on this topic
(A/72/70). Productive cooperation among States in this
field is possible owing to a solid legal foundation that
consists of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the legal instruments
adopted in accordance with it.
This year’s draft of the annual omnibus resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/72/L.18) emphasizes
17-41843

05/12/2017

the universal and uniform nature of the Convention.
It reaffirms that the Convention prescribes the legal
framework for the implementation of all activities in
the world’s oceans and that its strategic importance lies
in its forming the basis for national, regional and global
action and cooperation on ocean issues. It is crucial that
its integrity be maintained. We would therefore like to
reiterate that it is unacceptable for any changes to be
made to the legal framework for ocean activities as
defined by the Convention.
Our delegation calls for the effective implementation
of existing legal instruments that have been adopted
on the basis of UNCLOS and for seamless and
coordinated work by the relevant global, regional and
sectoral bodies. We consider attempts to reconsider the
mandates of these structures to be unacceptable, since
they could weaken them, undermine their activities and
disrupt the equilibrium of international cooperation.
We take special note of the successful cooperation
within the framework of the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks and the system of regional fisheries-management
organizations that the 1995 Agreement established.
The fact that it was implemented on its entry into
force has proved that it is a reliable instrument for
regulating fisheries issues beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction, taking into account the balance between
sustainable fisheries and preserving the marine
environment. We once again call on States to cooperate
in establishing new regional fisheries-management
organizations, and in enhancing the effectiveness of
those already existing. We welcome the increase in the
number of States parties to the Agreement this year,
and we invite States that have not yet done so to become
party to it.
A crucial role continues to be played by the
Convention bodies — the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf (CLCS) and the International Seabed
Authority. We congratulate the new members of the
Commission and the seven judges of the Tribunal on
their respective elections. We hope that their efforts will
help those bodies to carry out their work dynamically
and professionally. We consider it important to provide
adequate resources for the work of those bodies. In
particular, we again call for a solution to the long-

A/72/PV.64

standing issue of health insurance for CLCS members
during their stays in New York.
The discussion of issues related to the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond
national jurisdiction is particularly important. This
year, the Preparatory Committee established by General
Assembly resolution 69/292 to develop an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction completed its
work. Unfortunately, within that format, delegations
were unable to reach consensus on any of the possible
elements of a draft text for an international legally
binding instrument based on the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
The mandate that is set out in resolution 69/292 was
therefore not fulfilled by the Preparatory Committee.
We are concerned about the fact that the draft resolution
on the convening of an intergovernmental conference
(A/72/L.7) is being forced through immediately after
the Preparatory Committee’s completion of its work,
and we have to point out that the biodiversity process
is once again being held hostage in an atmosphere of
artificially generated haste. Moreover, in order to
expedite the completion of work on the draft resolution,
some ambiguities in the modalities for the future event
were simply omitted. Our constructive proposal for
developing two draft resolutions that would enable
us to carefully study all the procedural aspects of the
work of the intergovernmental conference was ignored.
This very disappointing approach will prevent us from
joining the consensus on the draft resolution’s adoption.
We also want to comment on the claims made once
again by the Ukrainian delegation. The standard set
of insinuations and clichés it used is pure propaganda
and not based in reality. As to Ukraine’s ocean-related
claims, we do not believe that they are appropriate
to the agenda item under consideration, nor that the
General Assembly is an appropriate place for engaging
in arguments on such issues.
Mr. Ravshan (Maldives): I would like to begin
by aligning myself with the statement delivered this
morning by the representative of Ecuador on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China (see A/72/PV.63), and
by welcoming the annual draft resolutions under this
agenda item (A/72/L.12 and A/72/L.18), as well as the
important new draft resolution on the international

17-4184315/31

A/72/PV.64

05/12/2017

legally binding instrument on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas
beyond national jurisdiction (A/72/L.7). My delegation
also welcomes the reports of the Secretary-General
(A/72/70 and A/72/70/Add.1), which document the
progress that has been made under this agenda item.

action. We would also like to emphasize the need
for a facilitative and transparent follow-up process
and recognize the efforts being undertaken by the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Ocean and
the United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs in creating the Communities of Ocean Action.

We have been debating the issues related to
oceans for more than 30 years. Yet the discussion that
we begin today must take into account an alarming
reality — the ocean is in peril. Unless we act now, life
in the ocean will perish forever. Marine pollution is at
an all-time high. The fragile marine ecosystem is being
compromised and depleted. Climate change is causing
irreversible damage, including deoxygenation and
ocean acidification. Indeed, it is causing sea levels to
rise. Coral bleaching is destroying reefs that have been
around for millennia. Human activities are suffocating
the rich marine biodiversity, and species are being
driven to extinction. The United Nations has issued a
call for action (resolution 71/312, annex), and it is now
time for us to act and listen to the voice of the ocean.

In addition to following up on existing
commitments, we must also identify deficiencies and
gaps in particular areas and galvanize further action.
In the light of the success of the Ocean Conference, my
delegation supports holding a follow-up conference and
would like to assure the Assembly of our commitment
to making that a reality in 2020. The SDG 14 followup process is an excellent opportunity to learn from
each other and inspire more action through showcasing
success stories. The Maldives made nine commitments,
covering a number of SDG 14’s targets, ranging from
eliminating plastic pollution to sustainable fisheries.

The Maldives, as a nation of small islands, has
a duty to raise that voice. For we, the islanders, the
people who breathe the ocean and depend on it for
our livelihood, our sustenance and indeed our very
existence, understand the dangers more than anyone
else. However, the ocean is too large and the dangers
it faces are too enormous for this issue to be framed as
one for small island or coastal States alone. It is a global
issue that requires a global solution.
We are pleased to see that we have accelerated
progress in this journey to make amends this year. Just a
few months ago the historic first United Nations Ocean
Conference was held, focusing solely on the ocean
within the context of the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 14. The Conference brought
together not just leaders of countries, but leaders from
different areas of ocean conservation and industry
to discuss the challenges facing the ocean and the
solutions to these problems. We would like to express
our gratitude to Fiji and Sweden for taking the lead in
making the Conference a reality.
The success of the Conference has been
demonstrated by its ambitious call for action (resolution
71/312, annex) and the more than 1,400 voluntary
commitments that emerged as the outcomes. My
delegation would like to express our gratitude to
Singapore and Portugal for facilitating the call for
16/31

The Maldives has always considered the ocean
to be our most valuable resource. Our two largest
industries, tourism and fishing, are highly dependent
on our beautiful ocean and its bounties. Recognizing
the delicate balance that needs to be struck between
reaping economic benefits and conservation, the
Maldives has utilized sustainable practices in these
industries since they have existed, and even before
SDG 14 materialized.
We are well known for our “one island, one resort”
concept. Special consideration is given to ensuring
that any new developments are sensitive to the natural
ecosystem and that there are no long-term adverse
effects. Each resort is required to protect its surrounding
waters, recognizing the shared benefits for tourism that
arise from conservation.
In close partnership with civil society and local
communities, we are also enhancing national efforts
to curb serious emerging issues, such as marine plastic
pollution, which has a detrimental impact on both the
environment and the tourism industry. We have also
played an active role regionally in the Indian Ocean
to reduce drifting fish-aggregating devices and ghost
fishing gear, which is a cross-border issue that further
exacerbates marine pollution in Maldivian waters.
The Maldives uses the cleanest and greenest
methods of commercial fishing in the world. Our tuna
is harvested entirely one by one, by pole and line and
handline, which ensures that there is no by-catch.
Commercial fishing within the 200 nautical miles of
17-41843

05/12/2017

our exclusive economic zone is limited to Maldivian
citizens. We do not issue foreign fishing licenses, and
fishing for sharks and sea turtles, as well as several
other threatened or endangered species that have strong
protections, is completely banned.
However, illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing from foreign fishing vessels in Maldivian
waters is a significant challenge that we face and that
undercuts our efforts to preserve and sustainably use
our resources. As a country with vast expanses of
ocean but limited resources to monitor them, we need
the support and collective action of the international
community to address this issue.
Earlier this year, we joined the Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. We
thank those States parties that have contributed, under
article 21 of the Agreement, to the fund for assisting
developing States in implementing the treaty. We
encourage countries that have not yet ratified the
Agreement to do so as soon as possible.
To address issues facing the oceans effectively, we
need to have a better understanding of the nature and
the extent of the issues, as well as of the ocean itself. At
the moment, however, it seems that we have better maps
of the moon than we do of the sea floor. That is why
the Maldives welcomes the International Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development, declared
in this year’s draft omnibus resolution (A/72/L.18).
We commend the initiative of the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission in this endeavour and look
forward to engaging constructively in the development
of the implementation plan.
We would also like to express our appreciation for
the focus of the eighteenth meeting of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process of Oceans
and the Law of the Sea on the effects of climate change
on oceans. The discussions helped to reinvigorate the
focus on this area of climate-change effects, which is a
serious issue facing the Maldives and many other small
island developing States and low-lying coastal nations.
This has been a record year for hurricanes in the
northern hemisphere, and the increasing frequency and
intensity of such storms are linked to climate change.
The fury of these ocean-generated storms are a call from
the ocean for us to take action to reverse the negative
effects that we have caused and to do so immediately.

A/72/PV.64

In heeding that call, we must take a comprehensive
approach that will allow us to collectively protect areas
of the ocean that are currently beyond protection. The
new internationally binding instrument to conserve
and sustainably use marine biodiversity in areas
beyond national jurisdiction has the potential to enable
us to achieve this end. We believe that it is crucial to
start addressing these issues within the setting of an
intergovernmental conference as soon as possible.
We have been considering the drafting of such a
treaty for more than 10 years. Today, we believe that
enough progress has been made to begin the formal
process. We would like to thank Mexico and New Zealand
for leading the consultations on the draft resolution on
modalities for the conference (A/72/L.7), which we
believe has the ability to deliver a fair and balanced
instrument that can achieve widespread ratification.
The ocean sustains life on the planet. Yet human
actions are now changing the nature of the ocean
from a source for sustaining life to a potential threat
to our very existence. With the power to act now, we
have a duty to stop the irreversible damage that we are
causing. We must ensure that the generations to come
are not deprived of the rich resources that the ocean has
to offer or, even worse, be faced with an inhospitable
world. As I said earlier, the challenge is not confined
to small island developing States. It is a challenge to
the survival of the planet as we know it, and it requires
shared solutions for a shared destiny.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): My delegation
associates itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Ecuador, Samoa, and the Federated
States of Micronesia, on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Pacific small
island developing States, respectively, on the agenda
item under consideration (see A/72/PV.63).
My delegation is pleased to be a sponsor of the
three draft resolutions under consideration for adoption
under agenda item 77 — the omnibus draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/72/L.18) and the
draft resolutions on sustainable fisheries (A/72/L.12)
and the modalities for an intergovernmental conference
on the development of an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ) (A/72/L.7). Our
support is based on our strong conviction that national,

17-4184317/31

A/72/PV.64

regional and international cooperation within the ambit
of UNCLOS, which is the international legal framework
for all activities related to the oceans and seas, is
pertinent. We thank the Facilitators from South Africa
and Norway for their leadership and even-handedness
in carrying out this important work this year.
On the development of an international legally
binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, we pay particular
tribute, first, to Ambassador Carlos Duarte of the
delegation of Brazil for his astute leadership and
guidance in steering us to the successful conclusion in
July 2017 of the work of the Preparatory Committee
established by General Assembly resolution 69/292 on
BBNJ. We also commend his predecessor, Ambassador
Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago, for his worthy
contributions to the process, as well as the Facilitators
and the secretariat of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea, who also played crucial roles.
We also acknowledge and thank Mexico and New
Zealand for the important facilitating roles that they
have subsequently played in coordinating the draft
modalities resolution. Those achievements have indeed
reflected our collective efforts, in which we should all
take pride.

05/12/2017

my delegation looks forward to the adoption of draft
resolution A/72/L.7 under consideration under this
agenda item.
Ms. Nakarmi (Nepal): At the outset, I wish to
commend the important draft modalities resolution
entitled “International legally binding instrument
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction” (A/72/PV.7), as it clearly lays out
modalities for the upcoming treaty conference to be
held in 2018. My delegation welcomes the decision to
be taken by the General Assembly to convene such an
intergovernmental conference in 2018 and pledges its
full support for the entire process.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Ecuador and
Bangladesh on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
the least developed countries, respectively (see A/72/
PV.63). Nepal would now like to make the following
points in its national capacity.

The sponsorship of the draft resolution by nearly
70 per cent of the United Nations membership is a
clear testament to the commitment of Member States to
ensuring that the unacceptable status quo with regard
to the tragedy of the commons, particularly the issue
of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction, is effectively addressed for the sake of all
of humankind today and for the generations to follow.
It is a call for action against the business-as-usual
modus operandi.

I further wish to express my appreciation for the
excellent leadership and work of Ambassador Carlos
Duarte of Brazil and Ambassador Eden Charles of
Trinidad and Tobago as Chairs of the Preparatory
Committee for the development of an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ),
in 2017 and 2016, respectively. Our sincere thanks also
go to the Facilitators, Mr. Pablo Arrocha Olabuenaga of
Mexico and Ms. Kate Neilson of New Zealand, for their
outstanding work during the informal consultations
leading to the finalization of draft resolution A/72/L.7.

The stakes are indeed high for all of us, as was
demonstrated by the political sensitivities facing us
throughout the BBNJ preparatory process. The road
ahead will certainly not be without its challenges. As
trustees of the global commons, it is incumbent on the
international community to harness this opportunity
and work together to make the transformative changes
necessary for the greater good of humankind. We are
confident that the solid foundation that has been laid
to take us forward to the next phase will guide our
work to a successful outcome at the intergovernmental
conference, starting next year. For these reasons,

We also underscore the importance of the milestone
resolution 69/292 for developing an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, which serves as a
foundation for the BBNJ process. We also support other
ocean-related forums that advocate for the sustainable
use and governance of oceans, including the Regular
Process, the Informal Consultative Process and the
negotiations on oceans and the law of the sea. In this
regard, we appreciate the work of South Africa and

18/31

17-41843

05/12/2017

Norway in successfully facilitating the draft omnibus
resolution (A/72/L.18).
As a party to UNCLOS and as a least developed
and landlocked mountainous country, Nepal attaches
great importance to the treaty conference that will be
addressing the package elements agreed to in 2011,
namely, marine genetic resources, including questions
on the sharing of benefits, area-based management
tools, including marine protected areas, environmental
impact assessments and capacity-building, and the
transfer of marine technology.
Oceans are the source of the planet’s lifeblood,
as they provide us with oxygen, food, fresh water,
medicines; protection for biodiversity as they shelter
the wide range of marine species; and stability for
transportation, international trade and tourism. Oceans
are precious for all countries — large and small,
developed and developing, situated near and far from
the sea coast. It is our shared responsibility to care for
the health of the oceans and enhance their capacity,
while sustainably making use of marine resources
and biodiversity and while also developing legal
frameworks based on the UNCLOS and other existing
legal instruments.
During the Preparatory Committee sessions, some
issues were agreed on but not others. We hope to resolve
them in detailed discussions at the intergovernmental
conference. For landlocked developing countries such
as Nepal, marine genetic resources are the common
heritage of humankind. The high seas, climate
change, the equitable sharing of benefits, capacitybuilding and transfer of technology, education and
awareness-raising and protection of the environment
and ecosystems through area-based management tools
are all crucial topics to be discussed. Just as it did in
the Preparatory Committee sessions, my delegation
will be actively participating in the forthcoming
intergovernmental conference.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the draft modalities resolution and reaffirms its full
cooperation in the upcoming intergovernmental process,
including the Regular Process, the Informal Consultative
Process and the intergovernmental conference.
Mr. Tito (Kiribati): At the outset, I want to join
my Pacific colleagues in aligning myself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Samoa
and the Federated States of Micronesia, on behalf of
the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific small island

A/72/PV.64

developing States, respectively (see A/72/PV.63). I also
join other delegations in thanking the delegations of
South Africa, Mexico, Norway and New Zealand for
their commendable facilitation of the negotiations on
these draft resolutions.
As a sponsor, my delegation is greatly honoured
to address members of the General Assembly on
this occasion and to express our full support for the
adoption of the proposed resolutions on the ocean and
the law of the sea (A/72/L.18) and sustainable fisheries
(A/72/L.12).
This is the first time that Kiribati is actively
participating in the deliberations on issues of this type.
In fact, we regret that we were not present during the
preliminary discussions and negotiations in the 1970s
that led to the adoption of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), but at that time
Kiribati was still under colonial rule. Consequently,
and unfortunately, the UNCLOS, as it exists today,
has in our view done some injustice to Kiribati, since
it splits the vast, time-honoured ocean of Kiribati into
three distinct exclusive economic zones. It is also clear
that the rule used to subdivide our ocean area into three
separate zones was not the same as that used for other
similar archipelagic States.
That does not mean, however, that Kiribati is any
less enthusiastic about the protection of the oceans
and seas for the benefit of all. In fact, we have been
very active in the protection of the ocean and seas, in
line with our own traditions and with conservation
measures agreed on regionally and internationally,
including UNCLOS. Recently, Kiribati declared the
Phoenix Islands Protected Area — more than 300,000
square kilometres, representing about 11 per cent of our
national exclusive economic zones — to be a protected
marine area where fishing is totally banned. That is
a great sacrifice for a small nation like Kiribati. The
gesture may seem small, but it is a real sacrifice that
means forgoing millions of dollars in needed annual
fishing revenue. It is a gift to humankind, because it
will contribute to the continuing replenishment of
marine biodiversity for the benefit of present and future
generations, whose livelihoods and development, I have
no doubt, will always depend on the ocean and the sea.
With the cooperation and assistance of our
regional and international partners, we have adopted
and implemented many laws for the protection of our
marine environment and resources, and we have always

17-4184319/31

A/72/PV.64

adopted a precautionary approach to enforcing them.
We have discovered that the conduct and behaviour
of fishing peoples and industries — especially from
distant-water fishing nations, which are generally
driven by the desire to make huge profits in the short
term — have become one of our greatest challenges
with regard to enforcing our conservation laws for the
seas and oceans. We therefore look forward to greater
cooperation at the global level in combating that human
greed for profit, because it is not only affecting the
quality of our health, it is affecting everything else on
the planet.
Kiribati is moving forward with an ambitious
plan to become a big fishing nation by 2037, as part
of a major leap forward to turn the islands into a
wealthy, strong and self-sufficient nation in 20 years,
in line with its long-term vision — Kiribati Vision 20
(KV20) — and other developmental goals set by the
United Nations. Kiribati hopes that the seas and ocean
around it continue to be the great friends of its people,
as they have been since time immemorial.
The threat of climate change in the islands, as
predicted by science, has not deterred the people of
Kiribati in their determination to move ahead with their
KV20 plan, in line with the Sustainable Development
Goals and targets and the Istanbul Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 20112020. Kiribati hopes that with the cooperation of the
entire world, the causal factors of climate change will
soon be reversed. Failing that, we have prepared one
of our magical powers to invoke the powers of the
spirits of the sea to tell the sea and the ocean to remain
friendly to island peoples, not only of Kiribati but of all
the world’s islands. For that reason, we fully support
the adoption of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik, President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik (International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea): It is a great honour for me to take the
floor on behalf of the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea at the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly on the occasion of its examination of agenda
item 77, on oceans and the law of the sea.
I will first report on the organizational and judicial
developments related to my Tribunal that have taken
place since my predecessor addressed the Assembly in
December 2016 (see A/71/PV.55). I will then make a
20/31

05/12/2017

few remarks related to perspectives on the future work
of the Tribunal.
With regard to organizational matters, I wish to
inform the Assembly that on 14 June the Meeting of
States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea elected seven judges to the Tribunal for a
term of nine years. Two judges were re-elected — Judges
Boualem Bouguetaia of Algeria and José Luis Jesus of
Cabo Verde — and five were newly elected: Mr. Óscar
Cabello Sarubbi of Paraguay, Ms. Neeru Chadha of
India, Mr. Kriangsak Kittichaisaree of Thailand,
Mr. Roman Kolodkin of the Russian Federation and
Ms. Liesbeth Lijnzaad of the Netherlands. The new
judges were sworn in in Hamburg on 2 October.
On 2 October, I was elected President of the
Tribunal for a three-year term. On the same day, Judge
David Attard of Malta was elected Vice-President.
Judge Albert Hoffmann of South Africa was elected
President of the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the
Tribunal on 4 October. Concerning the Registry, on
15 March the Tribunal elected Ms. Ximena Hinrichs as
Deputy Registrar of the Tribunal for a five-year term.
With respect to judicial matters, I inform the
Assembly that the Special Chamber of the Tribunal
formed to deal with the Dispute Concerning Delimitation
of the Maritime Boundary between Ghana and Côte
d’Ivoire in the Atlantic Ocean (Ghana/Côte d’Ivoire),
delivered its Judgment on 23 September. In that
Judgment, the Special Chamber delimited the maritime
boundary between the two parties in the territorial sea,
the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf,
both within and beyond 200 nautical miles. In addition,
the Chamber dealt with Côte d’Ivoire’s claim that
the responsibility of Ghana was engaged for alleged
violations of the rights of Côte d’Ivoire.
The first question that the Special Chamber had to
examine was whether the parties had already effected
by agreement the course of their maritime boundary.
After examining the arguments and facts presented
by the parties, the Special Chamber found that there
was no tacit agreement between the parties to delimit
their maritime zones. In that connection, the Special
Chamber emphasized that oil practice, no matter how
consistent it may be, cannot in itself establish the
existence of a tacit agreement on a maritime boundary.
The Special Chamber also expressed the view that
evidence relating solely to the specific purpose of oil
activities in the seabed and subsoil is of limited value
17-41843

05/12/2017

in proving the existence of an all-purpose boundary
that delimits not only the seabed and subsoil, but also
superjacent water columns.
Regarding the delimitation methodology, the
Special Chamber found no convincing reason to
deviate from the equidistance/relevant circumstance
methodology in this case. The Special Chamber noted
that the relevant coasts of the parties are straight and
not unstable, and therefore it saw no reason to assume
that the identification of base points and the drawing of
a provisional equidistance line would be impossible or
inappropriate. After having established the provisional
equidistance line, the Special Chamber examined
whether relevant circumstances requiring an adjustment
of that line exist, and came to a negative conclusion.
Regarding a possible cut-off resulting from the
equidistance line, owing to the concavity of the coast
line, the Special Chamber held that some cut-off effect
exists but that that effect is not so significant as to
require an adjustment of the line.
With respect to the question as to whether the
location of maritime mineral resources should be
considered a relevant circumstance, the Special
Chamber emphasized that maritime delimitation is not
a means for distributing justice, and that in principle the
pertinent international jurisprudence favours maritime
delimitation based on geographical considerations.
Regarding the delimitation of the continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, the Special Chamber
applied the same delimitation methodology as within
200 nautical miles, thereby following the Judgment of
the Tribunal in the case Delimitation of the maritime
boundary in the Bay of Bengal (Bangladesh/Myanmar),
which was the first decision of an international court
or tribunal delimiting the continental shelf beyond 200
nautical miles.
After having delimited the maritime boundary
between the parties, the Special Chamber had to
deal with Côte d’Ivoire’s claim relating to Ghana’s
international responsibility. The Special Chamber
came to the conclusion that none of Ghana’s activities
engaged its international responsibility.
The Assembly may recall that in this case, Ghana
had initially instituted arbitration proceedings against
Côte d’Ivoire under annex VII to the Convention.
Subsequently, the parties agreed that the case should
instead be dealt with by a Special Chamber of the

A/72/PV.64

Tribunal composed of five judges. That was only the
second time that parties agreed to submit their case to
a Special Chamber. Nonetheless, the procedure before
a Special Chamber may be an option for States when
they consider the various possibilities available to them
for the settlement of their disputes. The Statute of the
Tribunal provides that such a special chamber shall be
formed if the parties to the dispute so request.
It is noteworthy that the Statute allows for
considerable involvement of the parties in the selection
of the members of a Special Chamber. Although the
composition of such a chamber is ultimately to be
determined by the Tribunal, the Statute explicitly
requires that that has to be done with the approval of
the parties. Furthermore, the parties have the right to
choose judges ad hoc to serve as members of the special
chamber if the Tribunal does not include members of
their nationality on the bench.
I may add that the proceedings before a Special
Chamber follow the Tribunal’s rules of procedure,
which, having evolved over the years in the Tribunal’s
practice, offer a stable and predictable basis for the
conduct of proceedings. A judgment given by a special
chamber is considered as having been rendered by the
Tribunal and therefore has the same binding force as
judgments of the Tribunal. Moreover, Special Chambers
and the parties before them profit from the support and
facilities of the Tribunal’s Registry.
Let me also highlight the fact that immediately
after the Special Chamber handed down its judgment
in the Ghana/Côte d’Ivoire case, the parties’
representatives issued a joint communiqué in which
they reiterated their mutual commitment to abiding by
the terms of the judgment and fully collaborating on its
implementation. The joint communiqué also affirmed
the parties’ strong will to work together to strengthen
and intensify their brotherly relations of cooperation
and good neighbourliness.
There is another case currently pending in the
docket of the Tribunal, namely, the M/V “Norstar”
case (Panama v. Italy). The Assembly may recall that
this case, which was instituted before the Tribunal on
17 December 2015, concerns the arrest and detention
of the M/V “Norstar”, an oil tanker flying the flag of
Panama. Currently, written proceedings on the merits
of the case are being conducted, and oral proceedings
are planned to be held in the autumn of 2018.

17-4184321/31

A/72/PV.64

Let me now offer a few remarks with regard to
perspectives concerning the future work of the Tribunal.
I would like to make three points in that regard.
My first relates to maritime boundary delimitation.
The Tribunal has handled two major cases concerning
the delimitation of maritime zones: the Delimitation
of the maritime boundary in the Bay of Bengal
(Bangladesh/Myanmar) and the Dispute Concerning
Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary between Ghana
and Côte d’Ivoire in the Atlantic Ocean (Ghana/Côte
d’Ivoire), on which I just reported to the Assembly.
Both judgments demonstrate that the Tribunal sees
its role as being part of a community of international
courts and tribunals and that it takes into account the
existing jurisprudence. The Tribunal therefore offers a
fair degree of predictability to the parties to maritime
delimitation cases.
At the same time, the Tribunal and the Special
Chamber, in their respective judgments, made important
new contributions to the development of international
jurisprudence on maritime delimitation. For instance,
that was the case when, as I mentioned before, the
Tribunal in the Bay of Bengal case, for the first time
in the history of international adjudication, proceeded
to delimit the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical
miles. The Special Chamber in the case between
Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire also provided clarification
with regard to legal questions that had so far received
only limited attention in international jurisprudence,
such as the interpretation of article 83, paragraph 3, of
the Convention.
In sum, one can safely say that the Tribunal has
demonstrated its capacity to deal with complex
maritime delimitation cases. It presents itself as an
efficient dispute settlement mechanism to which States
may wish to turn with their delimitation disputes in
the future.
My second point relates to another area of law in
which the Tribunal has had the opportunity to show its
expertise, namely, in cases relating to the arrest and
detention of vessels.
Such disputes may come to the Tribunal in various
forms. The most obvious is the prompt-release procedure
pursuant to article 292 of the Convention. In such cases,
the Tribunal determines the reasonable amount of bond
or other financial security upon the posting of which the
vessel and/or crew have to be released. That procedure,
which is an urgent procedure, offers an efficient
22/31

05/12/2017

remedy for flag States and ship owners. The arrest
of a vessel and/or crew has also given rise to requests
for the Tribunal to prescribe provisional measures
pursuant to article 290 of the Convention. Furthermore,
questions arising from the arrest of vessels have also
been brought before the Tribunal in cases on the merits,
mainly in connection with claims for damages resulting
from allegedly illegal arrests and detentions.
In sum, one can say that the TribunaI offers a
variety of procedures in cases dealing with the arrest
and detention of vessels and crews. I am convinced that
States parties will continue to have recourse to those
procedures in the future.
Let me now turn to the third point that I wish to
make. It relates to new issues that might be submitted
for dispute settlement before the Tribunal. In that
connection, the international community is watching
with great interest and anticipation the current
negotiations taking place, at the initiative of the
General Assembly, concerning the development of
an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. Of
course it is too early to say what the exact contents
of that instrument will be. It may be anticipated,
however, that dispute settlement provisions will be
an important element of such an instrument in order
to maintain its consistent and efficient interpretation
and application. In that context, it is useful to mention
that new legal issues that emerge in the international
law of the sea can be addressed by the Tribunal not
only in the context of its contentious jurisdiction, but
also through its advisory function. Advisory opinions
can be requested from the Tribunal’s Seabed Disputes
Chamber, as well as the full Tribunal. Both possibilities
have been made use of in the past.
In any case, I want to underline that the Tribunal
stands ready to deal with any further tasks with which
States parties to the Convention wish to entrust it in
the future. The Tribunal is well placed for such work,
since it is one of the main forums for the adjudication of
disputes concerning the interpretation and application of
the Convention. It has more than 20 years of experience
in the settlement of disputes under the Convention.
As the Assembly is aware, the Tribunal is
conducting activities to enhance knowledge of its role
and activities in the settlement of maritime disputes.
17-41843

05/12/2017

Before I conclude, I would like to take this opportunity
to give a brief overview of those activities.
In 2017, the Tribunal held another regional
workshop on the settlement of disputes related to the
law of the sea, this time in the Central American and
Caribbean regions. The event, which took place in
San José, Costa Rica was the twelfth in a series of
workshops held in different regions of the world to
provide national experts with practical information on
the dispute settlement procedures available before the
Tribunal. Representatives of 11 States attended the San
José workshop. It was organized in cooperation with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Worship of Costa Rica
and with the financial support of the Korea Maritime
Institute, to which I reiterate our sincere gratitude.
Every year, the Tribunal provides some 15
internships of a duration of three months to university
students. In the 20 years of its existence, the programme
has given 338 interns from 95 States the opportunity to
acquire experience in the work of the Tribunal. I am glad
to note that the Tribunal’s internship programme is able
to support interns from developing countries through
a trust fund set up by the Tribunal. Several grants
have been made to the fund over the years by, among
other institutions, the China Institute of International
Studies, the Korea International Cooperation Agency
and the Korea Maritime Institute. I am very grateful to
those organizations for their support.
Since 2007, the Tribunal has also been conducting
the Nippon Programme, a nine-month capacity-building
and training programme in international dispute
settlement under the law of the sea. Seven fellows
are participating in the current, eleventh, cycle of the
Programme. To date, 72 fellows from 59 States have
had the opportunity to participate in the Programme,
which since its establishment has been organized with
the financial support of the Nippon Foundation of
Japan. I would like to take this opportunity to express
my sincere gratitude to the Nippon Foundation for its
commitment to the Programme.
I should not conclude without adding that the
Tribunal benefits greatly from excellent cooperation
with the United Nations. In that respect, I wish to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, the
Legal Counsel and the Director of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their support
and cooperation.

A/72/PV.64

The Acting President: I now call on His
Excellency Mr. Michael Lodge, Secretary-General of
the International Seabed Authority.
Mr. Lodge (International Seabed Authority): In
1970, the General Assembly had the foresight to set aside
the seabed and ocean floor beyond national jurisdiction
as the common heritage of mankind. Since 1994, when
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
entered into force, this Area has been managed through
the International Seabed Authority for the benefit of
mankind as a whole so as to promote the economic and
social advancement of all peoples of the world.
I am pleased to see that the draft resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/72/L.18) reaffirms the
important work of the Authority under the framework
of the Convention.
During 2017, the first year of my tenure as
Secretary-General, I have devoted much effort to
improving the internal management and performance
of the secretariat, as well as to enhancing the ways
in which the Authority communicates with member
States and other stakeholders. The Authority has also
tried throughout the year to participate meaningfully in
major conferences held at the United Nations, including
the meetings of the Preparatory Committee established
by resolution 69/292, the twenty-seventh Meeting of
States Parties to the Convention, and the United Nations
Ocean Conference. I am grateful to States parties for
their support for the work of the Authority and their
interest in that work.
The comprehensive legal regime set out in part
XI of the Convention provides an ideal platform for
the Authority to make an important contribution to
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14. To that end, the Authority has registered seven
voluntary commitments, with a special emphasis on
supporting small island developing States, landlocked
developing countries and African States, in order to
build capacity, promote marine scientific research in
the Area and encourage gender-based approaches to
deep ocean sciences.
Since one of the core aspects of the Authority’s
mandate is to promote, encourage and coordinate
marine scientific research in the Area, I am pleased
to see that section XI of the draft resolution calls for
more support for the Authority’s Endowment Fund
for marine research in the area. To date, that Fund has
contributed to the training of 83 scientists from 43

17-4184323/31

A/72/PV.64

different developing countries, including consistent
support for the Rhodes Academy of Oceans Law and
Policy over the past six years.
Moreover, in view of the critical importance of
marine science in the framework of the Convention,
the Authority has lent its full support to the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
initiative relating to the proclamation of an International
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
from 2021. The Authority, as a committed participant
in UN-Oceans, will collaborate with the IOC and
other partner organizations in ensuring successful
deliverables from the Decade.
I will make brief comments on some of the salient
aspects reflected in the draft resolution, particularly
those concerning the Area and the effective functioning
of the Authority.
As recognized in paragraph 64 of the draft resolution,
one of the Authority’s priorities is adopting regulations
for the exploitation of marine mineral resources. That
is critical, because the Authority’s Council has granted
extensions to the exploration contracts held for many
years by the former pioneer investors on the basis that
they will be in a position to proceed to exploitation
when those extensions expire. That will not be possible
without exploitation regulations that are commercially
viable but that at the same time set the highest standards
for protection of the marine environment.
I encourage States parties to provide comments
on the draft regulations by 20 December, according
to the road map agreed on by the Council, since
their full participation is critical to the success of the
process. I also intend to offer a series of open briefings
for the regional groups here in the United Nations
Headquarters in January 2018 with a view to facilitating
more inclusive discussions in the Council when it meets
next March.
An equally high priority, highlighted in paragraph
71 of the draft resolution, is for the Authority to make
rapid progress on developing regional environmental
management plans, especially in regions where
there is active mineral exploration. The secretariat is
currently reaching out to potential partners to help
facilitate a series of scientific and technical workshops
in 2018 focusing on key mineral provinces of interest
for exploration.
24/31

05/12/2017

Thirdly, the draft resolution welcomes the recent
periodic review of the Authority pursuant to article
154 of the Convention and references the Assembly’s
request to see a draft strategic plan for the organization
in 2018. I intend to consult on this matter in the coming
months, and it is my hope that States parties will take
ownership of that plan by articulating a long-term
vision for the Authority.
The draft resolution rightly notes serious concerns
around low attendance at annual sessions of the
Assembly. To address that problem, I am grateful
that States parties had endorsed a revised schedule of
meetings for 2018 and 2019 to include two meetings
of the Council in each year. The revised schedule also
recognizes the pre-eminence of the Assembly as the
supreme organ of the Authority, and I encourage all
States parties to attend and participate in that meeting.
I am also pleased to announce that the new voluntary
trust fund to defray the costs of participation of
members of the Council from developing States is now
established, and I encourage contributions to be made
to this Fund by States parties and others.
It is imperative for the effective functioning of
the Authority that States parties pay their assessed
contributions on time and in full. Despite some
encouraging recent developments, with the payment
in full by some member States that were considerably
in arrears, I very much regret to say that 41 remain in
arrears and facing suspension of their voting rights
under article 184 of the Convention. I urge States
parties to renew their efforts to pay their arrears of
contributions, as the present situation has an impact both
on the effective delivery of work by the Authority and
on States’ ability to exercise their membership rights.
In the light of the Authority’s fundamental role in
collecting and sharing data and information on the deep
seabed, I welcome the references in paragraphs 70 and
284 of the draft resolution to the value of the cooperation
between the Authority and other relevant organizations
under the umbrella of the GEBCO Seabed 2030 Project.
I am particularly grateful for the reference in
paragraph 81 to the need for coastal States to deposit
with the Secretary-General of the Authority a copy of
the charts or lists of geographical coordinates showing
the outer limit lines of the continental shelf, as provided
for in article 84, paragraph 2 of the Convention. This
is an essential part of the process of defining the
boundary between national jurisdiction and the Area
17-41843

05/12/2017

A/72/PV.64

and of assuring certainty in the administration of the
Convention. It is a matter of concern that as of today,
only seven States parties have fulfilled their obligation
in that respect.
Finally, I wish to express my most sincere gratitude
to the Government of Jamaica for its consistent support
to the Authority and its consistent commitment to
fulfilling its obligations as our host country.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 77, sub-items (a)
and (b).
Before proceeding further, I should like to remind
members that action on draft resolution A/72/L.7 is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is made available.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/72/L.12 and A/72/L.18.
We turn first to draft resolution A/72/L.12, entitled
“Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/72/L.12, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Australia,
the Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria, Croatia,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Fiji, Finland, France,
Greece, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica, Kiribati, Latvia,
Luxembourg, the Maldives, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Morocco, Nauru, the Netherlands, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Romania, Samoa, South
Africa, Trinidad and Tobago and Ukraine.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
El Salvador,
Republic of)

Turkey,

Venezuela

(Bolivarian

Draft resolution A/72/L.12 was adopted by 126
votes to 1, with 3 abstentions (resolution 72/72).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/72/L.18, entitled “Oceans and the law of
the sea”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce

17-4184325/31

A/72/PV.64

that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/72/L.18, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Fiji, France, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Jamaica, Latvia, the Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, Palau, Samoa, Singapore, Somalia,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Viet Nam
26/31

05/12/2017

Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, El Salvador, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Draft resolution A/72/L.18 was adopted by 128
votes to 1, with 3 abstentions (resolution 72/73).
The Acting President: Before opening the floor for
explanations of vote, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Özkan (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 72/73, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea” under sub-item (a) of agenda item 77. Turkey
agrees with the general content of the resolution in
principle and believes that the resolution is particularly
important, since it recognizes the important
contribution of sustainable development and the
management of the resources and uses of the oceans
and seas for the achievement of the international
development goals contained in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Turkey therefore appreciates
the efforts of the Facilitators, the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea and Member States to
finalize the resolution.
However, owing to the nature of references made
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) in the resolution, Turkey felt obliged to
call for a vote on the resolution. Turkey is not party to
UNCLOS and is of the opinion that UNCLOS is neither
universal nor has a unified character. We also believe
that it is not the only legal framework regulating all
activities in the oceans and seas.
We welcome efforts to reach a consensus on this
important resolution and expect all parties to be more
constructive and flexible in order to ensure that all
non-parties can come on board in future negotiations.
For its part, Turkey is ready to engage constructively
with all parties to achieve consensus. Until then, the
UNCLOS language in this resolution should not set a
precedent for other United Nations resolutions.
Having said that, we would also like to recall that
the reasons that have prevented Turkey from being
a party to UNCLOS remain valid. Turkey supports
international efforts to establish a regime of the sea that
is based on the principle of equity and is acceptable
17-41843

05/12/2017

to all States. However, in our opinion, the Convention
does not provide sufficient safeguards for special
geographical situations and, as a consequence, does
not take into consideration conflicting interests and
sensitivities resulting from special circumstances.
Furthermore, the Convention does not allow States to
register reservations to its articles. Although we agree
with the Convention in its general intent, and with most
of its provisions, we are unable to become a party to it
due to those prominent shortcomings.
Turkey abstained in the vote on resolution 72/72,
on sustainable fisheries, under sub-item (b) of agenda
item 77. Turkey is fully committed to the conservation,
management and sustainable use of marine living
resources and attaches great importance to regional
cooperation to that end. With that understanding, in the
past we have joined the consensus on the resolution.
Turkey is not a party to UNCLOS and is of the opinion
that it is not the only legal framework that regulates
all activities in the oceans and seas. Owing to the
references made to UNCLOS in this resolution to this
effect, we could not vote in favour of the resolution.
Mr. Celarie Landaverde (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of El Salvador is aware of the
importance of the oceans, particularly their use in the
context of sustainable development, which is essential
to ensuring food security for all human beings on the
planet in an orderly fashion. However, we understand
that loopholes still exist in areas such as sustainable
fishing, transport and the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity, among others. These
are areas in which the international community has
made important progress but where there is still a long
way to go.
As El Salvador is not a State party to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), we
believe that the agreements, provisions and resolutions
agreed on between States or that emanate from the
General Assembly should take into account the norms
of general international law, in particular the principle
that these provisions, agreements or resolutions should
not create obligations for non-State parties without their
consent, except when States expressly recognize them.
Moreover, it is our position that various administrative
aspects expressed in today’s debate could be discussed
more pertinently at the Meeting of States Parties to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and
not within the context of the General Assembly.

A/72/PV.64

El Salvador invites all States to continue working
on the issues of the exploitation, conservation and
protection of the oceans and seas, with a view to
ensuring a high quality of life for future generations.
That can be achieved with the cooperation of every
country in the world — whether bilaterally, regionally
or universally — and will help us to strengthen
international peace and security and friendly relations
between all nations in accordance with the principles
of justice and equal rights, as well as the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
For that reason, we stress the integrity of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
indivisibility of its objectives and goals, particularly
those in this area — Sustainable Development Goals
13 and 14 — both of which must be implemented in a
cross-cutting way by all countries if we are to leave no
one behind. The general issue of the oceans and seas
should also be the first phase of work on a topic of true
importance to the international community — the living
and non-living resources on the seabed, which are part
of the common heritage of humankind. All benefits
resulting from their use should be distributed in a truly
just and equitable way, benefiting all countries of the
world, particularly developing countries.
Finally, we hope in future to be able to count on
flexibility on the part of all delegations in order to
ensure that this resolution truly responds to the interests
of all Member States, thereby leading to its adoption
by consensus.
Ms. Engelbrecht Schadtler (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to make
a statement on resolutions 72/72 and 72/73, which have
just been adopted.
We thank the representative of Norway, Mr. Andreas
Kravik, for facilitating the negotiation process on
the text of resolution 72/72, entitled “Sustainable
fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”, to which we are
referring in this explanation of vote after its adoption.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its commitment to sustainable fisheries through the
application of the principles of the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture

17-4184327/31

A/72/PV.64

Organization of the United Nations and Chapter 17 of
Agenda 21, approved by the United Nations Conference
on the Environment and Development of 1992. Our
country is also party to a number of international
instruments that advocate for the preservation and
organization of fisheries.
It has been Venezuela’s consistent position in
various international forums that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) should
not be considered the only legal framework governing
all activities carried out in the oceans and seas, given
that there are other international instruments in the field
which, alongside UNCLOS, make up the body of law
known as the law of the sea. In this regard, our country has
repeatedly and consistently objected to the possibility
of the Convention being invoked as a conventional or
international customary law. On numerous occasions,
the Venezuelan delegation has stated that, in its view,
UNCLOS does not enjoy universal participation, unlike
many other multilateral instruments.
Likewise, Venezuela is not a party to the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, nor are the norms of
that international instrument applicable to it under
international customary law, except for those that
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela may expressly
recognize in future by incorporating them into its
domestic legislation. That is because the reasons
preventing us from ratifying these instruments, and
UNCLOS in particular, remain the same.
Although our country is not party to the Sustainable
Fisheries Agreement of 1995, the aquaculture
and fisheries sector is a priority in our national
development plans as set forth in the country’s 20132019 programme, which includes the goals of promoting
fisheries development through modernizing our fleets
and our maritime and river fisheries infrastructure.
This national development plan is complemented
by a broad set of regulations through which we have
been able to set up programmes focusing on the
conservation, protection and management of marine
biological resources and on promoting responsible and
sustainable management, focusing on biological and
economic aspects, food security and relevant social,
cultural, environmental and commercial issues, among
other things.
28/31

05/12/2017

Venezuelan law on fisheries prohibits bottom
trawling and establishes a sanctions regime for the failure
to respect conservation and management measures,
including oversight measures for those national vessels
that engage in fisheries activities, as well an inspection
and monitoring system for operations on the high seas,
which submits the relevant information to the body
tasked with fisheries management, which enables us
to know in which exact geographical area a fisheries
operation is being carried out and to ensure compliance
with the regulations on the management of resources
established in the law.
Venezuela has expressed reservations on the
content of the resolution on oceans and the law of the
sea because it is not a State party to UNCLOS or to
the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. For those
reasons, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela abstained
in the voting on resolution 72/72.
Our delegation would now like to address
resolution 72/73 on sub-item (a) of agenda item 77 on
“Oceans and the law of the sea”, which was submitted
for the consideration of the General Assembly. In this
regard, we extend our thanks to the representative of
South Africa, Mr. Thembile Joyini, for facilitating
the negotiation process on the text of this resolution,
leading it in a constructive spirit that enabled a diversity
of positions to be heard during consultations. We also
thank the Director of the Division of Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea, Ms. Gabriele Goettsche-Wanli and
her team.
As we pointed out, Venezuela is not a signatory
to UNCLOS or to the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, because their norms are not applicable either
as conventional law nor as international customary
law, except those that the Venezuelan State has
expressly recognized or may recognize in the future
by incorporating them into its domestic legislation,
because the reasons preventing Venezuela from
becoming a party to those instruments still exist.
17-41843

05/12/2017

The Venezuelan delegation reiterates its view that
unlike many other multilateral instruments, UNCLOS
does not enjoy universal participation. In this regard, it
has been our stated position in numerous international
forums that UNCLOS should not be considered as
the only legal framework governing all activities
carried out in the seas and oceans, as there are other
international instruments on the subject that, alongside
the Convention, make up a body of law, the so-called law
of the sea, including, among others, the 1958 Geneva
Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone,
the Convention on the High Seas, the Convention on the
Continental Shelf and the Convention on Fishing and
Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas, all
of which have been ratified by Venezuela.
UNCLOS codifies certain norms of customary
international law that have been incorporated into
the Venezuelan domestic legal system, either through
the ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 1958 or
through domestic legislation. The topic of oceans and
the law of the sea is a priority in Venezuela’s policies,
broadly reflected in our domestic legislation and in the
country’s programme for the period from 2013 to 2019.
We have complied with our international obligations
under the law of the sea and advocated for its integral
development from a standpoint of equity, stressing the
fact that all negotiations on it must reflect criteria and
principles linked to the right to sustainable development
of the marine environment and its resources for future
generations. Our country has therefore cooperated
with efforts aimed at promoting coordination on issues
linked to oceans and the law of the sea, in accordance
with international law, and has also participated
constructively in all consultations in this area.
During the negotiations, Venezuela once again
tried to find a way to achieve consensus on that
important resolution, in the belief that only a very few
elements stand in the way of that happening. However,
various positions rendered that impossible. Venezuela’s
view of UNCLOS is, on the whole, constructive and
proactive. We are therefore hopeful that solutions in the
form of text can be found on which all the participants
can agree, introducing a more appropriate balance in
the outcome of the discussions on the Convention, and
the value that it has to regulate all human activities in
the seas and oceans, alongside other relevant binding
international instruments in this field. My delegation
will continue to work constructively and more actively
with other delegations to achieve this objective.

A/72/PV.64

As we mentioned earlier, although resolution 72/73
has some positive aspects, we would caution that the
text also contains elements that caused Venezuela in
the past to express reservations about the outcome
document (resolution 66/288) of the 2012 United
Nations Conference on Sustainale Development and
about target 14.c under Sustainable Development Goal
14 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We believe that future updates to the terms of
UNCLOS should be considered, given that there
are new situations for which the current approach is
inadequate and, in some cases, counterproductive,
which has affected the development of a regime that
should be addressing the most important contemporary
issues related to the oceans and seas in a balanced,
equitable and inclusive manner.
For all of these reasons, Venezuela abstained in the
voting on resolution 72/73.
Mr. Fernández Valoni (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina voted in favour of resolution 72/72,
on sustainable fisheries. However, we want to reiterate
once again that none of the recommendations in this
resolution should be interpreted in such a way that the
provisions of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments could be considered to be obligations
for those States that have not expressly manifested
their consent to being bound by that agreement. The
resolution we have just adopted contains paragraphs
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Review Conference for the 1995 Agreement. Argentina
reiterates that those recommendations cannot be
considered as enforceable, even as recommendations
for States that are not parties to the Agreement.
Argentina also wishes to state that existing
international law does not empower regional fisheries
organizations or their Member States to adopt measures
of any kind against vessels whose flag States are not
a member of those organizations or arrangements, or
have not explicitly consented to such measures being
applicable to vessels flying their flags. Nothing in the
General Assembly resolutions, including those we have
just approved, can be interpreted as running contrary
to that conclusion.

17-4184329/31

A/72/PV.64

I should once again like to recall that the
implementation of conservation measures, scientific
research or any other activity recommended in
the General Assembly resolutions — in particular
resolution 61/105 and its subsequent resolutions — have
as an unquestionable legal framework the current
international law of the sea, as reflected in the
Convention on the Law of the Sea, including paragraph
3 of article 77, which must be strictly adhered to.
Compliance with those resolutions cannot be used as an
alleged justification for ignoring or denying the rights
established in the Convention. There is nothing in the
General Assembly resolutions that affects the sovereign
rights of coastal States over their continental shelves
or the exercise of jurisdiction over their continental
shelves under international law.
Paragraph 180 of resolution 72/72, which we have
just adopted, contains a very relevant reminder of
that concept, which is reflected in resolution 64/72
and its subsequent resolutions. In that context, and
as in previous sessions, paragraph 181 recognizes the
adoption of measures by coastal States — including
Argentina — regarding the impact of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems across their continental
shelves, in addition to efforts to ensure that those
measures are implemented.
Mr. Cuellar Torres (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Colombia would like to
begin respectfully by expressing its sincere gratitude
to Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway and Mr. Thembile
Joyini of South Africa for their tireless efforts as
Facilitators of the negotiations on the draft resolutions
on sustainable fisheries and on oceans and the law of
the sea, respectively. Both conducted the discussions
with dignity, transparency and a constructive spirit, as
reflected in the texts that we have adopted today.
Colombia is a nation with two coastlines, on both the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, whose bio-geographical
conditions provide a wide range of diversity in its marine
and coastal ecosystems. The health of those ecosystems
depends not only on coherent and responsible national
management, but also on the other countries that have
an impact on the oceans. As a very diverse country,
Colombia is committed to the conservation, protection
and sustainable development of those ecosystems,
through the implementation of policies, plans and
programmes that attest to the national, regional and
global importance of the issue. In addition, the country
has solid institutions for marine and coastal issues,
30/31

05/12/2017

guided by a comprehensive vision where the sea and the
coast, as well as their resources, become fundamental
elements of the country’s actions.
It is for that reason that Colombia recognizes the
valuable contributions of the resolutions on oceans and
the law of the sea and on sustainable fisheries. The
constructive spirit that guides Colombia in its need to
guarantee sustainable fisheries is based on the firm
belief that all nations have a commitment to protect
the sea and its resources, on which, to a large extent,
the world’s sustainable future depends. Colombia
therefore reaffirms its commitment to the development
and sustainable management of its fisheries resources
in order to build not only a sustainable country,
but also sustainable fisheries at a global level,
thereby guaranteeing access to fishing resources for
future generations.
It is by complying with those commitments
that Colombia has supported resolution 72/72, on
sustainable fisheries, with determination, joining the
consensus for its adoption in previous years and voting
in favour of it in this session. However, Colombia notes
that both resolutions — on oceans and the law of the sea
and on sustainable fisheries — contain wording that the
Colombian Government does not share with regard to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), such as the statement that this Convention
is the only normative framework that regulates the
activities carried out in the oceans.
Colombia carries out its activities in the marine
environment in strict adherence to the various
international commitments that it has expressly adopted
or accepted. It is for that reason that Colombia takes this
opportunity to reiterate that it has not ratified UNCLOS,
which is why its provisions are neither enforceable nor
opposable, except those that Colombia has expressly
accepted. Colombia therefore understands that today’s
resolution and our participation in its adoption process
cannot be considered or interpreted in a manner that
implies the express or tacit acceptance by the Colombian
State of the provisions contained in UNCLOS.
The constructive spirit that guides our country on
the issues of oceans and the law of the sea is based on
the firm belief that all nations have a commitment to
the protection of the sea and its resources and that the
sustainable future of the world largely depends on that
fact. Colombia is prepared to work in cooperation with
17-41843

05/12/2017

other nations to confront the challenges of maintaining
the health of the oceans.
For these reasons, Colombia expresses its
reservations about any mention of the Convention in
the relevant resolutions and reiterates that it does not
consider itself bound by its content.
Mr. Claycomb (United States of America): The
United States called for a vote on resolution 72/72, on
sustainable fisheries, for the reasons we stated during
the debate on this agenda item. As we stated, we strongly
oppose paragraphs 119 and 120, on the World Trade
Organization. It was with great regret that we called
for a vote because of those objectionable paragraphs.
We hasten to add that we continue to support the rest
of the sustainable fisheries resolution, which provides
critically important policy guidance to Member States
on sustainable-fisheries management.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.

A/72/PV.64

I give the floor to the observer of the European
Union to make a statement following the adoption of
resolution 72/72.
Mrs. Cujo (European Union): The European
Union and its member States deeply regret that, despite
all efforts undertaken during consultations and while
understanding that the outcome of the consultations
was consensual, today we have had to vote on resolution
72/72, on sustainable fisheries. It was long a consensus
resolution, and we hope that in future we will be able to
avoid having a vote on it and again adopt it by consensus.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
77 as a whole.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

17-4184331/31
