Resolution, adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
designated in article XXIX in a manner acceptable to the
Joint Staff Pension Board.
"3. If repayment in accordance with paragraph 2 above is
not made, his prior contributory service credit shall not be
restored, and
"(a) The lump sum which is the actuarial equivalent of any
discontinued benefit at the date upon which payments were
discontinued shall be credited as a voluntary deposit in accordance with the provisions of article XVIII, paragraphs 2 and
3; and
"(b) The total benefits paid or payable to him in respect of
two or more periods of employment shall not exceed the
benefits he would have received had all his employment been
continuous."

Article XVIII
(Voluntary deposits by participants)
Replace the present text by the following:
"1. In addition to the contributions deducted from the remuneration of a participant as provided in article XVI, any
participant may, subject to the approval of the Joint Staff
Pension Board and under such conditions as the Board may
prescribe, deposit in the Pension Fund, in a lump sum or sums
and/or by an increased rate of contribution, an amount computed to be sufficient to purchase an additional retirement
benefit which, together with his prospective regular retirement
benefit as provided herein, will provide for him a total retirement benefit not to exceed 60 per cent of his final average
remuneration at the age of retirement. Interest at such rates
as may be set from time to time by the Board shall be allowed
on such contributions.
"2. Such ad,ditional amounts, together with interest thereon,
shall be credited to the participant's individual account in the
Pension Fund and shall be used to provide him with an additional benefit, commencing at the same time as any regular
benefit to which he may become entitled under the present
Regulations, or upon his death prior to such commencement,
to provide a benefit to a survivor designated therefor by the
participant. The additional benefit shall be payable in one of
the following actuarial equivalent forms to be elected by the
participant or, in the absence of such election, by the survivor
so designated:
"(a) An amount equal to such additional deposits payable in
a single sum or in instalments together with interest thereon
to the date of payment;
"(b) An annuity payable for life with no further payments
after death ;
"(c) A reduced annuity payable for life, with a·provision
that upon the annuitant's death one-half of such annuity shall
be continued to, and during the life of, a survivor designated
therefor by the annuitant at the time of the commencement of
the annuity;
"(d) A reduced annuity payable for life, with a guarantee
that the total benefits paid on account of such additional deposits shall not be less than the amounts credited at the time
of the commencement of the annuity;
in the event that the participant has made no designation of a
survivor to receive such additional benefit, or if such person
does not survive him, the lump sum provided under subparagraph (a) above shall be paid to the participant's estate.
"3. Should a former participant whose annuity has commenced under the provision of the present article be restored to participation, his annuity shall cease and the lump
sum which is the actuarial equivalent of such discontinued
annuity shall be credited to his individual account under the
present article, provided, however, that no value shall be included in such lump sum for the contingent annuity of a survivor designated under paragraph 2 (c) above unless the participant submits evidence of such person's survival in good
health.
"4. A participant who elected, and had been authorized, to
make voluntary deposits under the present article may cease
making such deposits at any time, but in no case shall sums
once deposited ½/refunded to him before he has ceased to be
a participant." · ·

53

Article XXII
(Joint Staff Pension Board)
Replace the present text by the following :
"l. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall consists of twentyone members :
"(a) Six members appointed by the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee, two from the members elected by the
General Assembly, two from the members appointed by the
Secretary-General, and two from the members elected by
the participants; and
"(b) Fifteen members appointed by the staff pension committees of the other member organizations in accordance with
a table fixed by the administrative rules of the Fund which
shall provide for equal representation of the three groups
referred to in article XX.
"Z. The Board may appoint a standing committee, which
will act on its behalf when the Board is not in session."

Supplementary ~rticle B
(Associate participation)
Delete.

Supplementary article C
(The International Atomic Energy Agency)
The present text becomes supplementary article B.

1851 (XVD). Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the pattern of conferences 18 and the recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on that subject, 14
1. Decides to continue for a further period of one
year, until 31 December 1963, the pattern of conferences
established in its resolution 1202 (XII) of 13 December 1957;
2. Amends sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) of paragraph 2 of that resolution to read as follows:
" ( c) The regular sessions of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Economic
Commission for Africa, as well as meetings of their
subsidiary bodies, may be held away from their headqua:ters when the commission concerned so decides,
subject, in the case of regular sessions of the commissions, to the approval of the Economic and Social
Council and of the General Assembly;
" ( d) The annual session of the International Law
Commission would be held in Geneva;"
3. Invites the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the competent organs the importance and urgency
of the measures outlined in paragraph 11 of his report,
as well as the need for moderation on their part in
fixing their programmes of meetings in New York for
1964, in view of the major reconstruction work to be
carried out at Headquarters.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1852 (XVD). Geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 153 (II) of 15 November
1947 and 1559 (XV) of 18 December 1%0, and the
13 Ibid., agenda item 65, document A/5317.
H Ibid., para. 14.

54

General A111embly-Seventeenth Session

report of the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly
at its sixteenth session, 15
Recognizing that the principle of an equitable geographical distribution it: the composition of t~e Se~retariat does not conflict with the paramount considerat10ns
of employment of staff, namely, the necessity of securing
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity as laid down in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral16 and the improvements that have taken place
in the geographical distribution of the staff,
Recognizing that significant imbalances in t~e geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat continue to exist,
Recognizing further the necessity of correcting these
imbalances as early as possible,
1. . Recommends that the Secretary-General should be
guided in his efforts to achieve a more equitable geographical distribution, within the general framework
of his report, by the following principles and factors :
(a) In the recruitmen_t of all staff, ~ue reisar? s~all
be paid to securing as wide a geqgraphical d1stnbut10n
as possible ;
( b) In the Secretariat proper, an equitable geographical distribution should ta~e i!1to account _the fact
of membership, Members' contnbuhons and their populations as outlined in the Secretary-General's report,
particularly paragraph 69 ( b) thereof; no Member
State should be considered "over-represented" if it has
no more than five of its nationals on the staff by virtue
of its membership;
( c) The relative importance of posts at different
levels;
(d) The need for a more balanced regional composition of the staff at levels of D-1 and above;
( e) In career appointments, particular account should
be taken of the need to reduce "under-representation" ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General ta review periodically the geographical distribution of the staffs of the
Technical Assistance Board, the Special Fund and the
United Nations Children's Fund, and to report annually
to the General Assembly on this matter;
3. Requests the Secretar~•-General to report to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session on the progress achieved in the geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1853 (XVII). United Nations lntemational School
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, together with the report of the Board of Trustees
of the United Nations International School,17 and the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on this subject, 18
111 Ibid., Sixteenth Sessio11,, Annexes, agenda item 64, document A/5063.
16 Ibid., Seventeenth Sessi01t,, Annues, agenda item 70, document A/5270.
1T Ibid., agenda item 72, document A/5308.
18 Ibid., document A/5319.

Noting the action taken by the Secretary-General and
the Board of Trustees to locate a permanent site for the
School, to raise funds from voluntary sources to acquire
the site, and to build the new School,
Noting further the progress made in reducing the
operating deficit of the School,
Noting also the increasing number of applications for
admission to the School and its role in the recruitment
and retention of qualified personnel for the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 1439 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 by which the General Assembly decided to contribute to the International School Fund for a period
of five years such continuing financial assistance as the
Assembly might consider necessary, and its subsequent
resolutions 1591 (XV) of 20 December 1960 and 1727
(XVI) of 20 December 1%1 by which it contributed
grants to liquidate the operational deficit and to begin
planning for the permanent accommodation of the
School,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Mayor and the
City of New York for their continuing co-operation in
the location of a permanent site for the United Nations
International School and in extending the availability of
the present temporary premises;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices to assist the Board of Trustees in raising from voluntary sources the additional funds required
for the construction of the School and the creation of
an endowment fund ;
3. Decides to contribute $50,000 to the International
School Fund towards liquidating the operational deficit
anticipated for the current school year ;
4. Decides to contribute $20,000 to the International
School Fund for the purpose of forwarding plans for
the permanent accommodation of the School.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1854 (XVII). Administrative and budgetary procedures of the United Nations
A

The General Assembly,
Having regard to resolution 1731 (XVI) of 20
December 1961, in which the General Assembly recognized its need for authoritative legal guidance as to
obligations of Member States under the Charter of the
United Nations in the matter of financing the United
Nations operations in the Congo and in the Middle East,
Recalling the question submitted to the Internation"i'l
Court of Justice in that resolution,
Having received the Court's advisory opinion of
20 July 1962, 19 transmitted to the General Assembly by
the Secretary-General,20 that the expenditures authorized in the General Assembly resolutions designated in
resolution 1731 (XVI) constitute "expenses of the
Organization" within the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter,
19 Certain expenses of the United Nations ( Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), Advisory Opinion of 20 July 1962:
I.C.J. Reports, p. 151.
20 Official Records of the Genn-al Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Annexe.r, agenda item 64, document A/5161.
