S/PV.7628

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7628th meeting

Friday, 19 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. De la Calle García
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermudez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 22 January 2016 from the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2206 (2015) addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2016/70)
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2016/138)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-04397 (E)
*1604397*

S/PV.7628

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 22 January 2016 from the
Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to Security Council resolution
2206 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/70)
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2016/138)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Festus Mogae,
Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission; Mr. Moustapha Soumaré, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan; and
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to welcome
Mr. Mogae, Mr. Soumaré and Mr. Šimonović, who are
joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference from
Addis Ababa, Juba and Goma, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/70, which contains a letter dated
22 January 2016 addressed to the President of the
Security Council from the Panel of Experts on South
Sudan established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2206 (2015). I also wish to draw attention
of Council members to document S/2016/138, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on
South Sudan.
At this meeting the Security Council will
hear briefings from Mr. Mogae, Mr. Soumaré and
Mr. Šimonović, as well as Mr. Fodé Seck, Permanent
Representative of Senegal, who will speak in his
2/12

19/02/2016

capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: Mr. President, I thank you for the
opportunity to address the Security Council by videoteleconference today.
In October 2015, I was appointed to chair the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), the
body charged with overseeing the implementation
of the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The
Agreement provides that the JMEC Chairperson may
report to the Security Council at any time should there
be need for remedial action in the implementation of the
Agreement. It is my duty to report that in the months
intervening since the Agreement was signed and JMEC
began its work, as I reported to the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union about three weeks ago,
the progress made to date in implementation has been
limited and lags far behind the timetables specified
in the Agreement and in subsequent arrangements
between the parties themselves.
Despite its imperfections, the Agreement provides
the best opportunity for South Sudan to restore peace
and stability. But the Agreement is only as strong as
the political will that accompanies it, and, on this front,
the resilience of the South Sudanese people continues
to be severely tested by their leaders. Despite the
repeated commitments leaders have made to uphold the
Agreement, the test of timely implementation has not
been met. The parties have consistently demonstrated
that there is still much distrust and reluctance
to overcome.
Before suggesting what could usefully be done
to accelerate implementation, I should acknowledge
the progress that has been made to date. First, after
several months of discussion, the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army In Opposition (SPLM/A
In Opposition) advance team returned to the capital,
Juba, in late December 2015, after JMEC intervened
to determine the parameters for return. Secondly,
JMEC and a number of other institutions provided for
in the Agreement, such as the Joint Military Ceasefire
Commission, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee, have begun to
meet. Thirdly, some steps towards the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity have been
16-04397

19/02/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

taken, including the amicable distribution of ministerial
portfolios in the new Government, the appointment by
President Salva Kiir of Mr. Riek Machar, in absentia, as
First Vice-President, as provided for in the Agreement,
and the start of redeployment of Government forces to
locations at least 25 kilometres from the capital. And
finally, and perhaps most crucially, the permanent
ceasefire is largely holding in the former theatre
of conflict of Greater Upper Nile, although as the
latest events in Malakal amply demonstrate, violence
continues to occur.
These achievements, though notable, should be seen
in the context of a worrying escalation of instability
and violence in other areas of the country, particularly
in Western Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal,
which were regions largely unaffected by the conflict
that began in late 2013. Freedom of access of ceasefire
monitors is a recurrent challenge, most recently in the
vicinity of the town of Mundri, Western Equatoria.
While the significant reduction in violence in the most
conflict-affected states of Unity, Jonglei and Upper
Nile is most welcome, even here the security situation
remains fragile, and the tentative progress made is
vulnerable to reversal if political dynamics shift.
Even if mass violence has largely subsided in the
areas that experienced the most intense conflict, serious
incidents are still occurring. Most recently, violence in
Malakal over the past two days left at least 18 people
dead, many hundreds more reportedly displaced, and
significant damage to the United Nations protection-ofcivilians camp, which is meant to be a place of refuge.
I deplore this violence and call for a swift investigation
to determine responsibility for these incidents. I urge
all armed factions to show restraint.
More broadly, across the country, access restrictions
and localized insecurity have made the humanitarian
response extraordinarily complicated, and large parts
of the country, both directly and indirectly affected by
the conflict, continue to face humanitarian catastrophe,
for reasons that are largely within the control of
political actors. Humanitarian agencies remain unable
to preposition adequate supplies before the rainy season
arrives, given general insecurity and access restrictions
by the authorities on both sides. So there should be no
doubt that South Sudan’s leaders can, if they wish, act
to ameliorate the conditions in which their people live.
I witnessed the depths of the crisis when I travelled
to Bor, Malakal and Bentiu — three of the conflict’s

S/PV.7628

worst-affected towns. Let me thank the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for its facilitation
of my travel to those areas. In those three towns, I met
internally displaced persons who remain in United
Nations protection of civilian sites in vast numbers,
but who are, I understand, only a fraction of the
population affected by the conflict and its resultant
crisis. Two years after the conflict began, few yet have
any confidence that they will be able to return to their
homes and resume normal lives. This is because political
progress has been so slow and because the provisions of
the Agreement, while filled with potential, have yet to
demonstrate real achievement on the ground for most.
The current preoccupation of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission remains the formation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity, which
should have been formed in November 2015 following
the expiry of the Agreement’s pretransitional period
of 90 days. The subsequent reset date, which should
have led to the establishment of the Transitional
Government of National Unity between 15 December
2015 and 15 January 2016, was also missed, as was a
further date for the new Government’s formation, in
part because of a number of new political obstacles, not
least the creation by the present Government of new
administrative boundaries within South Sudan.
The calendar issued in my capacity as Chairperson
of JMEC accelerated the implementation of the
Agreement’s provisions in the latter half of December
2015, and the obstacle of new administrative divisions,
I hope, has been overcome by the latest communiqué
offered by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in Addis Ababa on 31 January.
Despite the IGAD communiqué, which was subsequently
unconditionally endorsed by the parties and the entire
JMEC membership in Juba on 2 February, as of today
we still do not have a Transitional Government of
National Unity in place.
We are, I believe, today closer to the formation of
that new Government, but the mere act of formation will
not deliver relief overnight, and does not necessarily
mean that the path of implementation ahead will become
any easier. The new Government must quickly confront
the humanitarian, development, political and military
crisis that the country continues to face. In addition
to these facets of the crisis, the rapid deterioration of
South Sudan’s economic situation in recent months is
an additional challenge.

16-043973/12

S/PV.7628

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Therefore, the significance of the new Transitional
Government will be determined by its performance.
Does the new Government demonstrate a commitment
to the ambitious but necessary reform agenda provided
for in the Agreement? Can the new Government
consolidate peace and effectively manage the country,
which is suffering from drastically reduced revenues
but facing enormous needs? Will the new Government
honour its commitments to accountability and
reconciliation — processes that are desperately needed
in the world’s newest country? We in the international
community must remain vigilant if we are to ensure that
the Transitional Government is not only formed, but
delivers on the promises and commitments contained
in the Agreement.
In order to accelerate implementation of the
Agreement, a high-level, coordinated international
effort, comparable to that which led to the signature of
the Agreement in August 2015, must be maintained. The
South Sudanese parties should not believe that they can
bypass the Agreement’s commitments, difficult though
they may be, or that any divergence in the views of the
international community can be exploited for partisan
interests. Continued pressure on the parties will remain
necessary because the limits of time and political will
remain significant constraints. Peace is the popular
demand of the people of South Sudan. Unfortunately,
among South Sudan’s political leadership, the threat to
resort to war in the event of political dispute arises all
too frequently.
The United Nations, both through the Security
Council and through UNMISS, has a critical role to play.
I am grateful for the willingness of UNMISS to support
the return of SPLM/A in Opposition personnel — both
military and civilian — as the transitional security
arrangements for Juba start to be implemented. I am
grateful for the support of the United Nations to the
work of the ceasefire monitors now deployed in 8 out of
10 locations, most recently Yambio and Aweil, as well
as the soon to be formed area joint military ceasefire
committees and joint military ceasefire teams,
due to play a crucial role in the consolidation of the
ceasefire. I urge the United Nations to continue to play
a leading role in support of JMEC and in support of
the Agreement.
In support of the Agreement, I would request that
the Security Council consider the following actions.
4/12

19/02/2016

First, the Council should unequivocally state
that while the Agreement does not offer solutions to
all problems or fulfil all of the objectives each party
pursued militarily, its genuine provisions of compromise
are worth implementing in the interests of peace and
reform, and that continued renegotiation of the terms of
the Agreement is not an option that will be entertained.
Secondly, the Council should underscore
the absolute urgency of completing the security
arrangements necessary to establish the Transitional
Government of National Unity, as already urged by
IGAD and the African Union. In this regard, last night
I received from Mr. Riek Machar, leader of the SPLM/A
In Opposition, a letter in which he stated that he would
travel to Juba to form the Transitional Government
only once 2,910 of his police and troops were in place
in the capital, with a further 1,200 police sent to Bor,
Malakal and Bentiu. This proposal does not constitute
a phased approach to the implementation of security
arrangements for the capital, as outlined in the IGAD
communiqué of 31 January. The time it would take to
fully deploy these forces would incur further delay
of the formation of the Transitional Government of
National Unity. Therefore, I plan to offer a compromise
proposal on security arrangements for Juba that would
be sufficient to ensure security for Mr. Machar’s
return and consequently allow for the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity. I would
request the Council to endorse the principles that
underpin my intended plan — security arrangements
that are appropriately phased, sequenced and realistic.
Thirdly, given the fragility of the security situation
in South Sudan, the continued risk of conflict and the
ongoing insecurity affecting the humanitarian relief
effort, the Council should demonstrate its resolve to
take all necessary measures against those who seek
to impede implementation of the Agreement, and to
underscore the seriousness of the situation faced by the
Sudanese people, half of whom are projected to need
humanitarian support to survive.
Finally, while the task of implementing vital
economic, humanitarian and transitional justice
processes should fall principally to the South Sudanese,
the United Nations could assist with a number of them,
including the provision of support to the African Union
in its obligation to establish the independent hybrid
judicial body, the hybrid court for South Sudan, and
to the commission for truth, reconciliation and healing
16-04397

19/02/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

due to be established by the prospective Transitional
Government of National Unity.
The Agreement, as I said earlier, has great potential.
But for that potential to be realized, no more time
should be lost, and the pace of implementation must
be accelerated. Focusing the attention of the parties on
implementation, and showing that the consequences
of failure have ramifications far beyond individual
decision makers, is critical. I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity and for its continued attention to
the situation in South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mogae for his informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Soumaré.
Mr. Soumaré: I thank you for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan, Mr. President. Since the Council has already
had the benefit of listening to Mr. Mogae’s briefing
and will soon hear from Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović, I will focus my comments on key operational
developments in South Sudan and the efforts that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is
making to implement its mandate.
I would like to start by expressing the Mission’s
concern about the outbreaks of violence at our
protection-of-civilians sites in Malakal, which have
resulted in civilian deaths. I should emphasize that the
United Nations strongly condemns any infringement
by armed elements on the civilian character of our
protection sites. As we speak, UNMISS uniformed
personnel are taking robust measures to strengthen
physical security within and around the site, while
humanitarian partners are working to resume the
delivery of essential services. Meanwhile, we are
engaged at all levels with the Government, the
opposition and the national security forces, as well as
within communities themselves, in order to address
the underlying factors and avoid a resumption of
violence. Unfortunately, civilian-on-civilian violence,
complicated by the presence of armed elements,
continues to occur frequently within these sites
and underscores the challenge the Mission faces in
sustaining them.
Violence continues in many regions of the country,
including areas that had previously been relatively
calm. A particular worry is the deteriorating security
situation in Western Bahr El Ghazal, particularly around

S/PV.7628

Wau, which has escalated during the past 48 hours.
Fighting between the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) and organized armed groups in the area
continues to threaten civilians and has resulted in a
steady influx of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
into Wau. Meanwhile, action taken by the SPLA to
arrest and confront armed groups in Western Equatoria
in December and January has led to widespread
population displacement, with as many as 7,500 IDPs
seeking protection in the compound of an international
non-governmental organization near the UNMISS base
in Yambio at the height of the displacement.
Elsewhere, as discussed in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/138), the rise in
intercommunal violence in Jonglei, Warrap and Lakes
remains a concern. In Jonglei, recent weeks have also
seen a resurgence of dormant intercommunal clashes
between the Lou Nuer and the Murle. Meanwhile, an
internal leadership struggle among the Murle has led
to a number of clashes, particularly in the Pibor area.
In response to such shifting conflict dynamics,
the Mission has adopted a more agile force posture
in its efforts to protect civilians affected by violence.
UNMISS is focusing on projecting a physical presence
away from its bases in Bentiu, Bor, Juba, Malakal and
Wau through long-duration patrols and temporary
operating bases in areas where insecurity is high. That
includes the establishment of temporary operating bases
in Leer and Mundri, which, along with the deployment
of an additional company to Yambio, have strengthened
the Mission’s presence in Western Equatoria. In the
Greater Upper Nile region, the Mission plans to deploy
a regular troop presence on the west bank of the Nile,
as well as within Malakal, with a focus on creating
conditions that will enable IDPs to relocate voluntarily
from the Malakal protection site. To strengthen physical
security in Juba, the force has attempted to institute a
24/7 presence aimed at protecting civilians and United
Nations personnel. However, night patrolling within
the city has been constrained by the SPLA.
As the violence continues, the humanitarian needs
continue to rise. An estimated 6.1 million people
across South Sudan are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance as a result of interlocking threats, including
armed conflict and intercommunal violence, economic
decline, disease and climatic shocks. Insecurity and
poor road conditions are also damaging the ability
of the United Nations to pre-position humanitarian

16-043975/12

S/PV.7628

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

supplies before roads are made impassable by the
coming rainy season.
Despite the urgency of the task of meeting these
needs, the Mission and its humanitarian partners
continue to have to deal with significant constraints
on their operations, including regular instances in
which personnel are denied freedom of movement,
as well as other violations of the Mission’s status
of forces agreement with the Government, which
we have regularly reported to the Council and our
Government counterparts.
These concerns underscore the urgent need to
make progress in implementing the peace Agreement.
To that end, Ms. Løj, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has been utilizing her good offices
to support the work of Mr. Mogae, the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), and
to engage with the parties on establishing transitional
institutions. She has been convening a regular forum
for international partners and friends of South Sudan
aimed at consolidating support for the JMEC’s efforts,
a critical need that the Chair just highlighted in his
statement. UNMISS also serves as a member of the
JMEC partners group, which seeks to strengthen
the engagement of regional and international JMEC
members. The group issued a statement on 18 February
fully supporting the decisions of the JMEC, while
calling on the parties to grant unfettered access to
humanitarian actors and ceasefire monitors.
From an operational standpoint, UNMISS has
been supporting the eight monitoring and verification
teams of the ceasefire monitoring mechanism, while
supporting the deployment of additional teams to other
critical areas. While the parties are still in the planning
phase for the establishment of the Joint Operations
Centre and Joint Integrated Police, UNMISS has
conceptualized a preliminary training regime that
can be implemented once the Joint Integrated Police
is operationalized.
As President Mogae stated, it is of critical
importance that the parties move ahead with the
formation of the Transitional Government of National
Unity. Nonetheless, we must remember that its formation
is but the first of many interlocking steps forward
towards fully implementing the peace Agreement.
Once the Transitional Government is formed, it will
need to be empowered to operationalize the institutions
of transition.
6/12

19/02/2016

Above all, the Transitional Government must act
to put an end to the ongoing violence that continues
to displace and harm civilians, while also disrupting
the delivery of critical humanitarian assistance to the
people of South Sudan. The Transitional Government
must also take urgent action to address the impact of
economic decline, which, compounded with severe
food insecurity, has left tens of thousands of vulnerable
people on the brink of humanitarian catastrophe. Only
the full implementation of the peace agreement, with
clear peace dividends for the people of South Sudan,
will help bring stability to the country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Soumaré for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to brief members of the Security Council on the human
rights situation in South Sudan.
When the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan was signed in
August 2015, it was largely received with optimism that
the parties to the conflict would abide by the declaration
of a permanent ceasefire and halt their attacks on the
civilian population. Small welcome steps have been
made in the implementation of the peace Agreement,
with crucial support from the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the wider international community. However, the
reconciliatory rhetoric propagated by Government and
opposition actors has deflected attention from the fact
that the parties to the conflict continue to attack, kill,
abduct, rape, arbitrarily detain and forcefully displace
civilians, and pillage and destroy their property.
In the six months since the signing of the peace
Agreement, a scorched-earth strategy has continued in
which civilians were burned alive in their homes, their
livestock raided and their means of livelihood destroyed.
In the greater Upper Nile region, Government forces
systematically razed villages to the ground in what
appears to be a deliberate strategy to deprive perceived
opposition supporters of any means of securing a living,
thus forcing their displacement.
Attacks on civilians reveal horrific levels violence.
In Leer county, Unity state, a survivor told our staff
that her village was attacked by a mix of Sudan
People’s Liberation Army soldiers and armed youth in
late October. She described how the attackers shot and
16-04397

19/02/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

killed her husband and then locked up her grandfather
in a storage room and burned him alive.
Children’s rights violations and sexual violence
in conflict remain rampant, despite respective
commitments signed by the parties to conflict to cease
and prevent them. During an attack on Koch county,
one woman described how soldiers killed her husband,
then tied her to a tree and forced her to watch as her
15-year-old daughter was raped by at least 10 soldiers.
UNICEF estimates that about 16,000 children have been
recruited and used by all parties since the beginning
of the conflict, including over 400 children in the last
quarter of 2015.
Fortunately, violence in Unity and the greater
Upper Nile has subsided; however, new theatres of
violence are emerging in areas previously little affected
by direct hostilities, notably in the Equatorias. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has
received reports of killings, sexual and gender-based
violence, and the destruction and looting of civilian
property. In recent months, allegations of unlawful and
prolonged detention, mistreatment and extrajudicial
killings of civilians have been documented, particularly
in Western Equatoria state. An increasing number
of armed defence groups have emerged in response
to the Government’s highly militarized approach to
addressing insecurity. With the diffusion of armed
conflict in all parts of the country, and the creation
of local armed groups fighting against Government
troops, South Sudan faces the risk of fragmentation and
related human rights violations.
While conflict-related violence remains a serious
concern, human rights are under attack throughout the
country. As UNMISS recently documented in a report
on the human rights situation, the space for freedom
of expression and dissent has narrowed considerably.
Several radio stations and newspapers have been closed
for having reported on topics deemed too critical of the
Government or, in the case of the Al Rai newspaper,
reportedly on the grounds that one of its board
members had recently joined Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition.
Human rights defenders and journalists have also
been intimidated, harassed, attacked, and detained. In
late December 2015, it was reported that a journalist of
the El Tabeer newspaper had been arrested following
the publication of an article he had written, criticizing
the Government’s economic policy. In 2015, seven

S/PV.7628

journalists were killed by unidentified gunmen. This
pattern of deliberately silencing dissenting voices
seriously contributes to the shrinking of democratic
space and negatively impacts the attainment of a
sustainable peace.
A series of reports have repeatedly concluded
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that gross
violations of international human rights law, serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
international crimes have been committed by the parties
to the conflict. These include human rights reports of
UNMISS, the report of the African Union Commission
of Inquiry on South Sudan, and the report of the Panel
of Experts established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015).
However, no action has been taken. Perpetrators of
these violations have not been held accountable. South
Sudan has a long history of forgiveness and amnesties,
even for the most serious crimes. To break this longstanding cycle of impunity, and to prevent future
violations of international human rights law, we must
ensure that the transitional justice mechanisms outlined
in the Peace Agreement are implemented. Almost
total impunity so far contributes to incidents such as
the recent rampages, killings, wounding, burning and
looting in the UNMISS protection of civilians site in
Malakal. There needs to be accountability to contribute
to prevention.
Chapter V of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict includes provisions to create a commission
for truth, reconciliation and healing, a hybrid court
for south sudan, and a compensation and reparation
authority. The establishment of these mechanisms in
line with international norms and standards is crucial to
achieving sustainable peace, but their formation faces
tremendous challenges. The need for resources will be
enormous and require the international community’s
focus and funds over a long period of time. Once
established, an independent hybrid court will only be
able to put to trial the most senior officials responsible
for human rights violations and abuses. However, many
more perpetrators will need to face justice in South
Sudanese courts, which currently do not have the
capacity to conduct such trials.
In conclusion, let me put forward three
recommendations. First, I urge the South Sudanese
parties to the conflict to immediately cease all violations
of international human rights law and international

16-043977/12

S/PV.7628

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian law. The parties to the conflict must
abide by and implement their commitments made to end
hostilities, to prevent conflict-related sexual violence,
and to stop violations of child rights violations. The
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict needs
to be implemented in letter and spirit in a timely
manner. Civil and military leaders have a command
responsibility under international humanitarian law to
prevent violations and to punish them, if they occur.
Otherwise, they are responsible themselves.
Secondly, I urge members of the Security Council
and regional leaders to continue engaging the parties
to the conflict in that regard. It cannot be tolerated that
leaders make declarations in Juba, while the hostilities
and attacks on the civilian population continue and
intensify across the country. Not only is South Sudan
on the verge of fragmenting, but the conflict seriously
threatens stability in the entire region.
Thirdly, I call on members of the Security Council
and the entire international community to provide
support, including financial, for the establishment
of the transitional justice mechanisms outlined in
the peace Agreement. The United Nations needs to
extend all necessary support to the African Union and
the Transitional Government of National Unity, once
established, to ensure that the cycle of impunity is
broken and justice is served.

19/02/2016

each of which I will briefly touch upon. The Panel also
described in detail the chain of command and control
within the Government and the opposition, which
underpinned its findings in establishing the command
responsibility for the actions and policies that, in the
Council’s view, are grounds for designation.
First, with regard to the current security situation,
the Panel’s final report states that, as of mid-December
2015, the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict,
which was signed in August 2015, had failed to an end
the violence. Both parties were consistently violating
the permanent ceasefire provided for by the peace
Agreement, with particularly high levels of violence in
Unity and Western Equatoria states. In mid-January,
the Panel of Experts observed that, although a lull in
the violence had been noted in some areas, including
Upper Nile, violence between the communal forces and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army had intensified in
Western Equatoria state and flared up in other regions,
particularly in Western Bahr el-Ghazal. According to
the Panel, both parties continued to acquire weapons
and military equipment, even after signing the peace
Agreement and despite the worsening humanitarian
crisis, considerable economic pressures and a
significant decline in Government revenues.

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to brief the members of the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
In my briefing, I will present the main findings and
recommendations set out in the final report of the Panel
of Experts (S/2016/70), which was submitted to the
Committee on 14 January, as well as the results of the
Committee members’ consideration of its conclusions
and recommendations. I will also briefly the discuss
the deliberations that took place on 12 February on the
report of the Panel of Experts and on the status of the
implementation of sanctions during the Committee’s
third official meeting, held with the representatives of
South Sudan and the States of the region.

Secondly, with regard to the political process,
the Panel’s final report underscores that, as of
mid-December 2015, progress towards the establishment
of the Transitional Government of National Unity had
been minimal. In the Panel’s assessment, even the
tentative steps taken by the parties to implement the
peace Agreement of August 2015 had been offset by
a number of adverse factors, including the absence
of a ceasefire, the intensification of intercommunal
violence in some regions, the lack of verifiable progress
on the demilitarization of Juba, and the Government’s
decision to create 28 new states in the country, despite
the request of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, former President of Botswana
Festus Mogae, who we have just heard, to refrain from
pursuing the restructuring of the country. Based on
those and other developments, the Panel of Experts
saw no reason to believe that the Government or the
opposition had made a strategic commitment to peace.

In its final report, which was conveyed to the
Committee on 24 December and in the presentation of
the report to the Committee on 14 January, the Panel of
Experts provided an overview of the security situation,
the political process and the humanitarian situation,

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
the Panel stressed that the relentless war carried out by
the parties had created an ever-worsening humanitarian
disaster. More than 2.3 million people — one-fifth of the
population — had been displaced since December 2013.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on Mr. Seck.

8/12

16-04397

19/02/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Over 3.9 million people are facing severe food insecurity
and the obstruction of the flow of humanitarian aid
is still widespread and systematic. The operations of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which we
have just heard about from Mr. Soumaré, were severely
limited owing to the obstructive measures constantly
taken by the parties, with at least 450 violations of the
status of forces agreement having been committed by the
Government and several dozen similar acts committed
by opposition groups since March 2015. The Panel of
Experts also reported that 43 humanitarian workers had
been killed since the war began in late 2013.
Fourthly, the Panel based its investigations to
determine the command responsibility on the definition
contained in Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions, to which South Sudan is a party. The
definition states that command responsibility not only
includes the planning and execution of violations, but
also extends to the failure to prevent or punish those
acts when the commander knew or had reason to know
that his subordinates had committed or were likely to
commit those acts.
The Panel indicated that in investigating the acts
that the Council had defined in resolution 2206 (2015)
as grounds for sanctions — such as acts intended to
extend or prolong the conflict, violations of ceasefire
agreements, violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, deliberate
attacks against civilians and against the United Nations
missions and humanitarian personnel — it focused its
attention on those who planned and oversaw major
military operations, namely, those who held strategic
and operational responsibility for the military.
In doing so, the Panel insisted that those who
planned and oversaw major military operations may not
have ordered each and every human rights violation,
but that does not absolve them from their responsibility
under the internationally accepted standard of command
responsibility, and especially since the violations
were systematically and continuously perpetrated,
and no action was taken to investigate them or punish
those responsible. The Panel determined that the
complex, multi-pronged military operations in Unity
state and elsewhere would not have been possible
without careful planning, particularly of logistics,
from headquarters in Juba, and without the approval
of the most senior leadership of the Government. The
Panel also reported that no commanders overseeing the
violation of human rights abuses had been investigated

S/PV.7628

or punished by the Government. The Panel further
noted that its findings about the nature of the violence
during the war and the responsibility for that violence
perpetrated by both sides was consistent with the
findings of the African Union Commission of Inquiry.
With respect to the Panel’s four recommendations,
in its first recommendation the Panel proposed that, in
order to achieve the Council’s goal of an inclusive and
sustainable peace in the South Sudan, the Committee
should
designate
high-level
decision-makers
responsible for actions and policies that threaten the
peace, security and stability of the country and who
have the power and influence to change the course of
the war. In that connection, on 12 January the Panel
conveyed to the Committee a confidential annex with
the names of four individuals. During his briefing on
14 January, the Coordinator noted that there was clear
and convincing evidence that the majority of acts of
violence committed in the course of the war had been
carried out under the direction of or with the knowledge
of senior officials at the highest level of Government
and within the opposition.
In its second recommendation, the Panel reiterated
the proposal, set out in its interim report, that the
Council impose a general arms embargo on South
Sudan. The Panel determined that such an arms
embargo was not a punitive measure, but was in fact
essential to the stabilization of the security situation in
the country, and that the lifting of the embargo could
therefore be tied to progress in the implementation of
the peace Agreement in order to provide an incentive
for the parties.
In its third recommendation the Panel suggested
that the Committee call on companies engaged in
business activities in South Sudan, especially in the oil
and natural resource sectors, to adhere to the principles
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and
to abide by the due diligence guidelines established
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in order to reinforce the implementation
of the provisions of chapter IV of the August 2015 peace
Agreement, in particular those regarding transparency.
The Panel noted in its response to questions during
the presentation of the report that some actors in the
oil sector in South Sudan were already paying due
attention to these guidelines in other countries.
In its fourth and final recommendation, the Panel
proposed that the Committee invite all humanitarian

16-043979/12

S/PV.7628

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

actors participating in the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism and in the Gender-based Violence
Information Management System in South Sudan
to collaborate with the Panel in order to identify
perpetrators of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
With regard to the Committee’s consideration of the
Panel’s report of 14 January, the ensuing discussion was
lively. The Panel heard many comments and responded
to many questions, particularly those relating to its four
recommendations. With regard to the Committeee’s
consideration of the proposed actions in connection
with the Panel’s four recommendations, three of
which were directed to the Committee, no consensus
was reached on the proposed actions regarding the
four recommendations.
As I briefly mentioned in the discussion under
the item “Other matters” during the Committee’s
consultations on 14 January, it is my intenation to
visit South Sudan and several States of the region in
the early part of this year. I will inform the members
of the Committee of the details of my planned visit in
due course.
During the 14 January consultations, I also
expressed my intention to convene a formal meeting of
the Committee with the representatives of South Sudan
and the regional States in connection with the Panel’s
final report. During the meeting held on 12 February,
the Committee members stressed the importance of
South Sudan and the regional States implementing the
travel ban and assets freeze imposed by the Security
Council against six individuals starting on 1 July 2015.
For their part, the invited delegations provided their
views on the findings and recommendations contained
in the final report.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Seck
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time my delegation takes the floor to address the
Council during your presidency, let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. Although it is rather late in the month,
I would like to assure you of the full cooperation of
my delegation. Let me also thank you and members
10/12

19/02/2016

of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to address you on this issue of vital importance to
my country.
Given the concern of the Council about the crisis
situation in my country, allow me to reiterate that
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan is
steadfast in its commitment to the implementation
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudanin its entirety.
The commitment has been demonstrated by the
establishment and operationalization of the different
committees stipulated in the peace Agreement, such as
the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee, the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism and the Strategic Defence and Security
Review. These are clear precursors to a successful
implementation of the peace Agreement. These entities
have embarked progressively on doing what they have
been asked to do, and their work is crucial to the
implementation of the peace agreement.
On 11 February, His Excellency the President of
the Republic of South Sudan, Salva Kiir Mayardit,
appointed Mr. Riek Machar, leader of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A in Opposition), and His Excellency Mr. James
Waniga First Vice-President and Vice-President,
respectively. Mr. Waniga was sworn in to his new post
on 12 February and has officially assumed his duties
as Vice-President. As Council members already know,
President Salva Kiir Mayardit appointed 50 additional
members of the Parliament who had been nominated by
the SPLM/A in Opposition to serve in the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly. The parties also agreed
on the distribution of ministerial and deputy ministerial
positions in the forthcoming Transitional Governmental
of National Unity. President Kiir has already nominated
people who will take up the positions given to the
Government, and he is ready to form the Transitional
Government of National Unity as soon as the SPLM/A
in Opposition and the other political parties submit the
names of their nominees.
The return of Mr. Riek Machar Teny to Juba
to take up his position will open a new page in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. Therefore,
we call upon the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral to use their good offices to call on him to return
to Juba for the immediate formation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity.
16-04397

19/02/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The security arrangements required by the peace
agreement for the demilitarization of the capital city
was unilaterally rolled out by the Government and today
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) command has
embarked through GPS and started moving forces to
the new 25-kilometre-radius locations. We appeal to
the international community to provide support for the
establishment of new military barracks outside Juba.
The South Sudan National Police Service has also
finalized the list of its personnel to the Joint Integrated
Police. The leadership of the South Sudan National
Police Service is therefore waiting for their counterparts
from the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) to finalize the
formation of the unit and the Joint Operation Centre.
The support of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, therefore, is required in realization of the
function of the Joint Integrated Police.
On 13 February, the joint command of the SPLA
and the SPLM/A in Opposition inspected the sites
allocated to be a residential area for the bodyguards
of Mr. Riek Machar. The security arrangements also
provide for Mr. Riek Machar Teny’s security details to
be in Juba prior to his return to Juba. The logistical
details of such a huge force also require assistance
from the international community. The security in the
country has improved significantly, although we still
experience insecurity in Mundri and Gbudwe from
elements of the Arrow Boys. I wish I had enough time
to delve into the details of the situation in those States.
The greater Western Equatoria has been the beacon
of peace in South Sudan for the past 27 years, having been
the first area to be liberated by the gallant SPLA forces.
What we are seeing today is not the failure of politics
or poor leadership for that matter, but an extension of
what the world is facing. Climate change is a reality
and its negative effect is what we are seeing today in
my country. My Government actively participated in
both the Sendai Risk Reduction Conference and the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Paris, not because of what our industries
have contributed to carbon depletion since we have
none, but due to what we are facing.
Today, the Dinka pastoralists cannot graze in
their traditional grazing land because they do not have
enough water and grass, as they used to have. That
forces them to look south where they can find water and
healthy grass for their animals. The newfound grazing

S/PV.7628

and water sources are predominantly inhabited by
farmers. Those are the causes of what we are seeing in
the Gbudwe and Mundri. The Government will restore
peace in the region and life will return to normalcy.
It is a well-known fact that the mainstay of the
economy of the Republic of South Sudan is mainly
from oil revenue. Therefore, the drop in global oil
prices affected local returns in South Sudan. That,
coupled with the conflict that has ravaged the country
for the past three years, has made the situation dire.
Nevertheless, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/138), the Government has introduced
some reforms that are aimed at improving the economic
situation of the country in the long run.
The Government further initiated negotiation
with the Government of the Republic of the Sudan on
the terms of the Agreement signed on 22 September
2012 between President Salva Kiir Mayardit and
President Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir specifically
in the area of oil transport fees through the Sudanese
pipeline. President Al-Bashir agreed and the Minister
of Petroleum of the Republic of the Sudan was in Juba
to share ideas with his South Sudanese counterpart. To
further improve the economic situation in South Sudan,
the Government of the Republic of the Sudan agreed to
open its border and allow free movement of goods and
people between the two neighbours.
The humanitarian situation in my country will
improve only when we fully implement the peace
agreement. With its implementation, displaced persons
will be able to go back home and resume normal
life. The new non-governmental organization law
promulgated in the Republic of South Sudan gave the
Government the necessary tools required to restructure
how humanitarian issues are managed and delivered.
We call upon all stakeholders to join the Government
in exercising its sovereign responsibility through
the proper governance of humanitarian activities in
accordance with the new law.
On 12 February, my delegation was invited by
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan and
regional countries neighbouring the Republic of South
Sudan to discuss the state of the implementation of the
sanctions regime. As we told the Committee then and
I would like to reiterate the position once again before
the Council today, I strongly believe that the Republic
of South Sudan needs assistance, not sanctions, in

16-0439711/12

S/PV.7628

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

resolving the conflict it is going through. Sanctions
will complicate the already complicated situation and
shock it further.
We should instead focus our efforts towards the
implementation of the peace agreement as the best
way to foster peaceful coexistence among the people
of the Republic of South Sudan. The international
community can use more constructive and productive
means of engaging the parties, rather than sanctions.
The Government is disappointed by the plan to
impose sanctions, rather than adopt measures that
will encourage the parties to cooperate with the
international community for peace. Sanctions at this
crucial time in the history of South Sudan will only
harden the stance and encourage confrontation and,
above all, devastate the economy, increase economic
pressures and inflict additional hardship on people who

12/12

19/02/2016

are already suffering and desperate. I call upon the
Security Council not to adopt the four recommendations
submitted to the Council by the Panel of Experts. Those
recommendations, if adopted, will derail the milestones
we have achieved so far.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the stance of
my Government about the implementation of the peace
agreement in letter and spirit. We call upon the Security
Council and the international community to genuinely
support the implementation of the peace agreement
more positively both financially and morally.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite the
members of the Council to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

16-04397
