S/PV.7781

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7781st meeting

Tuesday, 4 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2016/812)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-30714 (E)
*1630714*

S/PV.7781

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

report and on several important events that have taken
place in the past week.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the first
public meeting of the Council for the month of October,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Gerard Van Bohemen, Permanent Representative of
New Zealand, for his service as President of the Council
for the month of September. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Van Bohemen and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2016/812)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/812, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I should like to
thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Darfur. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/812),
issued on 27 September, provides updates on the main
developments in the situation. I should therefore like to
focus today on some of the most salient points in the
2/7

04/10/2016

First, with respect to the security situation, we
must acknowledge that the situation in the Jebel Marra
region of Central Darfur remains volatile. The fighting
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid that took place from
January to May has somewhat abated in intensity but
has never stopped altogether. Since June, there have
been new skirmishes and frequent aerial bombardments
in the area. There is a sense that the security situation
deteriorated further as of 17 September, when there
were reports of heavy fighting around Gulo and Guldo,
situated north-east of Nertiti in Central Darfur. Other
clashes have also occurred in western Jebel Marra, in
which at least nine villages have been attacked.
Unfortunately, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is not in a
position to confirm these reports or to evaluate the
military situation with any precision because, I am
compelled to reiterate, the Government of the Sudan
continues to impose access restrictions. However, we
have our ears to the ground, and as the recent clashes
seem to demonstrate, since the Sudanese Government
launched its offensive in January its forces have only
partially succeeded in achieving their objective of
dislodging the fighters of the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid from their operational bases in the
foothills of Jebel Marra. Continued fighting in recent
weeks is clearly worrisome, given the fact that the dry
season, which has just begun, is usually the optimal
time for large-scale military operations.
Moreover, we have received limited and conflicting
information on the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid. The movement continues to deny having lost
ground and suffered losses in Jebel Marra, while the
Government maintains that the entire region is under
the control of regular forces and that the recent rebel
attacks were really only desperate attempts to give the
illusion that the Abdul Wahid movement had survived
politically and militarily.
(spoke in English)
The security situation in other parts of Darfur
remained calm but with a sporadic seasonal spike in
violence between pastoralists and farmers over the use
and management of water and grazing land. Outbreaks
of intercommunal and intracommunal violence
occurred in some hotspot areas, amid a reduction in
16-30714

04/10/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the number of large-scale conflicts. Local authorities
continued to take measures to contain the situation
by facilitating peace agreements and ensuring the
presence of Government forces in the more sensitive
areas. Khartoum also announced a strategy to address
intercommunal conflicts and curb criminality by,
among other measures, the regulation and control of
weapons. That certainly is encouraging recognition of
the seriousness of the situation.
But, beyond those measures, complex challenges
in terms of governance and development still need to
be addressed in order to try to restore the social fabric
and peaceful coexistence among communities in a
region crippled by over a decade of conflict. UNAMID
continues to support central and local Government
initiatives to restore peace and stability in communities.
Of course, the Mission remains focused on the core
objective given by the Council — to protect civilians.
I can only call on the Government of the Sudan and
on the international community to work closely, and in
good cooperation, to address all these challenges.
Turning to the humanitarian angle, the impact of
the conflict remains significant. Since the resumption
of the fighting, as I mentioned earlier, in Golo and
Guldo on 17 September, humanitarian agencies
estimate that about 5,500 newly displaced people,
mainly women and children, have arrived in the Nertitinorth camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
although community leaders in the camps report higher
numbers — of up to 12,500 people. There are further
reports of an additional 4,000 people having arrived
in Guldo town. At this stage, none of the reported
numbers can be verified. Local authorities have issued
instructions to humanitarian agencies that they are to
limit their activities only to old established caseloads,
and should not verify, register or share information
pertaining to newly arrived IDPs. Moreover,
international non-governmental organizations have
reported that all missions between Nertiti and Guldo
have been stopped until further notice.
Despite those access and reporting restrictions,
UNAMID continues to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance through logistical support and
protection, while engaging the parties to immediately
cease hostilities and the Government to allow
immediate, full and unhindered access conflict areas
in Jebel Marra.

S/PV.7781

Turn to the political situation, as members will
recall, the road map agreement was signed at Addis
Ababa on 8 August by the members of the Sudan Call.
The African Union High-level Implementation Panel
then convened talks between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
North, the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi. Those
talks were held from 9 to 14 August to consider draft
agreements on humanitarian access and a cessation of
hostilities in both Darfur the two Areas. Both sets of
talks were suspended until further notice following
persistent disagreements between the parties.
In the face of that impasse, the High-level
Implementation Panel, the Special Envoy and UNAMID
continued their engagement with the parties to try to
bridge their differences. At the beginning of September,
UNAMID held consultations with the leaders of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/North, the JEM
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi in
Kampala. All restated their areas of contention in the
talks and indicated that, if necessary flexibility were
demonstrated by both parties on two issues — on the
release of prisoners of war and on the mechanism for the
oversight of humanitarian assistance — an agreement
could be reached.
The Government and the Darfur armed movements,
together with UNAMID, are expected to travel to Doha
for engagement with the Government of Qatar on the
way forward. The High-level Implementation Panel also
held a new round of informal consultations in Addis
Ababa last week end. Regrettably, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid remains outside of the negotiation
process, and no consultations with its leadership have
taken place since the last meeting with the UNAMID
Joint Special Representative, which took place last July
in Paris.
Meanwhile on the ground in Darfur, on
7 September, President Al-Bashir hosted the Presidents
of Chad and the Central African Republic and the
Emir of Qatar at a ceremony to mark the end of the
Darfur Regional Authority (DRA). On that occasion, he
announced a new era of peace and stability for Darfur.
And, on 21 September, the President issued a decree
formally dissolving the Darfur Regional Authority and
all bodies established under the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, with a few exceptions. On the same
day, and as earlier promised by President Al-Bashir, the

16-307143/7

S/PV.7781

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Government released 21 children it claimed had been
captured in clashes with the JEM in 2015.
With regard to the National Dialogue, on
26 September, President Al-Bashir officially received
the recommendations of the National Dialogue
Conference, which he pledged to implement following
its conclusion on 10 October. As political disagreements
remain over that end date, and as the Sudan Call — as
it calls itself — maintains its rejection of the National
Dialogue Conference, the political process remains
seriously constrained.
I am, however, pleased to report a relative
improvement in the issuance of visas to UNAMID
personnel and the processing of ration containers for
our troops. However, a significant amount of United
Nations and contingent-owned equipment remains at
Port Sudan, which continues to hamper the operational
effectiveness of the Mission. During my most recent
meetings with officials of the Government of the Sudan,
they promised that measures would be taken to address
bureaucratic and procedural impediments and to ensure
the release of those shipments.
On 17 October, the African Union, the United
Nations and the Government of the Sudan will resume
their engagement on the exit strategy based on the
parameters set by the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. A critical step in that
process will be the development of agreed criteria for
gauging progress towards the UNAMID benchmarks
agreed upon following the last convening of the Joint
Working Group, in May.
Ending the protracted suffering of the civilian
population in Darfur must remain the main priority of
the international community. In that context, we are
aware of the allegations regarding the use of chemical
weapons against civilians by Government of the Sudan
forces in Jebel Marra, as presented in the Amnesty
International report that was released on 29 September.
We have not come across any evidence regarding the
use of chemical weapons in the Jebel Marra. At the
same time, as Council members know, the Government
of the Sudan has consistently denied any access by
UNAMID to conflict areas in the Jebel Marra, which
has clearly prevented the mission from being able to
monitor effectively and report on the impact of the
fighting.
I have to note further that an initial assessment
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
4/7

04/10/2016

Weapons (OPCW) has stated that without further
information or evidence being made available, it is
not possible at this stage for it to draw any conclusions
based on the content of the Amnesty International
report. I would therefore encourage the Government
of the Sudan, which is party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, to extend its full cooperation to any
future OPCW investigation, as in fact the Government
in Khartoum has expressed it was ready to do in its
statements to the media following the publication of the
report, which underscores the absolute urgency of the
need for a cessation of hostilities in Darfur and a need
for the Security Council to act in unison to bring about
an end to armed conflict in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
with the signature by all the parties to the political
road map proposed by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, we have taken an important
step forward in the peace process. This now needs to
be consolidated, and the parties should from now on
implement both the letter and the spirit of the document
and undertake to resume negotiations so as to come
quickly to an accord on both the cessation of hostilities
and the modalities of humanitarian access to the
conflict zones. I would call on them to listen attentively
to the hopes of the people, hopes that are focused on
peace, stability and a somewhat better livelihood
through development. We remain convinced that the
Security Council will bring all the support needed for
the cooperative effort of the international mediators to
achieve those objectives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
requested the floor in the understanding that these
informational briefings for the members of the Security
Council could also benefit from members expressing
their opinions, without prejudice to the consultations
that will follow, where we can address issues that
require greater confidentiality.
Since this is the first time I am taking the floor under
the your presidency, Sir, I congratulate you on having
taken up this new responsibility. I also pledge the full
support of my delegation. At the same time, I would like
to thank Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen, Permanent
Representative of New Zealand, and his entire team for
16-30714

04/10/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the excellent work they did during their presidency in
the month of September. It was a particularly difficult
month, not only in terms of logistics, but also in terms
of the various developments that took place.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous
for his introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/812). In my brief comments, I shall refer to three
points: the political process, the humanitarian situation
and the restrictions on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
humanitarian actors.
Uruguay welcomes the various steps forward
mentioned by Mr. Ladsous that have taken place since
the signing of the road map agreement last August 8
by various movements, including the Sudan Call, the
Justice and Equality Movement, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minnawi, and others. The agreement the
new signatories joined, which was facilitated by the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
had already been signed by the Government of the
Sudan, has the objectives of paving the way to putting
an end to the conflict in Darfur and the Two Areas
and of addressing urgent humanitarian needs and the
underlying causes of conflict. Unfortunately, as was
also pointed out by Mr. Ladsous, we have not obtained
entirely positive results and we are particularly
concerned about the absence from the negotiating table
of certain groups, including, and more recently, the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, which continues
to reject any type of dialogue.
With respect to the humanitarian situation,
Uruguay reiterates its concern for the more than
2.5 million people who have been displaced, and we
are encouraged by the reference in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the fact that open hostilities have
generally diminished in Darfur in recent months. In
accordance with the information provided by the United
Nations humanitarian team, more than 80,000 people,
particularly women and children, have allegedly been
displaced in Darfur since the beginning of the year,
especially due to the clashes in the Jebel Marra area.
Against this backdrop, it is crucial that UNAMID
personnel comply fully with the provisions of its
mandate and that humanitarian actors have the necessary
conditions to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people affected by the conflict. It is also crucial that
the Government of the Sudan guarantee without delay
unhindered access for UNAMID and the humanitarian

S/PV.7781

partners to the communities affected by the conflict
with a view to carrying out monitoring and verification
missions as well as to deliver humanitarian assistance.
Furthermore, while we note that there has been
a relative improvement in the issuance of visas
for UNAMID personnel and the dispatching of
rations containers for the troops, we reiterate that in
accordance with its obligations under the Status of
Forces Agreement, the Government of the Sudan must
take urgent measures to eliminate all bureaucratic
obstacles and ensure that UNAMID enjoys the
conditions necessary to full compliance with its
mandate. As we have pointed out on several occasions
in relation to operations in other areas, my delegation
attaches particularly importance to the issue of States’
compliance with their obligations in relation to United
Nations operations in their territories.
In conclusion, I would like to express Uruguay’s
gratitude to all of UNAMID’s personnel and the United
Nations humanitarian country team and its partners,
who continue to work tirelessly, often in difficult
conditions, to achieve a sustainable peace in Darfur.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on taking up the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also express my thanks and esteem to
the outgoing President, the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand, for his able guidance of the Council’s
work in September. I further thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2016/812), and Mr. Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing.
The situation in Darfur in the reporting period
reflects great improvement on the security front. The
Sudan Armed Forces have succeeded in pushing back
against rebel groups in all of the states and subregions
of Darfur, with the exception of certain pockets of
Jebel Marra, a subregion of Central Darfur, which is
one of the five administrative units of Greater Darfur.
I am just explaining the geography of the area we are
looking at today. It is the subregion of the Jebel Marra
that is being used by the/Abdul Wahid rebels.
The five Federal states of Darfur and the
Government in Khartoum have spared no effort in
restoring security and to prevent tribal conflicts.

16-307145/7

S/PV.7781

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The number of conflicts has declined and their
consequences are now almost non-existent. According
to humanitarian statistics, after the security situation
improved, the number of voluntary returned internally
displaced persons (IDPs) increased. More than 150,000
IDPs have returned to their villages and enjoy security
and basic services in those villages, provided, most
notably, by the brotherly State of Qatar and the Arab
League under the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The Sudanese Government is also doing its utmost to
address the needs of displaced persons and those who
wish to stay in camps by integrating such camps into
villages and providing the necessary services.
At the beginning of September, with His Excellency
the President of the Republic of the Sudan and the
participation and support of His Highness Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani of Qatar, the President
of Chad and the President of the Central African
Republic, Darfur marked the end of the Darfur Regional
Authority, which had been established pursuant to the
2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur to supervise
the implementation of the Agreement’s provisions.
That Agreement, and in particular the administrative
referendum, was fully implemented, in which the people
of Darfur decided to keep the current system with the
five states. There was broad participation, which means
that the region’s residents are now enjoying security and
their rights and freedoms. That was also demonstrated
by their participation in the administrative referendum
and other activities, including construction, in order to
change the face of a region that we hold very dearly.
The Sudanese Government is sparing no effort to
ensure sound and comprehensive peace in the country,
while pushing back the spectre of violence and war. The
President of the Republic launched the National Dialogue
initiative, with a special oversight committee that began
deliberations so as to submit recommendations during
to the National Dialogue Conference on 10 October. The
door is open and everyone has been invited — those
who hope to join these efforts for peace, stability and
rejection of violence. We would like to build a country
on a foundation of unanimity and consensus.
I therefore appeal to the international community
and the Council to bring pressure to bear on all those
who do not wish to join in the efforts of national
dialogue. I would remiss were I not to mention the
signing by some armed groups and political parties of
the road map in Addis Ababa, under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel. On the
6/7

04/10/2016

other hand, Abdul Wahid and his rebels have rejected
all initiatives and appeals for peace and negotiation
and are counting on support offered by some countries.
From this forum, I would like to call upon all of those
providing protection and support to put an end to it and
to put pressure on the movement to ensure that it joins
efforts in Darfur.
I would like to reiterate that it is high time to begin
implementing the exit strategy for African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to draw down
on troop levels in a mission where there is really no
more need for such troops, in particular in the west,
north and south of Darfur. Once again, the Sudanese
Government would like to see that drawdown carried
out in a gradual manner, in several stages, to ensure
that the Mission is handed over to the United Nations
country team to work to rebuild peace and security in
the country within the framework of development.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights
several positive aspects in Darfur, notably the rebuilding
of peace and a reduction in crime and banditism. The
report also mentions the reduction in the number of
tribal conflicts during the reporting period. There was
also reference to the activities of armed groups. The
Government’s efforts to ensure peace and security
in Darfur are also stressed in the report. Once again,
I would like to reaffirm that our Government is
determined to cooperate and coordinate efforts with
the Mission to ensure that it is able to fully carry out
its mandate, including the exit strategy, according to
resolution 1769 (2007). Our Government has made a
firm commitment to the Mission since its deployment
to date and until the very last soldier leaves. I would
also like to share the comments made by the Head of
the Mission, who said that the issuance of visas is no
longer a problem for the Mission and that the Sudanese
Government has taken the necessary action in order to
allow containers of rations to be shipped through.
(spoke in English)
Finally, 13 years ago, in 2003, conflict erupted
in Darfur. At that time, it was considered to be the
worst conflict in the world. In 2004, the N’Djamena
Agreement was signed and followed up by the Abuja
Agreement in 2006, but to no avail. Spoilers from within
and outside of the Sudan effectively joined hands. In
2011, thanks to the joint efforts by the Government of
the Sudan, the United Nations, the African Union and
the Arab League, the Doha Agreement was concluded
16-30714

04/10/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and eventually implemented up to September this year,
when we officially celebrated the end of the conflict.
During his meeting with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan last week, the Secretary-General
thoughtfully and earnestly stated that, together, we had
charted troubled waters and come a long way. Images
of Darfur and its war were everywhere, and now we are
talking about reconstruction, development and an exit
strategy. Now is not the time to allow spoilers wearing

S/PV.7781

various disguises and masks to prolong the conflict in
the Sudan and destabilize the country. They will not
budge but, together, with the Security Council, we are
now more confident that that will not be allowed to
happen.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-307147/7
