S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6906th meeting
Wednesday, 23 January 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Masood Khan/Mr. Tarar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. White
Mrs. Jafarova
Mr. Hong Ming
Ms. Legendre
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Maes
Mr. Erroja
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Zhdanov
Mr. Kayinamura
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Woodifield
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-21484 (E)

*1321484*

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Nigeria to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to request all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to welcome the participation in this meeting
of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the observer State of Palestine, following the granting
to Palestine of the status of non-member observer State
in November. I also thank Mr. Robert Serry for the
valuable presentation he gave on the developments that
have taken place over the past three months.
(spoke in English)
Important developments have taken place since
the last open meeting (see S/PV.6847) to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the issue of
Palestine, three months ago.
First, President Obama was re-elected in the first
week of November. His election renewed the hope for
a fresh and effective engagement by the American
Administration towards the peace process in the Middle
East.
A week after the American elections, there was a
limited escalation in Gaza. Egypt tried to mediate as
soon as the escalation started. But before our efforts
could bear fruit, they were undermined by the wide-scale
Israeli aggression against Gaza that same week. That
prompted us to demand the convening of an urgent
meeting of the Security Council, on 14 November, to
address the deteriorating situation. The Council held a
closed meeting (see S/PV.6863) the same day, but was
unable to take action. Nevertheless, we pursued our
efforts to mediate between Israel and Hamas to stop
the violence. We succeeded in reaching an agreement
to calm down the situation, on 21 November. It included
a number of arrangements aimed at sustaining the

2

de-escalation. It also included the gradual loosening of
the illegal blockade on Gaza and stopping the hostilities
from both sides.
On 29 November, the General Assembly voted by
an overwhelming majority to grant Palestine the status
of observer State in the General Assembly (resolution
67/19). A total of 138 countries voted in favour and nine
voted against; there were 42 abstentions. All of the
statements made by States during that historic meeting
of the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.44), whether in
favour, against or in abstention, explained that they
had taken their position in order to promote the peace
process in the region.
Before that historic step in the General Assembly,
Israel had promised to retaliate. It did deliver on its
promise. In the period following the adoption of the
resolution), the Israeli Government proceeded with a
settlement frenzy in the occupied territories, especially
Jerusalem. Fourteen members of the Council have
issued separate statements denouncing this policy,
which aims at imposing a fait accompli on the ground.
Israel also seized the tax revenues of the Palestinian
Authority, subjecting it to the threat of a financial
collapse.
The Arab Foreign Ministers have met three times
to address the situation in Palestine since our last
meeting: in November, during the Israeli aggression
against Gaza; in December; and in January. They took
a number of decisions to condemn the settlement frenzy
in the occupied territories and to support the Palestinian
Authority and the reconciliation efforts in Palestine.
They committed to exerting all efforts to give the peace
process a last chance.
Egypt resumed its efforts for reconciliation in
Palestine. This month the President of Egypt received
the President of the State of Palestine. We also received
the leaders of Hamas. Steps are currently being taken
for the purpose of reconciliation.
Finally, the Israeli elections took place yesterday.
The official results are yet to come, but preliminary
results show that the current ruling party is ahead
in the exit polls. During the election campaign, the
Prime Minister of Israel vowed to continue and expand
settlement activity. He reaffirmed on many occasions
that Israel had the right to build in East Jerusalem.
In the middle of these important developments, we
can identify two positive signs. First, the agreement for

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

the ceasefire in Gaza is still holding. Measures have
been taken on both sides to de-escalate the situation.
Arrangements have been made by Israel to loosen the
blockade, including the expansion of the fishing area
for Palestinians to six miles and limited access for
trucks into Gaza.
Secondly, the process of Palestinian reconciliation
is slowly resuming. We plan to organize a number of
meetings in the near future for the two parties to resolve
their differences.
Before our next meeting, three months from now,
all of the parties, the international community and the
Security Council in particular have to show a concrete
engagement to contain the serious potential implications
of the collapse of the peace process. Inaction is not an
option. Incremental practical steps have to be taken
in order to ensure stability in the region and save the
peace process.
First, the sponsors of the peace process, including
the American Administration, the European Union,
Russia, the United Nations and all the parties have
to recommit to a serious effort to resume the peace
negotiations on the basis of the previously agreed terms
of reference, with a view to reaching a final solution
that would include the establishment of a Palestinian
independent State on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Secondly, all current settlement plans in the
occupied territories have to be frozen. No new plans
should be approved. The Council should consider
taking action in that regard.
Thirdly, reconciliation efforts in Palestine have to
be encouraged in a clear and unequivocal way.
Fourthly, the situation on the ground in Palestine
has to be improved. That applies to both Gaza and
the West Bank. The blockade against Gaza has to be
lifted. The financial embargo against the revenues of
the Palestinian Authority has to end. The daily violence
and abuse against the Palestinians has to stop.
We look forward to the achievement of all, or some,
of those steps in the next three months. Meanwhile,
Egypt will remain committed to working with all
parties towards achieving a just and lasting peace for
all the peoples and States of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.

13-21484

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): All
protocol observed, I wish to concentrate my statement
today solely on the critical matter of settlementbuilding in the occupied Palestinian territories, without
prejudice to the deep importance that we attach to
the other pressing emergencies in our region, which I
will come back to in our next intervention before the
Council under this item.
In two days’ time, the United Nations will begin
marking the anniversary of liberation of Auschwitz
and, in doing so, recall one of the grimmest episodes in
human existence, when the Nazis, together with their
collaborators in occupied Europe, destroyed most of
eastern and central Europe’s Jewish population, together
with a large number of Jews drawn from western
Europe, particularly from France, the Netherlands and
Belgium.
The industrial annihilation of a people was hitherto
unknown to a world that had long grown accustomed to
campaigns of persecution and mass killing; we think in
this regard of the suffering of indigenous nations, for
example. The principal lesson from all those experiences
has been clear: once we classify and subordinate
others to categories not equal with ourselves, along
a value chain not drawn from a universal perspective
but defined narrowly by the individual communities
themselves, we can easily slip into degrading the other,
stigmatize them and blame them for whatever negative
circumstances unfold, ultimately launching ourselves
towards outcomes otherwise thought impossible and
which became more possible with every curse.
The Arab-Israeli peace process has reached a
crucial point, and the Council over the coming year will
be the known to future generations as either the Council
that presided over the end of one of the longest conflicts
on its agenda, with the birth of a comprehensive
settlement based on two States existing side by side in
peace and security, or the Council that presided over
more ignominious outcome: the burial of peace and the
ruin of those living in the region.
We must now therefore do all we can to arrest
any development affecting negatively the prospects
of the relaunching of the final status negotiations. But
we can hardly stitch a credible international effort
together, with the fine adjustments it requires, if
every week we are being buffeted by news of planned
or new Israeli settlement activity, particularly were
it to be in occupied East Jerusalem, or in E-1, which

3

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

denies the Palestinians contiguity and will doom peace
for good. What is particularly vexing is that the law
on this issue remains unaltered and abundantly clear,
notwithstanding whatever decisions the Supreme Court
of Israel may choose to take.
The applicable law in respect of the exercise by
Israel of military control over the occupied State
of Palestine is, once again, neither Israeli law nor
whatever domestic law Israel sees fit to impose, but
international humanitarian law, applicable to all high
contracting parties as well as obligations that are erga
omnes. Israel’s administrative and military regulations,
insofar as the West Bank is concerned, can be lawful
only if they are utterly consistent with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its control guided strictly by
its obligations as the occupying Power.
The International Court of Justice’s position on this
last point is crystal clear. It maintained in paragraph 78
of its 2004 advisory opinion that:
“The territories situated between the Green Line
[...] and the former eastern boundary of Palestine
under the Mandate were occupied by Israel in
1967 during the armed conflict between Israel and
Jordan. Under customary international law, these
were therefore occupied territories in which Israel
had the status of occupying Power. Subsequent
events in these territories [...] have done nothing to
alter this situation. All these territories (including
East Jerusalem) remain occupied territories and
Israel has continued to have the status of occupying
Power.” (see A/ES-10/273)
It is also worth noting that there are no territorial
exceptions to this finding. All the territory of the West
Bank, as described by the International Court of Justice,
is considered occupied. A closer reading of resolution
242 (1967) also bears this point out, as we explained
before the International Court of Justice on 24 February
2004. In his oral submission, the late Sir Arthur Watts,
Q.C., Counsel for Jordan, noted how resolution 242
(1967)
“affirmed, unanimously, the principle of Israel’s
withdrawal of its armed forces ‘from territories
occupied in the recent conflict’ — and that meant,
and could only mean, territories on the non-Israeli
side of the Green Line. Thus the Green Line is the
starting line from which is measured the extent
of Israel’s occupation of non-Israeli territory;
originating in 1949 as an armistice line, it became

4

in 1967 the line to the Israeli side of which Israel
had to withdraw its forces, and on the non-Israeli
side of which territory was ‘occupied’ by Israel.”
The transfer by the occupying Power of parts of its
own population into the territory it occupies represents
a clear and continuing serious violation of the laws and
customs applicable in international armed conflict, as
codified by article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
and which is also defined as a criminal act in article
8(2)(b)(viii) of the Rome Statute.
For those on the more extreme Israeli right who
seem to be largely unaware of this last point, or are
aware and do not much care, it is worth repeating again
that in respect of the Rome Statute, and pending the
Court’s application of its jurisdiction over Palestine,
which is something that may now become possible, we
may move beyond simply State responsibility and cross
into the domain of individual criminal liability.
The actions of the Israeli settler movement
in the occupied Palestinian territories must, for
obvious reasons, now stop, and the deep suffering
of the Palestinian people must be brought to an end.
The actions of States must be guided by customary
international law, which this Council itself must uphold
and not undermine.
Moreover, our deep opposition to the policy of
settlement building and our repeated condemnation of
it, which we reiterate today, are not founded on some
form of bigotry toward the Jewish people. What they
are built on is a continuing, three-decade-long violation
of international humanitarian law, confirmed by the
International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion
of 2004 and understood as such by the vast majority of
States existing in the world today.
Finally, we hope that the international community
will be seized by the urgency of these delicate moments
to create the necessary conditions for the resumption of
the final status talks, within which the final shape of the
borders will no doubt be dealt with early. In this vein, it
is also worth recalling how, in negotiating the draft for
what became resolution 242 (1967), the understanding
reached between the principal interlocutors was for a
withdrawal from all non-Israeli territory, with only
minor reciprocal border rectifications.
Ultimately, our hope is to see the occupation of all
Arab lands ended fully, for the Palestinians to live free
in their new State and, 68 years after the Holocaust,

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

for the Israelis to feel secure, with all of us in the
region working together in the shade of a permanent
comprehensive peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing. Brazil
appreciates the participation of Minister Riad Malki
and the contribution of the Permanent Representative
of Israel.
As this is the fi rst open debate on this issue since the
historical adoption by the General Assembly of resolution
67/19, let me reiterate Brazil’s great satisfaction at the
unequivocal support of the international community
for the Palestinian request for observer State status in
the United Nations. Brazil congratulates the people
and the Government of the State of Palestine on that
development, which we believe will reinforce the path
towards a negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
question.
As we begin another year, prospects for peace in the
Middle East seem to be growing increasingly remote.
The passing of time has only added new complexities
to the situation and intensified the need for diplomatic
efforts towards sustainable solutions for new and longstanding challenges.
The international community is, unfortunately, still
failing to effectively assist with solutions to the most
important political problems affecting the region. The
Council would, in this regard, set a meaningful example
by displaying a stronger determination to seriously deal
with this issue through sustained, regular debate.
Throughout 2012, the window for a two-State
solution continued to narrow, and more people in Gaza,
Syria, Lebanon and southern Israel continued to suffer
the consequences of inaction.
The situation has been further aggravated by the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. That illegal practice remains a serious
obstacle to peace in the region and to the realization
of the two-State solution. The construction of Israeli
settlements in the so-called E-1 area and other recent
settlement construction in the Palestinian occupied
territory are of particular concern. Israel should

13-21484

reconsider its decision. Such activity undermines the
prospects for a two-State solution, is illegal under
international law and constitutes a major obstacle to
peace. Not only must Israeli settlement construction be
completely frozen; settlements must be dismantled and
the occupation must end.
Progress is urgently needed in 2013. The
international community has long been in possession of
the blueprint for the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The essential missing element is the political
resolve to apply it through a reliable process.
Brazil reiterates its call on the Security Council to
fully carry out its responsibilities. The promotion of
peace in the Middle East is in the interest of all members
of the United Nations and cannot be delegated to third
parties. As stated previously by my Government, an
inoperative Quartet and a silent Security Council do
not serve the interests of peace in the Middle East.
The recent conflict in Gaza was yet another
reminder of the human, political and material costs
of the indefinite protraction of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and of the paralysis of the peace process.
The Brazilian Government protests in the strongest
terms the destruction by Israeli forces, during the most
recent conflict in Gaza, of the Al Sikka bridge serving
the inhabitants of Moghraqa, Wadi Gaza village,
Buriej and Nuseirat, which had recently been rebuilt
by the United Nations Development Programme with
Brazilian funds. It is simply unacceptable that the
civilian population should pay the price.
It is positive that the ceasefire agreed upon by
the parties was upheld. Human life must be equally
protected, be it in Gaza City or in Sderot. A sustainable
solution for this issue involves the repudiation of
violence and extremism by all actors, Palestinian
reconciliation, the end of the Gaza blockade and the
resumption of the peace process.
Concerning Syria, we are appalled by the current
level of violence against civilians. We have strongly
condemned the attack at Aleppo University. Brazil
reiterates the need for an independent investigation to
identify those responsible for that act and bring them
to justice. We are also concerned by the situation of
Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries. Brazil has
contributed to the activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Lebanon,
Jordan and Turkey in order to diminish their suffering.

5

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

Violence in Syria compromises the future of the
country, yet both the Government and the opposition
continue to disregard the imperative for a negotiated
solution and to wrongly believe that they can prevail
by military means. The primary responsibility for the
cessation of violence certainly lies with the Syrian
Government, but we are also aware of the responsibilities
of the armed opposition groups and of the presence of
radical elements among the rebels.
All parties must fulfil their obligations to halt
violence and respect international humanitarian law, as
well as actively engage in finding a peaceful solution to
the conflict. The international consensus is that there
is no military solution to the conflict. The only path
forward is through an inclusive Syrian-led political
process.
At the present juncture, support for the work of
the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, is even
more important. Brazil calls on all actors, including
the Security Council, to redouble their efforts to
find a multilaterally agreed solution to the crisis, as
provided for in the final communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex), which retains its
relevance today as a consensus document. Efforts must
concentrate on the need to end bloodshed immediately,
to promote stability and to help the parties to negotiate
in good faith.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. It is an issue of
great importance to regional and international peace
and security, especially in the circumstances currently
prevailing in the Middle East.
At the outset, I would like to confirm our
endorsement of the statements that have been and
will be made on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Non-Aligned Movement. I also salute the presence
among us of the Foreign Minister of the State of
Palestine and his participation in this meeting, and I
thank Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing.
The Palestinian cause has witnessed important
developments since the last Council debate on the issue
(see S/PV.6847). Through its resolution 67/19, adopted

6

on 29 November 2012, the General Assembly granted
Palestine the status of a non-member observer State of
the United Nations. After the adoption of that resolution,
Israel started expanding settlements and increasing
the number of residential units in existing ones. In his
briefing to the Council last month (see S/PV.6894), the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs noted
Israel’s announcement in the wakes of that adoption
that it would continue planning for the construction
of thousands of residential units in the area between
Jerusalem and the Ma’ale Adumim settlement. He went
on to say that the Israeli Government had decided to
speed up the construction of approximately 6,500
residential units in East Jerusalem. That was the Israeli
Government’s response to resolution 67/19.
As another means of punishing the Palestinian
people, Israel refused to pay the tax and customs
revenues due to the Palestinian Authority. That is a
violation of the Paris Protocol, which stipulates that tax
revenues must be transferred. To alleviate the suffering
of the Palestinian people, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
gave budgetary support to the Palestinian Authority
in the amount of $100 million. The Israeli occupation
of Palestinian land has become one of the longeststanding occupation issues that this Organization
has dealt with. We hear statements in this and other
bodies expressing the strong belief on the part of the
international community and the United Nations in the
justice of the Palestinian cause and the inevitability
of putting an end to their plight. However, practically
speaking, the Council is paralysed and helpless because
the occupying Power continues to disregard the
international community and carry on with its brutal
and unjust policies.
In his most recent report on the situation in the
Middle East (S/2012/701), the Secretary-General
states that settlement expansion undermines the
territorial basis for a future Palestinian State. The
settlements incontrovertibly violate the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which forbids occupying Powers to change
the demographics of the land or to confiscate territory.
The settlements deal a death blow to the possibility of a
peaceful settlement to the Palestinian question based on
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the two-State solution.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as the guardian
of Islamic holy sites, is deeply concerned about the
Israeli practices in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The Security
Council and the General Assembly have adopted over

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

10 resolutions pertaining to Jerusalem and the need to
avoid any negative impact on its religious and spiritual
significance. Nevertheless, over half of Israeli settlers
live in the area of Jerusalem and its environs, and
increasingly in the area between southern Jerusalem
and Bethlehem. The most recent resolution on Jerusalem
was Assembly resolution 67/24, adopted on 30 October
2012 and entitled “Jerusalem”. Its first paragraph states
that any measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
to impose its laws and sovereignty are illegal and null
and void and lack all legitimacy.
Israel continues its campaign of demolition in the
area surrounding the holy sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
both above ground and especially under and around
the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, in an effort to weaken its
foundation, which would lead to its eventual collapse.
The excavations around Al-Aqsa Mosque have increased
to almost 30 locations. Meanwhile, Israel continues to
demolish the homes of Palestinian Jerusalemites and
to cancel their residency rights, continuing to evict
many Palestinian families from their homes in East
Jerusalem, leaving them homeless.
That is without even mentioning the behaviour of
Israeli settlers in the city who commit provocations,
including damaging and desecrating mosques and
churches. The Council is obligated to compel Israel
to cease its current policies and abide by Council and
Assembly resolutions. The time has come to do away
with the permanent immunity that Israel has enjoyed,
to take the measures necessary to guarantee the
independence of the State of Palestine, and to put an
end to the occupation of its territories. The occupation
of the Syrian Arab Golan and the Shab’a farms and
other Lebanese territories, must also come to and end.
Failure to act will deeply hurt the credibility and stature
of the United Nations and the Security Council.
The tragic situation in Syria has recently taken a
serious turn for the worse, with increased killings from
air raids conducted by the Syrian Government against
its own citizens. It has come to the point of treating its
citizens as enemies, killing them and destroying their
homes. The number of victims is now more than 60,000,
while the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons is in the millions.
Everyone can see that the Syrian regime has lost
its legitimacy and can no longer remain in power. It
fights to the very end in order to cling to its vanishing
authority. It seeks to portray the situation as a dispute

13-21484

between that country and its neighbours, while in
fact its people have risen in revolt and have clearly
expressed their will, which must be respected. Its
clinging to power over the corpses of martyrs cannot
continue. Threatening to destroy Damascus so that it
collapses around its people is only a sign of despair and
bankruptcy.
The Syrian people feel bitter about the international
community’s lack of action and at the fact that the
Security Council has abandoned them. The Council
has to date been unable to stop the Government
killing machine. Instead, the killing machine has
grown stronger and broadened its scope, committing
crimes against humanity and horrendous massacres.
My country therefore demands that all perpetrators of
those crimes be held accountable before international
justice. It calls on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in that regard.
As it notes with distress the events in Syria, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has not hesitated to shoulder
its responsibility by coming to the help of the Syrian
people and providing humanitarian assistance and
relief aid to the tune of several hundreds of millions
of dollars. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will actively
participate in the donor conference called for by the
Secretary-General, to be held at the end of this month
in the State of Kuwait, in order to meet the needs of the
Syrian people.
Moreover, the Kingdom was among the first
countries to recognize the Syrian National Coalition,
recognized to date by more than one hundred States. The
Coalition must therefore now be given the opportunity
to represent the Syrian people in all organizations,
bodies and forums. That position of Saudi Arabia
stems from its great grief and sadness at the events we
witness daily — the killing, destruction and genocide
committed by the regime against unarmed civilians.
Our country notes that the Security Council has
been very slow to take action in response to the tragic
situation in Syria and to assume its humanitarian,
moral and regional responsibilities. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia urges the Council to respond to the
appeals of the Syrian people and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. We call on the
Council to promptly act with resolve under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in order to put
an end to the killing being perpetrated by the Syrian
regime. We urge it to work towards achieving a real and

7

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

peaceful transfer of power that meets the aspirations
and expectations of the Syrian people for freedom,
dignity and prosperity and that preserves the unity
and territorial integrity of Syria, while respecting the
diversity of its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
extend my sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President,
and to your country, Pakistan, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. On a
similar note, I wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing.
My delegation wishes to associates itself with the
statements to be made by the representatives of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Djibouti
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
In November last year, we witnessed the will of the
international community when the General Assembly
granted Palestine non-member observer State status
(resolution 67/19). While we rejoice at that development,
we condemn the racist and uncivilized actions of
Israel in relation to that event since then. Israel has
continued its expansionist policy by approving new
illegal settlements in the West Bank and in the E-1
area close to East Jerusalem. On 8 January, Prime
Minister Netanyahu claimed that Israel’s construction
and expansion of those illegal settlements do not pose
any threat to the peace process. That is absurd and
preposterous. That move by Israel is clear proof that it
views international law and world opinion with disdain.
What is more apparent is that Israel is not interested in
peace. My delegation believes that the further expansion
of illegal settlements will scuttle the two-State solution.
Israel continues to illegally alter the reality on the
ground in the occupied Palestinian territory. It seems
adamant in destroying the will of the Palestinians to
govern themselves. Israel’s seizure of Palestinian
tax revenues is not only unlawful and shameful, but
is another act of atrocity aimed at weakening and
punishing the Palestinian National Authority. The
world cannot turn a blind eye to those illegal actions
by Israel. Major Powers should prove to the world that
their foreign policy and actions on the issue of Palestine
are decided in their capitals, not in Tel Aviv.

8

Israel must be made to realize that its future and its
security lie within the principles of the establishment of
a Palestinian State under the two-State solution, based
on the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. Israel must also cease all illegal settlement
activities and the demolition of Palestinian structures,
which are in violation of international law. It must be
forced to respect and restore the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. Israel must heed international
calls to lift the illegal blockade on Gaza immediately.
Only then can Israelis and Palestinians live side by side
in peace and security.
The impasse in the Middle East is not impossible
to resolve, but we need pragmatic solutions based on
international principles and norms. It requires all
influential Powers to display strong political leadership
in considering the mutually reinforcing needs of the
peoples and nations in the region. It goes without
saying that the Security Council must play its intended
role by fulfilling its mandate to enforce its resolutions
in pursuit of a sustainable solution to the question
of Palestine, thus restoring its credibility. We must
collectively pledge such efforts in order to rid the world
of insecurity and conflict and to replace them with
sustainable peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
outstanding leadership of the presidency of the Council
this month. I thank Morocco for its stewardship of the
Council last month. I also wish to thank Mr. Robert
Serry for his detailed briefing this morning. I welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the State of
Palestine and his participation in this meeting. I would
like to welcome the new Council members and pay
tribute to the outgoing members.
This is the first debate of 2013 on this issue.
The Group of Arab States would therefore like to
reaffirm the fact that 2013 will be a decisive turning
point with regard to the Middle East, in particular the
Palestinian question, which is the primary cause of
the Arab world. On 29 November 2012, we witnessed
the historic granting to Palestine of non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. It is the
first major individual achievement in many years on
the path to lasting and comprehensive peace and the
two-State solution. It is particularly important at a time

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

when the international community has demonstrated
its incapacity to compel the occupying Power, Israel,
to respect the unanimous will of the international
community and to end the occupation of Palestine
through ensuring the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including those of the
Security Council.
It is unacceptable that, to date, the international
community has continued to adopt the same approach
of many decades in addressing the Palestinian question.
It is high time for the world, through the United
Nations and particularly the Security Council, to
assume its direct responsibilities in the maintenance
of international peace and security, particularly since
Israel has continued to occupy Arab and Palestinian
lands and to maintain its illegal and illicit activities
in blatant violation of all international laws and
instruments, including the building of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.
In that context, the deliberate violations carried out
by the Israeli Government have escalated, as if Israel
is attempting to further punish the Palestinian people
and their leaders in view of their diplomatic, political
and legal successes at the multilateral level that have
promoted Palestine to the rank of observer State to the
United Nations.
The escalation of activity, including settlement
construction, led to the Israeli Government’s
announcement of three thousand additional units to be
built in Palestinian territory, namely, East Jerusalem,
and the completion of the so-called E-1 settlement
complex, which would isolate East Jerusalem, separate
it from the West Bank and cut the geographic link
between the north and the south of the West Bank. That
is an additional threat made by the State of Israel, and it
highlights the illegitimacy of its settlement activities. It
also represents a major obstacle to the achievement of a
solution based on two States living side by side within
the pre-1967 borders.
Unsatisfied with their actions so far, Israeli forces
also savagely acted against Palestinian activists who
were demonstrating against Israeli expansionist
policies and peacefully attempting to protect their land
by setting up Palestinian villages that they call Bab
al-Shams and Bab al-Karamah.
We vehemently condemn the continuing Israeli
violations against the Palestinian people and their land.

13-21484

In 2012, the occupying Power killed 226 Palestinians,
including more than 60 women and children, and
injured 2,300. It also destroyed 2,100 homes and
facilities and uprooted more than seven thousand fruit
trees, and authorized the construction of 26,000 new
housing units. Israel must realize that its continuing
crimes will have negative consequences and that those
who perpetrate the crimes will not escape from justice.
Israel must be held responsible for the health of all
of the Palestinian detainees and prisoners, given that its
detention policy spares no sector of Palestinian society.
The Arab Group also condemns Israel’s piracy
through its control of Palestine’s trade channels and
crossings, particularly its refusal to transfer tax and
customs revenues to the Palestinians. That revenue is
fundamentally important to the economy of the State of
Palestine, which has already suffered serious challenges
due to Israeli policies limiting the movement of goods
and individuals both inside and outside of Palestine.
Beyond the piracy implications, the Palestinian
Authority faces difficulty in paying the salaries of its
civil servants, which has affected the interests of about
1 million Palestinian citizens. From the viewpoint of the
Arab Group, we call upon the international community
to take immediate action to compel Israel to release
the Palestinian tax revenues and to refrain from such
illegitimate and immoral practices.
The Arab Group welcomes the positive signs that
have emerged from the meetings recently held in Cairo,
with the aim of accelerating reconciliation between the
Palestinian factions. The Arab Group welcomes, in this
context, the great efforts of Cairo and the Arab League
towards Palestinian reconciliation, which is an Arab
priority.
Arab and Palestinian hands are fully extended
to ensure a just and lasting settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of two
States — an independent State of Palestine within
the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, alongside the State of Israel, in line with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Israel has continued to play its role as the
occupying Power and to demonstrate its arrogance in
the region. It has preferred that role, rather than a role
aimed at establishing natural and normal relations with
neighbouring States. Yesterday parliamentary elections
took place in Israel. During the campaign, we heard

9

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

the negative slogans of a number of parties. Therefore,
we must tirelessly continue our efforts to end Israeli
violations of international law in order to achieve peace
in the region.
All efforts could be undermined if Israel continues
to violate international law and to hamper international
Arab efforts to achieve peace, as it has continued to do
in recent years. We therefore call upon the international
community to take immediate action in proposing a
serious initiative with an established deadline and time
frame for all parties, aimed at achieving two States in
line with international legitimacy and with the peace
process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): First of all, Mr. President,
on behalf of the member States of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, your able team and
your country on the excellent conduct in steering the
work of the Council for the month.
Amid a rapidly changing situation in the Middle
East, the Palestinian question remains at the heart of
the outstanding issues that require the utmost attention
of and prompt intervention from this body, which has
so far failed to address and correct the injustices that
Israel has been inflicting on the Palestinian people
from 1948 until today. The Palestinian people’s
aspirations to realize their legitimate dreams and rights
to freedom, sovereignty and self-determination and
to practice the principles of equity, justice and human
dignity in their own independent State on their own
homeland, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, are
systematically blocked and denied. Their long-standing
question is still unresolved and peace and justice are
unsecured, and the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is ultimately made
permanent.
After 20 years of painful, tortuous and often
futile negotiations, prospects for peace and justice
in the region are now diminishing more rapidly than
ever. Indeed, Israel’s occupation policies and practices
continue to undermine the vision of the two-State
solution and to defy the will of the international
community through settlement, construction, land
annexation, appropriation of properties, isolation of
East Jerusalem from the Palestinian territory, and so

10

on, all in violation of international law and relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.
Indeed, it would be hard not to notice the
emergence and proliferation of parties in Israel with
hard-line positions and the primary goal of supporting
settlements and not making peace with the Palestinians,
thus leaving the fate of Palestinian statehood hanging in
the balance. Definitely, while Israeli settlement policies
constitute a standing challenge, the current stalemate in
the peace process is neither acceptable nor conducive
to a just and lasting settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
Meanwhile, the recognition and upgrading of
Palestine status to non-member observer State at the
United Nations constitutes a timely and fundamental
opportunity that should not be lost but rather fully
utilized to create a new momentum for reviving the
currently deadlocked peace process and to create
genuine progress in the pursuit of a just and durable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, one that
will lead to the comprehensive realization of the
independence of the State of Palestine on the basis of
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The realization of peace and stability in the
Middle East is an utmost priority for the OIC and
the international community alike, given that a
credible political process, to which the OIC remains
committed, is of strategic significance to the entire
region and beyond. Therefore, the OIC remains firm
in its conviction that the Security Council must not
be absolved of its role and duties under the Charter of
the United Nations to take necessary and immediate
actions to ensure that Israel halts its occupation and
settlement policies, so as to enable the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights in line with
United Nations resolutions and international law, and
eventually to maintain the internationally endorsed
two-State solution.
Our debate today coincides with the most
intense and aggressive Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem in particular, where Israel continues to
pursue a systematic process of altering the city’s
indigenous demographic composition and character
and creating facts on the ground. Israeli policies are
designed to isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
Palestinian environs, in defiance of the unanimity of
the international stance, United Nations resolutions

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

and international law. At this crucial phase, there must
be continued economic, financial and political support
for the Palestinian people with a view to enhancing the
sustainability, viability and existence of the Palestinian
State, which faces dire financial challenges due to
arbitrary Israeli measures and illegal withholding of
Palestinian revenues.
The ОIC will continue to stress that resolving
the Middle East conflict hinges on a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question. The international
consensus to realize the vision of the two-State solution
requires a clear stance based on international legality
and justice. There must also be full acknowledgement
of and respect for historical commitments and pledges
made in that regard, as embodied in relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to thank Pakistan
for convening this open debate. I also wish to express
appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing.
Japan has long understood the Palestinians’
aspiration to build an independent State and has
supported the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. Japan thus endorses a two-State solution
under which Israel and a future independent Palestinian
State would coexist side by side in peace and security.
In light of that, last November Japan voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 67/19, regarding the status
of Palestine at the United Nations, and welcomes the
fact that the resolution was adopted with the support of
a large number of Member States.
Palestine now bears greater responsibilities
vis-à-vis the international community. Japan once
again calls upon Palestine not to use the non-member
observer State status accorded by the General Assembly
resolution to act in a way that might negatively affect
or hinder direct negotiations with Israel. We ask for
prudence with respect to its conduct, such as applying
for membership in international organizations — an
action that might negatively affect prospects for the
resumption of negotiations.
As for the situation in Gaza, we welcome the
fact that the calm brokered by Egypt in November
has largely held so far. We urge all parties concerned
to continue to respect the ceasefire with a view to

13-21484

realizing a durable calm in Gaza. We also encourage
tangible steps towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
while rejecting any attempt to promote violence or to
deny Israel’s right to exist.
It is regrettable that negotiations between the
parties remain stalled, putting in danger the prospect
for a two-State solution. Japan requests both Palestine
and Israel to establish relationships of mutual trust and
to promptly return to the negotiation table. Japan will
continue to actively contribute to moving the Middle
East peace process forward, in cooperation with the
United States, Arab countries, the Quartet and other
partners.
In that context, we deeply deplore that, after the
adoption of the General Assembly resolution, the Israeli
Government announced its approval of the large-scale
construction of housing units in East Jerusalem and
the West Bank. Settlement activities need to be frozen,
as they are a violation of international law. Japan is
also worried about a temporary suspension of the
transfer of tax revenues that Israel collects on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority. Support for the fiscal
stability of the Palestinian Authority is a necessary
task that Israel should carry out. We strongly hope
that following Israel’s national elections yesterday, the
new Government to be formed will create conditions
for a resumption of meaningful peace negotiations by
rescinding those decisions, which are only exacerbating
tensions between the parties.
With respect to assistance to Palestine, Japan,
together with Palestine, will hold a conference on
cooperation among East Asian countries for Palestinian
development in February in Tokyo. Japan will thus
contribute to promoting assistance to the Palestinians
in cooperation with other East Asian countries.
Addressing the issues of Palestinian refugees is also
of critical importance. Bearing in mind the crucial role
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)plays in
this matter, since last November Japan has extended to it
another $10 million in assistance, including $7.7 million
in food aid. Japan remains firmly committed to making
substantial contributions to support UNRWA activities.
Allow me now to touch upon Syria. Japan is deeply
concerned by the serious and worsening situation
in Syria and profoundly deplores the death of many
thousands of people as a result of continued violence.
An attack against the University of Aleppo last week is

11

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

further tragic testimony to that. As an active member
of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People, Japan
reiterates its call on all parties in Syria to immediately
halt the violence and abuses of human rights, and
condemns the Syrian authorities for not keeping their
own commitments and responsibilities to protect their
own citizens. We support the diplomatic efforts of
Mr. Brahimi, the Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, and
once again emphasize the importance of advancing the
process of a Syrian-led political transition.
Faced with this appalling situation, we cannot
remain mere spectators. Last week, on Switzerland’s
initiative, 57 countries, including Japan, jointly sent
a letter to the President of the Security Council,
requesting that the situation in Syria be referred to the
International Criminal Court (S/2013/19, annex). We
call on the Council to duly recognize the importance
of ensuring accountability for crimes committed on the
ground, and to send an unequivocal message demanding
that international human rights and humanitarian law
be observed by the Syrian authorities and all other
parties.
With the harsh winter inflicting tremendous
suffering on a growing number of refugees on
the ground, there is an urgent need to address the
rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria.
Japan commends the Secretary-General’s initiative
to convene a high-level international humanitarian
pledging conference for Syria, to be held on 30 January
in Kuwait City. The Government of Japan intends to
dispatch a senior-level delegation from the capital
with a view to making a significant contribution to
international efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Pakistan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and on organizing today’s debate,
focusing on the centrality of peace in the Middle East,
not only for the peoples of the region but also for the
international community. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting the Holy See to take the
floor in this important debate.
The Holy See has actively and attentively followed
the steps leading to Palestine’s new status at the United
Nations as a non-member observer State, and welcomes

12

General Assembly resolution 67/19, while noting that
such an outcome does not in itself constitute a solution
adequate to the problems in the region. It remains
a matter of deep concern to my delegation that the
international community has failed to engage the Israelis
and Palestinians in significant, substantive dialogue
and dispute resolution so as to bring stability and
peace to both. Solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains the key to a series of questions affecting the
region more broadly, not to mention the consequences
for the wider world. The Holy See therefore aligns itself
with other delegations in calling for a resumption of
the peace process and a commitment by all parties to a
peaceful resolution of their disputes.
On 15 May 2009, at the conclusion of his pilgrimage
to the Holy Land, Pope Benedict XVI passionately
expressed the following sentiments, which have a
substantive bearing on our work:
“No more bloodshed! No more fighting! No
more terrorism! No more war! Instead, let us
break the vicious circle of violence. Let there be
lasting peace based on justice; let there be genuine
reconciliation and healing. Let it be universally
recognized that the State of Israel has the right
to exist, and to enjoy peace and security within
internationally agreed borders. Let it be likewise
acknowledged that the Palestinian people have a
right to a sovereign, independent homeland, to live
with dignity and to travel freely. Let the two-State
solution become a reality, not remain a dream.”
The Holy See’s Secretary for Relations with
States, Archbishop Dominique Mamberti, speaking
before the General Assembly in 2011, expressed the
hope that the competent bodies of the United Nations
would strive to give concrete implementation to that
goal (see A/66/PV.28). Today the Holy See vigorously
renews that essential plea and the wisdom underlying
the need for a commitment to dialogue as an antidote
to the violence that continues to destabilize this region.
At various times, the Holy See has invited the
leaders of the two peoples, Israeli and Palestinian, who
have suffered so much, and of those nations that have
a particular responsibility in the region, to do all they
can to restart and reinvigorate the negotiations in good
faith, and to avoid actions, such as making conditions,
that contradict declarations of goodwill and the sincere
search for meaningful solutions that can ensure a secure
foundation for peace for these great peoples. Real peace

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

in the Middle East will come only as a result of mutual
understanding and respect among all the peoples of the
region, Jews, Christians and Muslims. Peace requires
courageous decisions and unwavering commitments.
The international community, together with the
Quartet, which has been involved in the Middle East
peace process, must demonstrate leadership in bringing
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 181 (II)
to a successful conclusion, because that document is
the juridical basis for the existence of two States. Like
other members of the international community, and in
full support of the role and efforts of the larger family
of nations in helping to resolve the crisis in the Middle
East, the Holy See is convinced that the ongoing crisis
will be resolved only when respect for justice and the
legitimate aspirations of the two peoples, Israeli and
Palestinian, are preserved and guaranteed by them and
by the international community at large.
In the hope that the problems caused by the
many conflicts of the region will finally be resolved
through good-faith negotiations, respectful dialogue
and equitable compromise, the Holy See further
underlines that a lasting solution must include a
decision on the status of the holy city of Jerusalem and
its internationally guaranteed protection, essential to
the patrimony of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. As
Pope Benedict XVI recently stated in his address to the
diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, Jerusalem
must be an element of peace and unity for the peoples of
the world and therefore never a source of division. The
Holy See hereby renews its support for internationally
guaranteed provisions to ensure freedom of religion and
of conscience for its inhabitants, as well as permanent,
free and unhindered access to the holy places for the
faithful of all religions and nationalities.
Moreover, let us not forget that resolution 181
(II) foresaw a special international status for the city
of Jerusalem and its environs, to be administered by
the Trusteeship Council. We know that similar ideas
have recently been put forward by some of the parties,
in the context of peace discussions, and we sincerely
hope that they will be pursued. Indeed, the only way to
resolve the delicate issue of Jerusalem in a definitive,
just and lasting way, as well as to secure the guaranteed
provisions for freedom of religion and access to the holy
places called for at the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly and in other resolutions, might
be to involve the United Nations in the holy city’s

13-21484

safekeeping and administration in some relevant and
effective capacity.
Turning to the sad events in Syria, the Holy See
is deeply concerned about the worsening situation and
the humanitarian aspects of the crisis. The Holy See
has reiterated several times that a military solution to
the Syrian crisis is untenable. My delegation joins with
those who urge the parties concerned, for the same love
of that people they wish to protect, to end the violence
and bloodshed and to come to the negotiating table,
under the auspices of the international community,
in order to begin a transition towards a peaceful civil
society, with no discrimination based on ethnicity or
belief, and respectful of its long history of peaceful
coexistence among its diverse religions, ethnicities and
cultures.
In fact, the Holy Land and the entire Middle East
are characterized by the presence of this mosaic of
different cultures, languages, religions and confessions,
which bestows such an enviable pride of beauty on
their history and their contributions to the enduring
civilizations of the world. The bimillenary presence of
Christians in those lands is a factor of richness that must
be respected, promoted and preserved. It is a matter of
fundamental rights rooted in the very essence of that
ancient civilization, which must be duly protected by
the respective Governments — and we welcome here
their attention so far accorded to that issue — and
supported by the international community.
The theme of Pope Benedict XVI’s message for this
year’s International Day of Peace refers to Jesus’ words,
“Blessed are the peacemakers”. Allow me therefore to
conclude by recalling the Pope’s address here before the
Council, so that all who are responsible for the wellbeing of the peoples of the Middle East may listen and
reflect on that message, because every action intended
to hasten the realization of peace will constitute a
legacy that ennobles the name of all peacemakers, for
they are the human guarantors of that which dignifies
the human person and the family of nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The acceding country
Croatia; the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential

13

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
With regard to the Middle East peace process,
the European Union firmly believes that now is the
time to take bold and concrete steps towards peace.
The parties must engage in direct and substantial
negotiations without preconditions in order to achieve
a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
ending all claims. The European Union underlines the
urgency of renewed, structured and substantial peace
efforts in 2013, and towards that end it is ready to work
with the new United States Administration and other
international partners, including within the Quartet.
There will be no sustainable peace until the
Palestinians’ aspirations to statehood and sovereignty
and those of Israelis to security are fulfilled through
a comprehensive negotiated peace, based on the twoState solution. The viability of a two-State solution
must be maintained. The European Union expresses
deep concern about developments on the ground that
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.
The European Union is deeply dismayed by and
strongly opposes Israeli plans to expand settlements
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem and in
particular Givat Hamatos, and plans to develop the E-1
area. Construction in Givat Hamatos cuts geographic
continuity between Jerusalem and Bethlehem. The E-1
plan, if implemented, would seriously undermine the
prospects of a negotiated resolution of the conflict by
jeopardizing the possibility of a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State and of Jerusalem as the future capital
of two States. It could also entail the forced transfer of
the civilian population. The European Union reiterates
that settlements are illegal under international law
and constitute an obstacle to peace. In the light of its
core objective of achieving a two-State solution, the
European Union will closely monitor the situation and
its broader implications, and act accordingly.
As we have stated before, the European Union will
not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders other
than those agreed by the parties. The European Union
also believes that the following further parameters
could serve as a basis for a resumption of negotiations:
first, security arrangements that, for Palestinians,
respect their sovereignty and show that the occupation
is over, and, for Israelis, protect their security, prevent
the resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with
new and emerging threats; secondly, a just, fair and

14

agreed solution to the refugee question; and, thirdly, the
fulfilment of the aspirations of both parties concerning
Jerusalem. A way must be found through negotiations
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States.
The setting up of an internationally supported
framework for direct negotiations between the parties
would be instrumental in the resumption of such
negotiations. The European Union remains in close
contact with the parties and with the Union’s partners
within the Quartet, as well as with other key actors,
with the clear aim of achieving significant progress as
soon as possible.
The European Union recalls that the Arab Peace
Initiative provides regional support for a comprehensive
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement. The European
Union will work with those who are willing to join in
such a quest for peace, stability and prosperity.
The European Union calls on Israel to resume
without delay the transfers of Palestinian tax and
clearance revenues it collects on behalf of the
Palestinian Authority, and without further interruption,
in line with the Paris Protocol. Cuts in those transfers
jeopardize the viability of the Palestinian Authority,
have a critical impact on the provision of basic
services for the Palestinian population, and present
a considerable threat to the security situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory and beyond.
It is of the utmost importance that the Palestinian
Authority continue to receive strong political and
financial support from the international community
as a whole. The European Union recently decided on
a front-loading of its budget support to the Palestinian
Authority and calls on other donors, in particular Arab
countries, to fully honour their commitments.
The European Union calls on the new Israeli
Government that will be formed after yesterday’s
election, as well as on the Palestinian leadership, to
reaffirm their commitment to the two-State solution
and to engage in direct and substantial negotiations
without preconditions.
On 29 November 2012, the General Assembly
voted in favour of resolution 67/19 on the granting
of non-member observer State status in the United
Nations to Palestine. The European Union calls on
the Palestinian leadership to use that new status
constructively and not to undertake steps that would

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

deepen the lack of trust and lead further away from a
negotiated solution.
Despite the ceasefire, the status quo in the Gaza
Strip remains unsustainable. Fully recognizing Israel’s
legitimate security needs, the European Union reiterates
its call for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from the Gaza
Strip, the situation of which will be unsustainable
as long as it remains politically and economically
separated from the West Bank. Equally, the issue of
illegal weapons transfers into the Gaza Strip has to
be effectively addressed as a matter of urgency. It is
vital that all parts of the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities be implemented and that talks on a durable
ceasefire agreement continue.
The European Union commends the efforts of
Egypt and all those who engaged in mediation. The
European Union is committed to facilitating the social
and economic development of the Gaza Strip. The
European Union expresses its readiness to make use
of its instruments in support of the parties’ efforts,
including the possible reactivation, in the appropriate
way, of the European Union Border Assistance Mission
to Rafah. The European Union underlines its readiness
to explore further ways to address the situation in the
Gaza Strip, including with concerned parties in the
region, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
The European Union reiterates its call for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind the strong
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, in line with
the principles set out in his speech of 4 May 2011, as an
important element for the unity of a future Palestinian
State and for reaching a two-State solution. It is in the
fundamental interest of the European Union to support
peace and democracy in the entire region, and a strategic
priority to see an end to a conflict that will continue to
undermine peace and security along the EU’s southern
borders as long as it remains unresolved.
The European Union is appalled by the increasingly
deteriorating situation in Syria, primarily due to
the unprecedented use of force by the regime. It also
condemns all attacks, including terrorist acts, that
indiscriminately target civilians. The European Union
is seriously concerned about the potential use and
transfer of chemical weapons in Syria, and reminds
the Syrian regime and other parties that, in case of
their use, those responsible will be held accountable.

13-21484

The European Union underlines the necessity of the
complete destruction of those chemical weapons at the
earliest date practicable, and urges Syria to accede to
the Chemical Weapons Convention as soon as possible.
The European Union remains deeply concerned by the
spillover effects of the Syrian crisis in neighbouring
countries. It remains committed to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.
The European Union reiterates its full support for the
efforts undertaken by the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to achieve a Syrian-led peaceful
political transition based on the principles included in
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012, and calls on
all parties to actively engage with Mr. Brahimi. The
European Union continues to call on all members of the
Security Council to uphold their responsibilities.
The European Union encourages the National
Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces to continue working on its structures, to
become more operational and inclusive, and to remain
committed to respecting the principles of human rights,
inclusiveness and democracy and to engaging with all
sections of Syrian civil society. The European Union
encourages the Coalition to engage further with the
Joint Special Representative, and stands ready to engage
with and support the Coalition in those endeavours and
its relations with the international community at large.
The European Union reiterates its support for
strengthening the capacity of civil society organizations
and stresses their importance for the building of the
future democratic Syria. It also acknowledges the
importance of supporting local civilian structures
throughout Syria.
The European Union reiterates its call on all parties
to the conflict to facilitate humanitarian access and aid
delivery to the people in need, to ensure the neutrality of
humanitarian aid, and to strictly abide by international
humanitarian law. The pledging conference in Kuwait
on 30 January will be an important opportunity. The EU
will reaffirm its engagement to the Syrian population
in Syria and in neighbouring countries affected by the
crisis and that are generously hosting Syrian refugees.
The European Union will also call on all donors to
step up their response, in coordination with the United
Nations and in full respect of humanitarian principles.
The overall humanitarian contribution so far from the
EU and its member States amounts to over €333 million.

15

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about widespread and systematic violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law that,
according to the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Syria, may amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. The European Union
recalls that all those responsible for such crimes must be
held accountable and that there should be no impunity
for such violations and abuses. The European Union has
repeatedly stated that, if concerns about war crimes and
crimes against humanity are not adequately addressed
at the national level, the International Criminal Court
should deal with the situation. The Security Council can
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court, as requested in the Swiss letter to the Security
Council of 14 January, at any time (S/2013/19, annex).
The European Union calls on the Security Council to
urgently address the situation in Syria in all its aspects,
including that issue.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Abdou
Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I am pleased to
see Pakistan, one of the founding members of our
Committee, holding the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Having been elected on many
occasions to the Security Council, your country,
Mr. President, inspires considerable respect because of
its contributions to the work of that body and to the
maintenance of peace in general. Allow me also to
thank Mr. Robert Serry for his very useful briefing on
the situation in the Middle East.
Recently, in October, our Committee and member
States warned the Security Council of the dangers of not
taking action in the light of the deteriorating situation in
Gaza. The conflict in November cost the lives of many
people, mostly Palestinians, and caused considerable
material damage to that enclave, which is still suffering
the impact of the last war. While welcoming the
diplomatic efforts of Egypt, the Secretary-General and
other global actors, we were concerned about the time
the Council took to respond. Pursuant to resolution
1860 (2009), the Council should now take immediate
measures to bolster the ceasefire, ensure the protection
of civilians and fully lift the blockade that has been
imposed by Israel.

16

The Committee welcomes the historic adoption
of resolution 67/19 by the General Assembly, which
is the first step towards full recognition of the State
of Palestine as a State Member of the United Nations,
a matter which is currently before the Council. The
resolution has created a new reality that can give new
impetus to the peace process and promote respect for
international law. During its conferences and meetings
in 2013, our Committee will deploy considerable efforts
to analyse the resolution’s specific impact in legal,
political and socioeconomic terms.
The changing situation on the ground is a cause
of major concern. We condemn the confiscation of
Palestinian revenues and the destabilization of its
institutions by Israel, and we call for them to cease
immediately. All financial disputes must be settled
through negotiation. We thank the donors who have
increased their emergency aid and call on others to
fulfil their unpaid pledges as soon as possible. Our
roundtable on assistance to be held in Rome on 27 and
28 February, and to which Council delegations are
invited, will focus on the new opportunities and the
new challenges that result from resolution 67/19.
Our committee is encouraged by the diplomatic
community’s strong condemnation of the new settlement
programmes decided upon by Israel, particularly in
E-1. Those programmes must be stopped immediately.
We would like to thank all members of the Council
who have spoken out in framework of the “15 minus 1”
configuration. Nevertheless, we note that the Security
Council remains paralysed on that issue.
Our Committee will continue to remind States
that they have the responsibility not to contribute to
violations committed by Israel and to ensure that Israel
respects the Fourth Geneva Convention, as reaffirmed
by the International Court of Justice. We will continue
to advocate for Palestinian unity and a resumption of
the peace process on the internationally accepted bases.
The time has now come for all partners, especially
the European Union, the League of Arab States, a
revitalized Quartet and the Security Council to work
hand in hand on bold initiatives to turn 2013 into a
year of peace. They can count on our Committee’s full
support in this endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I welcome the presence here
today of the Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Riad Malki. Palestine recently attained non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. This was
far too late, coming some 65 years after the adoption
of resolution 181 (II). It was the first step on the path
towards the realization of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable right to establish an independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June
1967.
To that end, we call on the Security Council
to respond to the call of the Palestinian State to be
granted full Member State status in the United Nations,
while guaranteeing the restoration of all the legitimate
rights of all of the Palestinian people, including the
return of Palestinian refugees to their motherland and
the provision of compensation in a fair and equitable
manner pursuant to resolution 194 (III) of 1948 for the
losses incurred.
I can affirm that the Palestinian people, following
the panoply of United Nations meetings that have
been held since the Israeli occupation began, view
us with skepticism. How could it be otherwise, given
the fact that these people have been held hostage for
more than 65 years under the most abject forms of
racist and expansionist occupation? How could it be
otherwise, given the continued systematic campaign
of settlement activity, which has stamped out any hope
for the emergence of a viable Palestinian State, halting
not even for a single day? How, indeed, could it be
otherwise, given that Israel, the occupying Power, has
practiced and continues to perpetrate the worst forms of
racial discrimination and flagrant violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law? How could
they not look with skepticism on the informal periodic
meetings at which the Council has proven incapable of
putting an end to the tragic suffering of these people
and restoring their legitimate rights, ceding instead
the large part of its prerogatives to the Quartet, which
itself has failed to tackle the situation, seeking instead
to sideline the General Assembly?
In the light of the unflinching support that several
members of the Quartet have given to Israel, how could
it be otherwise?
If we wish to preserve what is left of the credibility
of the United Nations, uphold the prospects for peace in
the region and prevent war, then the United Nations and

13-21484

its Member States must refrain from the ceremonial and
business-as-usual approach to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. That approach lacks any serious content and
cannot lead to tangible results on the ground. It is time
to start taking concrete measures to bring to an end
once and for all the inability of the United Nations to
fulfil its obligations to stop the Israeli occupation of
Arab territories — an inability that, as we all know,
is the result of the intransigence of successive Israeli
Governments, which have themselves been blindly
supported and unfairly justified by a number of
influential Powers present and active in the Council.
We were deeply alarmed by the fact that, in his
briefing two days ago on priorities for 2013, the SecretaryGeneral failed to include a reference to the resolution of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. It was not included among the
priorities. We are all the more alarmed as the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process also
failed in his briefing to refer to an essential component
of his mandate and obligations — addressing the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan — even when it was
brought to his attention and other representatives of the
Secretariat warned him of the consequences of ignoring
this essential component of the international stance on
the Middle East.
This is an essential point; the occupied Syrian
Golan is an integral part of the item before the Council.
The representatives of the Secretary-General must
therefore refer to the occupied Syrian Golan in their
briefings and statements. In his briefing to the Security
Council, the Special Coordinator avoided making any
allusion whatsoever to the Golan, even though it is part
of his mandate. Instead, he referred at length to the
prevailing internal situation in Syria, even though that
is not part of his mandate.
More than 45 years have passed since Israel occupied
the Golan. However, apparently these long decades have
not been enough to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions,
in particular resolutions 497 (1981), 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), to bring its occupation of the Syrian Golan, its
grave and systematic violations of human rights, its
terrorist policy of racial discrimination and reprisals,
and its unbridled expansionist activities to an end.
We call on Israel to provide international
supervisors and organizations with maps of the
areas that have been mined in the Syrian Golan. The
explosion of cluster munitions and mines placed by the

17

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

occupying Power in the Syrian Golan have led to over
726 casualties, including 227 children. We have brought
this information to the attention of the SecretaryGeneral.
The most recent such acts of violence saw an
increase in the number of abductions of Syrian citizens
from the disengagement zone by the occupying Israeli
Power. The Israeli authorities have even gone so far as
to provide support to armed terrorist groups operating
in the disengagement zone so as to exploit them to
justify the construction of a wall of separation and
racial discrimination that stretches 42 kilometres along
the ceasefire line in the occupied Golan.
The intention of Israel and the occupying authorities
is to pursue their unbridled attempts to tear the Golan
from Syria and to include it as part of its occupation.
We underscore the need for the Golan to be returned
in its entirety to my country. We call for the Golan to
be restored to Syria, whether or not this is acceptable to
the Israeli representative. In spite of the perpetration of
all Israel’s crimes; in spite of all the resolutions adopted
by the United Nations; and in spite of all the reports that
have been drawn up by the United Nations commissions
of inquiry, condemning and describing these crimes
unequivocally, it is truly regrettable that the Israeli
leaders and perpetrators of these war crimes and crimes
against humanity continue to shirk any responsibility
or accountability at the international level because of
the illegal immunity that has been granted to them by
certain influential States.
We all witnessed this morning the insolence of
the representative of Israel who, in his statement,
unequivocally demonstrated that he is completely
divorced from reality and operating in a state of political
delirium and immoral hallucination, completely
denigrating the rights of the Palestinian people. The
Israeli representative is misled if he believes that he can
alter or distort in any way the historic reality through
a statement that is full of lies and political trickery. We
call upon himto read this book The General’s Son.
(spoke in English)
The General’s Son is a kind of biography written
by Miko Peled, son of the famous Israeli General
Matti Peled. He is considered to be one of the most
prominent Israeli generals who participated in Israel’s
wars against its neighbours in 1948, 1956 and 1967. The
General, who passed away in 1995, converted to peace

18

and became a peace activist in Israel. The author speaks
about the wrongdoings of Israel’s policies towards the
Palestinian people as well as towards the Arabs in the
occupied territories. By the way, this man lives in Israel
and is an Israeli citizen, but the book was published in
Ramallah. The Palestinians authorized the publication
of this book. The Israeli Government prevented it from
being published.
(spoke in Arabic)
Once again, I am obliged to warn of the unbridled
attempts of a number of delegations to water down the
agreed traditional terms of reference concerning the
situation in the Middle East by addressing other subjects
at this debate and seeking to distance us from the matter
at hand for the sake of pursuing their own objectives.
The issue is putting an end to Israel’s occupation of the
occupied Arab territories and the establishment of a
Palestinian State.
Accordingly, I shall not respond to the fraudulent
allegations that have been made by a number of
delegationsagainst my country, Syria, during this
debate, as this is a matter of principle. We must not find
ourselves discussing an agenda item that we have often
drawn warning attention to. Naturally, there is a great
deal we could say to refute the allegations that have been
put forward by some member States that have spared
no effort in seeking to further exacerbate the crisis in
Syria by supplying, sheltering and arming extremists
and terrorists operating in Syria in order to stymie any
possibility of finding a peaceful solution to the crisis.
In this regard, I should like to point specifically to
Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey.
I shall be brief on this matter and will simply
underline the fact that the Syrian Government recently
submitted a comprehensive political programme for a
resolution of the current crisis in Syria. This document
is a national solution, based on dialogue between and
among the Syrians themselves under Syrian leadership.
We call upon all those who claim to be committed to
resolving the situation in Syria to respond positively
to this programme by putting forward constructive
ideas to enable its implementation instead of rejecting
political solutions or national dialogue. The crisis in
Syria will find a peaceful solution on the Syrian scale.
Finally, our preference would have been for the
first statement that was made to the Security Council
by our colleague from the United States at the start
of President Obama’s second mandate, as well as the

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

statements made by our colleagues the representatives
of France and the United Kingdom, to have been
balanced in nature and to have been based on the
reality on the ground in Syria, in keeping with their
obligations pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, the Geneva Conventions, international law,
and Mr. Brahimi’s mandate. Their statements outght
to have been open to the priority of supporting the
national dialogue mechanism to resolve the crisis in
Syria in both a political and peaceful manner, on the
basis of the aspirations of the Syrian people and led by
Syrians themselves, as is recalled in the two resolutions
addressing the Syrian crisis. Instead, they expressed
support for one entity of the Syrian opposition, inciting
it to operate against the motherland and the interests
of the Syrian people, and thereby pushing them into a
cycle of destruction and violence in my country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Pakistan for
scheduling this very important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. Allow me to express our
appreciation to the Foreign Minister of the observer
State of Palestine for his speech this morning. I also
thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process Robert Serry for his briefing.
The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, I wish
briefly to make certain points that Bangladesh believes
to be of importance.
A sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
including the issue of Palestine, must be our collective
strategic objective. All Member States should pledge
complete commitment to this objective and throw their
full moral, diplomatic, political and economic support
behind its early realization.
It is a disgrace that the people of Palestine are being
denied their fundamental rights to self-determination
and to live freely in their own land. Palestinians have
been denied their right to return home and live in dignity
and safety. Achieving a lasting solution in the Middle
East will require Israel’s complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.
We are happy that the General Assembly conferred
on Palestine non-member observer State status in the

13-21484

United Nations, but we are saddened that, in response,
Israel announced on 30 November that it had accelerated
planning for the construction of more than 3,000 new
housing units in Jerusalem, potentially bisecting the West
Bank. There is no doubt that these illegal and unilateral
decisions of Israel are counterproductive to achieving a
two-State solution. The announced settlement activity
would be a breach of both the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The situation is further aggravated by another
recent retaliatory announcement by Israel that it would
withhold revenue from the Palestinian Authority. We
believe that this unjust decision of the occupying Power
will impair the Palestinian delivery of much-needed
public services.
The situation of thousands of Palestinian
prisoners — including women, elected officials and 300
children — in Israeli detention centres also remains a
cause of worry. Those detained must either be charged
and face trial with judicial guarantees, or be released
without delay. Violations of the human rights of these
detainees should be stopped. We know that justice
delayed is justice denied.
We reaffirm past Security Council decisions that
Israeli settlements in the occupied territory are illegal
and constitute a major obstacle to peace. We believe that
the best guides to achieving a two-State solution are
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions — including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) — the principle of land for peace,
the Madrid terms of reference, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We reiterate our full support for
the realization of an independent, sovereign, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine with Al-Quds al-Sharif as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
dignity.
With regard to the situation in Lebanon and in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, my delegation calls for
full respect for resolutions 497 (1981) and 1701 (2006).
We urge the occupying State immediately to halt its
actions to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights in
accordance with the relevant resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset
please allow me to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this quarterly open debate

19

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
I should like to thank the Special Coordinator,
Robert Serry, for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in the Middle East, particularly on the
Palestinian question. I should also like to join others in
welcoming the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the observer State of Palestine, Mr. Riad
Malki, in today’s debate and in thanking him for his
statement. I should also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel for his statement.
Amid the unprecedented transformation of the
Arab world, the continuing stalemate in the Middle
East peace process is clearly not in the interests of the
region. There have been no direct talks between Israel
and Palestine for more than two years. The efforts of
the international community, including those of the
Quartet, towards the resumption of direct talks between
Israel and Palestine have yielded no results.
Against this backdrop, the overwhelming vote in the
General Assembly on 29 November 2012, upgrading the
status of Palestine to non-member observer State, was
a positive development. It was a decisive achievement
for Palestine in the history of its long and arduous
struggle to reach its final goal of an independent and
viable Palestinian State. India, which has always played
a proactive role in garnering support for the Palestinian
cause in multilateral forums, co-sponsored that
resolution. India will continue to support Palestine’s bid
for full and equal membership of the United Nations.
Developments in the occupied Palestinian territories
since the historic vote in the General Assembly have
been most unhelpful to the Palestinian cause. The
intensification of settlement activities by Israel in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, despite widespread
international condemnation, is creating new realities
on the ground, thereby threatening the very premise
of a two-State solution. We join others in urging Israel
to end the settlement activity in order to allow the
Palestinian side to come to the negotiating table.
Settlements,
roadblocks
and
the
related
infrastructure of occupation continue to cause severe
hardship to the Palestinian population. These are
also adversely affecting the normal functioning of
Palestinian State institutions. The Palestinian Authority
is facing a severe financial crisis. The financial crisis
could erode the significant progress made in building
Palestinian State institutions if immediate attention is

20

not given to the issue. There is an urgent need to support
the Palestinian Authority in meeting its budgetary
shortfalls.
The blockade of Gaza is in its sixth year. It is
affecting essential services, economic activities and
infrastructure development. While Israel has taken
several measures to allow the flow of essential goods
into Gaza, these cannot be a substitute for lifting the
blockade. Recent hostilities in Gaza are again a stark
reminder to the international community of the dangers
that a continuing stalemate in the peace process can
bring about. We hope that both parties will continue
to uphold the ceasefire agreement and implement its
provisions in good faith.
The recent rapprochement between various
Palestinian factions is indeed welcome. We hope that
efforts towards the promotion of reconciliation will
bear fruit soon, leading to the formation of a unity
Government, the holding of elections, the reunification
of Palestinian State institutions, and measures for the
reconstruction and development of Palestinian society.
India has a long history of solidarity with the
Palestinian people. In 1975, India was the first non-Arab
State to recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization
as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, and in 1988 became one of the first countries to
recognize the State of Palestine. India has also extended
material assistance to the Palestinian Authority
since its establishment, and has been a partner in the
socioeconomic development of Palestine in its quest
for a life of dignity and self-reliance. Our assistance
has been for humanitarian relief, development projects,
the establishment of educational and training facilities,
budgetary support, and so on.
This year, India has pledged $10 million in budgetary
support to Palestine. India also contributes $1 million
annually to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Following the
three memorandum of understanding’s signed during
the visit of President Abbas to India in September 2012,
India is in the process of implementing projects in the
fields of information and communication technology,
vocational training and the construction of schools. In
addition, India is implementing development projects
in Palestine, with Brazil and South Africa as partners
in the India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum.
India supports a negotiated settlement resulting in
a sovereign, independent, viable and united State of

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

Palestine living within secure and recognized borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and side by side and
at peace with Israel, as endorsed in various Security
Council resolutions and the Quartet road map. Let me
also state here that progress on the Lebanese and Syrian
tracks remains critical for lasting peace in the region.
We remain hopeful that an environment conducive to
direct talks can be achieved in the near future. India
stands ready to play its part in our collective endeavours
to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.
Lastly, we remain seriously concerned at the
deteriorating security situation and continuing violence
in Syria. We strongly condemn all violence and
violations of human rights, irrespective of who their
perpetrators are. We also condemn in the strongest
terms the terrorist acts that have been and continue to
be committed in Syria. We urge all the parties to stop
violence and engage in an inclusive national dialogue
in order to resolve the conflict through peaceful means,
based on the internationally approved political and
legal basis including the resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012) and the joint communiqué of the Geneva
Action Group (S/2012/523, annex).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa expresses
its appreciation to Special Coordinator Robert Serry for
his briefing to the Council and for the statements by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine
and the Permanent Representative of Israel.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We have served as a member of the Security Council
for the past two years as an elected member, during
which time we had the opportunity to take part in
discussions on today’s subject at least 24 times. Perhaps
the question that needs to be asked at this juncture is
this: “What has really happened in the past 24 months,
or the last few years for that matter?” Our objective
response to that question is that over the past few years
we have seen the following: the continued occupation
of Palestinian land; continued insecurity for the people
of Palestine and Israel; the continued blockade of
Gaza; continued conflict in Gaza; continued rocket
fire into southern Israel; the continued construction
of the separation wall; continued threat to regional

13-21484

and international peace and security; and continued
inaction by the Security Council.
That is not an impressive record for the United
Nations in general, and for the Security Council in
particular, on whose watch the situation has deteriorated
for decades on end without any hope of a lasting
solution. In November of last year, the majority of States
Members of the United Nations, including the majority
of the members of the Security Council, welcomed
Palestine to the United Nations as an observer State.
Last year, the Security Council had the opportunity
to affirm Palestine’s statehood, but unfortunately it
failed to do so. In anticipation of reaction to Palestine’s
admission to the United Nations, we had warned
against any acts of retribution; but, no sooner had we
welcomed Palestine into the United Nations fold, that
Israel announced that it would withhold Palestinian
tax revenues. That retributive reaction is illegal and
immoral, as it constitutes collective punishment of
the Palestinian population and negatively affects the
effectiveness of the Palestinian Authority, which
is already facing serious challenges with regard to
institution-building and the provision of myriad of
public goods. We condemn that act and call on Israel
to respect the decision on Palestine as it, in fact, is a
positive step towards the realization of the two-State
solution.
South Africa condemns the ongoing settlement
activities by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The continued construction of settlements
seriously undermines the two-State solution by isolating
East Jerusalem and by threatening the viability and
territorial contiguity of a Palestinian State. Those
illegal settlements further constitute a major stumbling
block in the resumption of direct negotiations, and
therefore in the achievement of sustainable peace. It is
now high time that the Council speaks with one voice
against thpse counter-productive actions. We condemn
all acts of violence regardless of where they come from,
as they undermine the viability of a two-State solution.
Despite calls on Israel to lift the blockade of
Gaza, it continues to execute its policies in the enclave
with impunity, without any action from the Council.
Israel must stop those policies, as they are contrary
to international law and render peace elusive. As we
all know, at the heart of the confrontation between the
Palestinians in Gaza and the Israelis, lie the latter’s

21

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

continued illegal occupation of Palestinian land,
especially the continuing blockade of Gaza.
The ongoing efforts of Egypt in reconciling the
Palestinian parties are indeed commendable. We
encourage the Palestinian parties to forge ahead with
their reconciliation efforts in order to consolidate
the gains made, and act in unity for the permanent
liberation of the people of Palestine. We cannot
overemphasize enough the importance of the unity of
the Palestinian people as they seek to build a new and
prosperous nation, whose complete affirmation hinges
on the implementation of the two-State solution.
With no peace on the horizon and the Quartet not
making any significant progress, we maintain the view
that the Quartet’s utility should be urgently evaluated.
As a member of the Quartet, the Members of the United
Nations have an obligation to ask questions about the
body’s usefulness and the role of the United Nations in
this body.
With regard to the situation in Syria, we are
deeply concerned about the further deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situation, including violence
against the Palestinian refugees in the country. South
Africa continues to maintain that the only solution to
the Syrian crisis is an all-inclusive process of national
dialogue, free from any form of intimidation, violence
or outside interference aimed at regime change. Syria
requires a political transition that reflects the will of
its people. In that regard, we once again discourage the
arming of all parties, including the opposition.
In conclusion, we believe that in our search for a
solution to the Palestinian question we should not lose
sight of the broader regional dynamics. We therefore
call on the Council and the rest of the international
community to accelerate constructive efforts towards
the holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis,
including the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
should like to thank the Pakistani presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important meeting.
It provides us all with an opportunity to update ourselves
on the situation in the Middle East, particularly with
regard to the Palestinian question. We would also like
to thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert Serry,
for the valuable report he has submitted. We also

22

thank Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine, for his important statement to the Security
Council.
The 29 November debate in the General Assembly
and the vote on resolution 67/19, giving Palestine
non-member observer State status, was an important
step in achieving its legitimate ambitions (see
A/67/PV.44). The resolution reflects the unanimous
desire and support of the international community to
see a Palestinian State that is independent within the
framework of the two-State principle. That historic
event shows that there is no alternative to peace and
stability and to open new horizons for the people of that
region. However, Israel, the occupying Power, still does
not understand that this is an opportunity for peace,
which is founded on this international decision. Israel
has categorically rejected that resolution and the new
State that it represents in the region.
That resolution opens the way to genuine peace
negotiations. However, Israel has not only refused but
has defied the international community by imposing
collective punishment on a large scale, withholding tax
and customs revenues and continuing its occupation.
Because of its negative reaction in response to the
Palestinian step, which has been supported by the
majority of the international community, Israel is
showing the world that it does not want peace. The
Israeli response in the face of this international
consensus was to continue to build settlements and to
step up the building of new ones.
The Israeli decision has negative implications for
peace and does not provide the necessary conditions
for negotiations. Israel is continuing to neglect its
international commitments and is trying to change
the facts on the ground. The decision of the Israeli
Government to build new settlements is a flagrant
violation of the provisions of international law
governing the situation for occupied territories, all the
more so given that this step changes the character of
the occupied territory and threatens to fragment the
territory and foreclose the chances for establishing
a Palestinian State. Israel is trying to isolate East
Jerusalem from the surrounding Palestinian territories
of the West Bank so as to make it a Jewish city and
prevent a just and comprehensive peace from being
achieved. That is a flagrant violation of the two-State
solution that is based on international consensus.

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

It is our hope that in this new year and in the coming
months it will be possible to break the deadlock, instead
of merely managing the crisis as has been the case in
previous years, and to focus attention on resolving it.
There should be a new dynamism so as to deal with the
real issues underlying the conflict.
It is our hope, in this context, that the leading role
of the Security Council, and of the United Nations as
a whole, will come into play; it has the responsibility
under the Charter to maintain international peace and
security. It is our hope that the positive change in the
position of a number of States, including members
of the Security Council, will continue and that this
change will promote the voice of international legality,
which we hope to see come into play so as to enable the
Palestinian people to enjoy their historical, legitimate
right to establish their own independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Mr. President, allow me first of all to express my
thanks to you for having convened this meeting. I wish
also to express my appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry,
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing to the Council today.
My delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
As witnessed by the world last year, on 29 November,
General Assembly resolution 67/19, on the non-member
observer state status of Palestine, was adopted by the
General Assembly with the support of an overwhelming
majority. The granting of non-member observer status
to Palestine in the United Nations was a historic event
that reflected the desire of the international community
to put an end to the decades-long Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian territories and to realize the Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination.
My delegation joined in sponsoring and supporting
the resolution, along with the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. My delegation would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Palestine
once again on its status in the United Nations.

13-21484

It is, however, deeply regrettable that the Palestinian
situation is deteriorating instead of moving in a positive
direction, despite the absolute support and the efforts of
the international community.
Israel has turned a deaf ear to the just and fair
demands of the international community and continued
to cling to the aggressive and inhuman policies of
illegally occupying Arab territories, expanding
settlements, blocking the Gaza Strip, ruthlessly killing
civilians and so on.
Israel recently decided to build thousands of new
settlement units while confiscating land and seizing
money, seriously threatening the basic right to existence
of the Palestinian people, as a political reprisal against
Palestinian observer State status in the United Nations.
Those are rampant provocative acts and challenges
against the majority of States Members of the
United Nations, international law and related United
Nations resolutions that supported the founding of an
independent Palestinian State and durable peace and
stability in the Middle East.
Israel’s undisguised confiscation of Palestinian land
under the pretext of settlement expansion shows clearly
that it is none other than Israel that is aggravating the
situation and seriously threatening peace and security
in the Middle East.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
strongly denounces Israel for its settlement expansion
and demands that Israel immediately stop any act
undermining peace and security in the region and
withdraw its forces from all illegally occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories. Israel’s continuous provocations
are unthinkable without the support and protection of
the United States. That clearly shows the hypocritical
nature of the United States policy towards peace in the
Middle East.
The establishment of an independent State of
Palestine is an inalienable sovereign right of the
Palestinian people.
It is today a world trend to support the justified
struggle of the Palestinian people for an independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within 1967
borders.
The number of countries in the United Nations
recognizing the State of Palestine has reached more
than 130, which represents a majority of the States

23

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

Members of the United Nations. The non-member
observer State status of Palestine is a great development
that encourages us all.
That reality will surely bring about the realization
of Palestine’s full United Nations membership and the
establishment of an independent sovereign State of
Palestine.
The Security Council, whose mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
pay due attention to the changed realities of today and
take strong measures to achieve a fair solution of the
Palestinian question and not turn away from Israel’s
inhuman crimes, such as the blockade of the Gaza Strip
and the expansion of settlement units.
If the Security Council, despite the demands of
the international community, continues to protect only
the interests of a certain specific country in support
of Israel, that will have a negative effect on peace and
security in the Middle East and damage more than ever
before the credibility and reliability of the international
community in the Security Council.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
its full support and consistent stand for the just cause
of the Palestinian people regaining their legitimate
national rights, including the establishment of an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to
convey the Movement’s appreciation to the Pakistani
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.
I would like to express the Movement’s appreciation
for the high-level participation in this important
meeting, as well as the report presented by Mr. Robert
Serry, United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.
The Movement believes that Israel’s settlement
activities constitute grave breaches of international
law and violate numerous United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions of the Security Council. Such
activities undermine the contiguity, integrity, viability
and unity of the occupied Palestinian territory,

24

including East Jerusalem. This issue also remains the
foremost obstacle to peace, impairing all efforts to
revive credible peace negotiations aimed at bringing
an end to the Israeli occupation and achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its grave
concern over the continuing illegal Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Movement condemns
the provocative announcement by Israel, the occupying
Power, that it will construct 3,000 settlement units on
confiscated Palestinian land in an area east of occupied
East Jerusalem, now widely known as the E-1 plan, in
addition to declarations regarding the construction of
another 3,600 settlement units.
Those deplorable actions in rapid succession are a
grave breach of all the principles and rules of international
law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
governs situations in lands under foreign occupation,
and are in blatant contempt of the demands and will of
the international community and the hand that has been
extended in peace by the Palestinian leadership. Israel’s
illegal settlement activities and the illegal actions by
extremist Israeli settlers are also causing extensive
physical, economic and social devastation throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory. This is deplorable
and must come to a complete halt.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns and
rejects those illegal actions by Israel, the occupying
Power, which have been deliberately intensified since
the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 67/19,
which, inter alia, accorded to Palestine the status of
non-member observer State in the United Nations.
The Movement demands that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately rescind those plans and measures
and cease completely all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, and abide by all of its legal
obligations.
NAM continues to call on the Council to uphold
its Charter responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including with regard
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. NAM also calls on the
parties to return to the path of peace on the basis of the
long-standing terms of reference of the peace process,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions, for
the achievement of a just and lasting final settlement.

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

The Non-Aligned Movement also condemns Israel’s
decision to withhold the Palestinian tax revenues due
to the Palestinian Authority, in violation of agreements
reached between the two sides and of international law.
On that issue, Israel has also declared that its decision
is a reprisal for the adoption of resolution 67/19. Such
a deplorable act constitutes a blatant act of piracy and
collective punishment. It is impairing the Palestinian
delivery of public services, payment of public sector
salaries and operation of governmental institutions and
is further exacerbating the financial crisis.
The Movement expresses its grave concern over
the construction of the apartheid annexation wall in
violation of international law, relevant United Nations
resolutions and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, of 9 July 2004. It calls upon the
international community, including the Security
Council, to compel Israel to cease those illegal actions
and measures.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses grave
concern over the deteriorating situation and deplorable
conditions of thousands of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees who continue to be held unlawfully in Israeli
jails and detention centres, including at least 300
children as well as women and elected officials, and
calls for their immediate release.
The Movement also remains concerned about the
critical humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We
call once again for the full and immediate lifting of the
illegal Israeli blockade, which has now entered its sixth
year and is in violation of resolution 1860 (2009), other
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
humanitarian law, which prohibits collective
punishment of civilian populations under occupation.
Israel must promptly and unconditionally open all
its crossing points with Gaza and end its continued
obstruction of the freedom of movement of persons and
of the reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction of the urgent need for the international
community to act resolutely and collectively to fulfil
its long-standing commitment to, and responsibility
for, the realization of a just solution to the question of
Palestine in all its aspects, on the basis of international
law and the terms of reference of the peace process,
including the resolutions of the Council.
The Movement remains resolute in its commitment
to continue to assist the Palestinian people in their

13-21484

legitimate quest for dignity, justice and their inalienable
right to self-determination in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The
achievement of those noble goals is long overdue, and
its continued postponement will only put the goal of the
two-State solution and the conclusion of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace further out of reach.
The Movement regrets that all efforts to date
by international and regional parties, including the
Quartet, have failed to achieve any progress owing
to the deliberate obstruction by Israel, the occupying
Power, its refusal to respect the parameters of the peace
process and its insistence on continuing to change the
facts on the ground, in total contradiction of the goal
of the two-State solution, the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
The Movement also takes this opportunity to
express its support for Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which Egypt continues to sponsor, and hopes
that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in the
interest of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty
and calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragile situation and avoid a resurgence of hostilities.
Such actions also constitute a threat to international
peace and security and are a continuation of Israel’s
aggression against Lebanon.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical or demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and Israeli measures to impose
its own jurisdiction and administration there are null
and void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The States members of the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterate their continuous calls on the Security Council
to act urgently to send a clear message to Israel, the
occupying Power, that all of those illegal actions will
not be tolerated and must be fully halted forthwith. The
message must be sent to Israel that it is expected to abide
by the rule of law, cease all illegal measures intended

25

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

to alter and prejudge the situation on the ground and
cease all provocations and incitement. Israel’s blatant
impunity and disregard for the law cannot be tolerated.
Allow me to speak very briefly in my national
capacity to respond to the unfounded references made to
my country by the representative of the Israeli regime.
There has been a consensus over the past 65 years
that the Palestinian question is the core issue in the
Middle East and affects directly or indirectly any other
problem in the region. There is also a growing consensus
that Israel’s continued aggression and unabated
atrocities against the Palestinian people lie at the core
of the Palestinian issue. Therefore, the Council is today
debating the repeated and grave crimes perpetrated by
Israeli regime against the Palestinian people, including
its establishment of new settlements in Palestine and
blocking of the revenue of the Palestinians.
However, the representative of that regime,
echoing the words of the representative of its ally State,
attempted once again to divert the debate towards Iran
and, among other things, referred to Iran’s peaceful
nuclear programme. The irony is that a regime is
talking about Iran’s peaceful nuclear activities while
it possesses the only stockpile of nuclear arms in our
region. The nuclear weapon in the hands of that regime,
with its record of State terrorism and aggression, has
always been a major concern for the Middle East.
It is as absurd as it is appalling that the Israelis now
try to hide their atrocious and egregious acts behind
empty rhetoric aimed against my country. It is obvious
that their propaganda against Iran has always been a
smokescreen they send up to mask their actions and
to divert public opinion from their land usurpation
policies and other crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset,
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Robert Serry, for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing. The Indonesian delegation is
particularly pleased to welcome the participation
of Mr. Riad Malki, Foreign Minister of the State of
Palestine, in this meeting.

26

My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
representative of Djibouti on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
Like many members of the international
community, Indonesia is very concerned over the
absence of progress in the peace process between
Israel and Palestine. We are very clear about one thing:
the hurdle of illegal settlements is the most potent
obstacle to the prospect of peace in the Middle East,
with particular implications for the two-State solution.
In recent months, Israel has continued its defiance by
proclaiming an escalation in settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory and East Jerusalem,
including through the so-called E-l corridor plan. That
attitude is an affront to the cause of peace. It must be
confronted, and it must be stopped.
Because of those considerations, my delegation
reiterates that Israel must fully abide by the resolutions
of this Council in respect of settlements. Continued
illegal construction and expansion of settlements
compounds the problem of fragmentation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. That inevitably
hinders the prospect of negotiations.
All the while, Gaza continues to endure widespread
suffering caused by Israel’s menacing blockade, making
recovery almost impossible in that area. Meanwhile, we
must also urgently and comprehensively address dire
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian Authority, which
are directly linked to the damaging and illegal Israeli
policy of withholding tax revenues. In that regard, I wish
to underline the calls made by the Palestinian leadership
for the contributions that the Authority urgently needs
in order to carry out its functions, deploy humanitarian
relief and develop its capacity.
Indonesia remains ardently supportive of the twoState solution, based on the conviction that an independent
State of Palestine, with rights and responsibilities equal
to those of other States, will contribute to achieving
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. The historic decision by the General Assembly to
accord non-member observer State status to Palestine,
through resolution 67/19, is indeed a strong testament
to the support of the majority of Member States for
the struggle of Palestine to exercise its right to selfdetermination, in line with the principles outlined in
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

map and the Arab Peace Initiative. However, we must
continue our support for Palestine’s full membership in
the United Nations.

to the International Criminal Court (S/2013/19, annex).
We would like to take the opportunity here today to
reiterate that request.

Let me now turn to the situation in Syria, which has
been raging for some time now. We must urgently work
for an immediate end to the violence and address the
dire humanitarian needs of the people. We must also
ensure that vital humanitarian assistance can reach
the people in need of it, in order to stop the deplorable
human suffering of the Syrian people. To complement
the work of the Joint Special Representative for Syria,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the international community
must play a more robust role and be united so as to find
a comprehensive solution to the situation. Indonesia
welcomes the upcoming International Humanitarian
Pledging Conference for Syria, to be held later this
month in Kuwait.

The Palestinian people enjoy overwhelming
support among the United Nations membership for
their inalienable right to self-determination. That was
clearly expressed by the membership on 29 November
last year, when the General Assembly, in resolution
67/19, welcomed the State of Palestine as a non-member
observer State.

Finally, we must also start, without delay, a
political process aimed at finding solutions that are
in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the
Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): The conflict in Syria
must be stopped. The Council’s inability so far to unite
in action weakens the prospects for peace. The conflict
has already had dire consequences for Syria and the
Syrian people. We are all aware of the tremendous cost,
with over 60,000 people killed and the already high
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
increasing every day. The Icelandic Government, for its
part, decided last week to contribute close to $200,000
to United Nations humanitarian assistance.
The Security Council must take the lead in fostering
a political and peaceful solution, for the sake of Syria
and the Syrian people as well as for wider regional
stability, which could easily be threatened should the
conflict continue. Waiting is not an option. The Security
Council has the responsibility and the tools to maintain
international peace and security, and the situation calls
for urgent Council action.
Steps must be taken to ensure that the regime
and anyone else responsible for the horrible atrocities
committed will ultimately be held accountable. For
that reason, Iceland was among 57 Member States
that jointly sent the Security Council a letter last week
requesting the Council to refer the situation in Syria

13-21484

That development will hopefully persuade
the Security Council to take a more active role in
solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For too long,
especially in the absence of an active peace process, the
involvement of the international community has mainly
been reactionary, with statements being issued on an ad
hoc basis in reaction to individual actions, such as the
recent decision of the Israeli Government to go ahead
with building new settlements in the E-l zone. If the
international community is indeed committed to the
two-State solution, it has to become proactive instead
of being a passive bystander.
“We exist.” That is a phrase from an appeal sent by
Palestinians living in and around the E-l area asking
relevant parties to advocate on their behalf that they
not be evicted from their homes and displaced again.
“We exist.” Those are the words of people who have
again and again been victims of demolitions of their
properties, rendering them and their families repeatedly
homeless. “We exist” is a necessary reminder to us all
that, in the end, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is about
a people that indeed exist and their land.
Iceland would like to use this opportunity to urge
the Security Council to visit the State of Palestine,
to reaffirm the illegality of the settlements, to accept
the State of Palestine’s application for United Nations
membership and, finally, to bring the parties back to
the negotiation table.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Müftüoğlu (Turkey): As this is the first
Security Council open debate on the Middle East
since the historic General Assembly meeting of
29 November 2012 (see A/67/PV.44), allow me to start
by expressing once again our sincere congratulations
to the Palestinian leadership, represented today by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the observer State

27

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

of Palestine, on the long-awaited and well-deserved
international recognition of Palestinian statehood.
Turkey considers the overwhelming support of the
international community to be an initial step towards
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. Yet
it is unrealistic to expect that the peace can prevail
when the fundamental pillars of the two-State vision
are undermined time and again by the settlement
policies of Israel. Since the previous open debate
(see S/PV.6847), we have learned of the intention of
the Israeli Government to build on the so-called E-1
area. Invitations to tender for the construction of
new buildings in Kiryat Arba and Efrat, approval to
construct 1,500 new units in Ramat Shlomo and the
initiation of the planning process to build in Givat
Hamatos and Gilo are policies and actions that show the
clear intention to render impossible a realistic and viable
two-State solution. We also call for the resumption of
the transfer of tax and clearance revenues that Israel
owes Palestine, in line with the Paris Protocol.
Not only Turkey, but also the vast majority of the
international community is seriously worried about such
acts. The Secretary-General has also repeatedly voiced
his concerns regarding the ongoing illegal settlement
activity. As such, statements by the Israeli leadership
indicating that no settlements in the West Bank will be
removed are regrettable, as is the announcement that no
harm to the contiguity between Jerusalem and Maale
Adumim will be allowed.
The peace process is going through a crucial period.
Amid reports that the prospect of a two-State solution
is diminishing every day, the international community
should provide its full support and motivate the parties
towards results-oriented negotiations. We welcome the
recent meetings between President Abbas and Khaled
Mashaal as a very important step towards long-overdue
Palestinian reconciliation. There is no doubt that a
united Palestinian voice will bring further support to
the Palestinian cause.
As the elections in Israel are just completed, we
sincerely hope that the results will facilitate a way to
peace. Turkey will continue to support the peace process
and the rightful aspirations of the Palestinian people
to internationally recognized statehood, in accordance
with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Turkey therefore welcomed the Palestinian appeal
for membership in the United Nations, submitted by

28

President Mahmoud Abbas on 23 September 2011
(S/2011/592, annex I), and continues to support the right
of Palestine to be represented under this roof among its
international peers.
The ceasefire achieved with the able mediation of
Egypt following Israel’s latest military operation into
Gaza required steps to be taken regarding the lifting
of the illegal blockade on Gaza. Yet another two
months have passed, adding up to more than five years
of collective punishment of the Palestinians living
in Gaza. We call on the international community to
continue to pursue its efforts to help end that illegal
blockade once and for all.
Last week, the Council heard from Ms. Navi Pillay
and Ms. Valerie Amos about the humanitarian dimension
of the Syrian crisis and the latest developments on the
ground. Today, we have listened to the briefing of
Special Coordinator Mr. Serry. With more than 60,000
dead, 2 million displaced and 4 million in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance, the crisis in Syria is the most
rapidly growing humanitarian crisis in the world. The
Syrian people are desperately waiting for action from
the international community, especially from this very
Council. The total number of asylum seekers hosted
in 15 active camps in Turkey has reached 158,000.
Five more camps are under construction to meet the
increasing demand.
We have said many times before, and I repeat
once again, that we will continue, with the help of the
relevant United Nations bodies and other international
actors, to extend our helping hand to the Syrian people
during this dire period. That said, we categorically
refute the allegations that were unfairly directed at my
country earlier today by one of the previous speakers.
It is a fact that crises in the Middle East are not easy
to confine. Their ramifications have the potential to
threaten regional peace and stability, and even beyond.
Things become even more complex when different
crises become intertwined. That is exactly what we see
in the case of Palestinian refugees in Syria.
Through its overwhelming majority vote,
the international community sent a message on
29 November 2012 (see General Assembly resolution
67/19). We hope that the message is read correctly and
followed ambitiously. While welcoming the efforts of
the Secretary-General and the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Serry, we call on the international community to give
its decisive support to the resumption of comprehensive

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

peace negotiations between the parties for a just and
lasting solution based on international recognition of
Palestine, with the 1967 borders and East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace with Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In my national capacity, I wish to underscore
some important aspects of the matter before us.
Time and again, such debates on the Middle East
region are held by Security Council without achieving
any progress on the issue. The main political problem
in the Middle East is Israel’s systematic aggression
against Palestine. The Security Council must play its
role in maintaining international peace and security
and immediately adopt concrete practical measures
so that Israel stops its abuses and illegal policies and
practices against the Palestinian people.
Israel’s behaviour deliberately contravenes United
Nations resolutions and international laws, is a threat
to regional and international peace and security, and
violates the human rights of an entire people through
flagrant, systematic and inhuman abuses that this body
should condemn.
The Israeli illegal occupation of Palestinian and
other Arab territories remains the primary obstacle to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive solution in
the Middle East region. There will not be peace in the
Middle East as long as such aggressions continue and
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people are not
taken into account.
The General Assembly adopted a historic decision
on 29 November 2012, when its members, by a majority
decision, accorded Palestine non-member observer
States status in the United Nations. Cuba co-sponsored
General Assembly resolution 67/19, consistent with
its long-standing position of support for the cause of
the Palestinian people to defend their rights. However,
that action must be an interim step towards Palestine’s
eventual admission as a full State Member of the United
Nations, which Cuba fully supports. The Security
Council must consider and approve without further
delay Palestine’s 2011 request for recognition as a
United Nations Member State.

13-21484

The reprisals of the Israeli Government related to
the adoption of resolution 67/19 on 29 November 2012
are unacceptable. Its brutality against the Palestinian
people has resulted in the deaths of more innocent
civilians and in huge material damage that has
aggravated the already precarious living conditions of
the Palestinian people in that small, besieged territory.
Likewise, Israel’s decision to withhold tax revenues due
to the Palestinian National Authority, in violation of
agreements between the two parties and of international
law, and the new settlement plans in the occupied
Palestinian territories are highly reprehensible actions.
Cuba will continue supporting the Palestinian
people in their legitimate and just struggle for selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Cuba calls on Israel to end to its occupation of all Arab
territories, and reiterates again its position in favour of
a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the Middle
East region.
Cuba is closely following the situation in Syria. The
Security Council was not conceived as an instrument
to promote regime change. The intentions of some to
foment Security Council actions and pronouncements
aimed at increasing violence, undermining a sovereign
Government, generating insecurity and leading a nation
into a social and humanitarian crisis of unforeseeable
consequences are cause for concern. The obligation of
this organ is to promote peace, not violence; to prevent
destabilization, not to finance, arm and train those
intent on destabilization; and to protect innocent people,
not to use or manipulate them for geopolitical purposes.
That is also the responsibility of the Organization as a
whole.
A civil war in Syria or an intervention by foreign
forces will have serious consequences for international
peace and security, particularly the Middle East region.
Cuba shares the concern over the loss of innocent
lives in Syria and anywhere else in the world. It also
condemns violent acts taking place in that country
against the innocent civilian population, carried out
by all those involved in that or any other conflict. We
reject any attempt to make alleged efforts to protect
human lives a pretext for foreign intervention, whether
directly or with the support of irregular armed groups,
including mercenaries who only sow destruction and
death.

29

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

Cuba reaffirms the right of the Syrian people
to exercise full self-determination and sovereignty,
without foreign interference or intervention of any
kind. The role of the international community at this
difficult moment of a United Nations Member State is
to help safeguard peace and stability in the country. We
reiterate our confidence in the capacity of the Syrian
people and Government to solve their internal problems
without foreign interference. We demand full respect
for the self-determination and sovereignty of that Arab
country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Sir, for convening this important
debate. Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Middle East increases anxiety for world peace
with each passing day. The world needs proactive
leadership to address the critical uncertainty in the
region. We believe that it is the responsibility of the
parties to create the necessary environment to facilitate
peace. The continuing settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories are a crucial factor in
the escalation of suspicion and the lack of trust between
the parties to the conflict in the Middle East.
The settlement activity of the occupying Power
is a clear violation of the law and of article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council
and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the
International Court of Justice, have all condemned the
settlement activity as illegal. The resumption of talks
has also been tied to that issue. We are further dismayed
by the escalation of illegal settlement activity since the
General Assembly’s decision to accord Palestine status
as non-member observer State of the United Nations.
It is an unnecessary provocation in an already difficult
situation.
Despite the brief moment of celebration in
the General Assembly following the adoption of
resolution 67/19 according new status to Palestine,
the Palestinians have yet to realize their right to selfdetermination, independence and sovereignty and
remain dispossessed from much of their land. Israel’s
practice of demolishing Palestinian homes further fuels
resentment. The continuation of that practice cannot

30

contribute to confidence-building or the peace process.
We encourage the parties to exercise restraint for the
sake of the greater goal of peace.
The world must not forget the dire humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially Gaza, where conditions remain
unsustainable. Grievances based on violations of
economic, social and individual rights have the capacity
to ignite violence and even spill over borders. In Gaza,
the blockade, which is now entering its sixth year, has
created an aid-dependent economy and reinforced a
sense of helplessness and extremism. Even a modest
improvement in the situation in Gaza will require the
lifting of the blockade and the full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009).
The United Nations is required to keep the vast
majority of the people in Gaza supplied with their
minimum necessities. We underline our strong support
for the work of the United Nations agencies in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Sri Lanka will continue to encourage political
rapprochement between Gaza and the West Bank.
The political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people will contribute to the viability of the
two-State solution. We are pleased that the Palestinian
Authority, despite severe political and economic
constraints, has made progress in institution-building.
We are particularly dismayed at the severe financial
hardships being imposed on the Palestine Authority.
While Israel must desist from actions that
contravene the established rules of international law
and practice, and as we support the two-State solution,
we are also conscious of the security needs of Israel.
Palestinians and Israelis could enjoy security and peace
as neighbours through a mutually agreed political
solution, with human rights at its heart.
The peace process, which was once so
enthusiastically embraced, is at an impasse and tensions
continue to escalate. A climate conducive to peace
will be encouraged by a mutual approach sensitive
to each other’s concerns. Both parties to the conflict
must actively pursue every possibility for peace with a
view to ultimately establishing an independent State of
Palestine, existing peacefully side by side with Israel.
Sri Lanka remains committed to the attainment of the

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and to a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
reiterate the support of our Permanent Mission to the
United Nations to your great country, Pakistan, in its
duties as President of the Security Council.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela endorses
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The rights of the Palestinian people to their lands
are ancestral, and are increasingly besieged and
isolated by Israel, the occupying Power. That natural
corridor between Asia and Africa, with access to the
Mediterranean Sea, and seat of ancient cultures, has
been and is a region coveted by colonialists and ancient
and modern empires.
Archeological findings reveal that the oldest
villages of humankind date back to as many as 9,000
years before our era. Palestine is a trove of thousands of
years of history. The epic of Atrahasis, the great sage,
tells of a time expressed in Babylonian terms “when
gods were in the ways of men” — a time when humans
did not inhabit the Earth. The Earth was inhabited only
by gods, who were divided into two classes: the Igigi,
who worked the land and with their labour fed and
eased the lives of the aristocracy of the gods, and the
Annunaki, who lived off the work of others. Exhausted
by their oppressive labours, the Igigi rebelled against
the other gods and claimed luminous life in the sunlight.
So it is that since time immemorial, gods and
humans have risen up against oppression and injustice.
The myth comes to mind now that the Palestinian
people are claiming their inalienable right to exercise
authority over their own land and to occupy a worthy
place in history, without subjugation and oppression.
This umbilical cord connecting a people with its
ancestral roots helps to explain the heroic resistance of
the Palestinians and of the Arabs of the Middle East in
defence of their national and cultural identity.
Permanent members of the Security Council have
prevented the Council from promoting arrangements
to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question, in fulfilment of its primary responsibilities

13-21484

in the maintenance of international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations. The
intensification of the conflict is associated with the
impunity enjoyed by Israel, the occupying Power. Its
political and military elite, exploiting the support,
influence and power of veto of a permanent member of
the Security Council, flagrantly violates international
law, the human rights of the Palestinian people and
international humanitarian law.
The violations of international law by that elite in the
occupied territories of the State of Palestine are evident.
Their actions include, among others, the trampling of
the territorial sovereignty of the Palestinian people,
the destruction of the economy, the displacement of
populations, the destruction of basic infrastructure
and crops, and targeted and mass killings within the
framework of its policy of State terrorism. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict also unmasks the imperial political
and economic interests associated with the interests of
political and economic groups of countries of the region.
The desire to control the oil reserves of the Middle East
is key to understanding the prevailing situation.
Venezuela reiterates its rejection of the interference
of foreign Powers and their support for the terrorist
groups in Syria that are responsible for widespread
violence aimed at promoting the overthrow of the
legitimate Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
We call for the cessation of armed violence in order
to find a negotiated political solution to the crisis that
is confronting the Syrian Government and opposition
forces, taking into account the political initiative
proposed by President Bashar Al-Assad a few days
ago. We reiterate our full support for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, in
accord with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Some members of the Security Council have
called attention to the opportunistic manipulation
of resolution 1973 (2011), concerning Libya,
thereby contributing, fortunately, to containing the
warmongering plans of certain countries. The nature
of the United Nations and the validity of its Charter are
at stake. Foreign intervention in the internal affairs of
sovereign States and armed aggression have been the
methods of choice used by some Powers to attain their
colonialist objectives. On behalf of the alleged defence
of democracy and human rights, inspired by the policy
of regime change, peoples are massacred and their
legitimate institutions destroyed.

31

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

We emphasize that there is no good terrorism. All
terrorism is harmful, as it promotes the dismantling
of States and their sovereignty. Never have terrorism,
interventionism and the violation of human rights
been acceptable options. The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela Government reiterates that political
dialogue and the use of peaceful means of settlement
of disputes are the most expeditious tools for resolving
disputes or conflicts. Sovereign peoples and States
solely responsible for designing and implementing their
own destiny.
In the current historical circumstances, as the
drums of war grow loud, the Sixteenth Summit of the
Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in Tehran in August 2012 appealed
for the resumption and advancement of the Middle
East peace process based on resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1850 (2008);
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace; and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
dignitaries stated that
“the construction and expansion of settlements and
the Wall...are totally contradictory to the peace
process and must be ceased completely for the
resumption of credible peace negotiations” .
They also
“reiterated the necessity and urgency of ending the
prolonged, unlawful Israeli occupation of all of
the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. They further reaffirmed their longstanding position in support of the achievement of
the independence of the State of Palestine in all
of the Palestinian Territory occupied by Israel in
1967, including East Jerusalem as its capital” .
In conclusion, the Government of President Hugo
Chávez Frías of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its support of the legitimate aspiration of
the State of Palestine to become a full Member of the
United Nations. We hope that the objections filed by
a permanent member of this body will be withdrawn
so that the General Assembly is able to approve
expeditiously the admission of the State of Palestine as a
full Member, in the light of a possible recommendation
of the Security Council, consistent with the provisions
of the Charter. The Security Council must fully exercise
the powers which that legal instrument, the constituting
document of the United Nations, accords it in this area.

32

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the Pakistani presidency of the
Security Council for this opportunity to share with the
Council Canada’s views concerning the situation in the
Middle East. Canada would like to begin with a few
remarks on the situation in Syria.
(spoke in English)
In Syria, President Bashar Al-Assad’s desperate
attempt to cling to power and deny Syrians their
legitimate democratic rights is as tragic as its is futile.
With more than 60,000 deaths and over 650,000 refugees
having been forced to flee the country, the agony of the
Syrian people cries out for action. Al-Assad’s callous
disregard for the suffering or ordinary Syrians has made
it appallingly clear that he will not relinquish power
voluntarily, while the atrocities he has committed ensure
that the conflict will persist so long as he remains.
Therefore, we believe it incumbent on the international
community to take action. We call on the Security
Council to live up to its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security by imposing binding
sanctions against the Al-Assad regime before any more
innocent lives are lost needlessly.
Canada stands with the Syrian people in their
struggle against tyranny. We have imposed 11 rounds of
sanctions on the Al-Assad regime and its supporters. We
have provided $23.5 million in humanitarian assistance
and have also provided support to Syria’s neighbours,
which have generously taken on the huge burdens
associated with hosting so many refugees. We are also
working to support the peaceful democratic opposition,
encouraging them to reach out to all Syrian people,
including, in particular, the country’s diverse ethnic and
religious communities. The Syrian opposition coalition
must convince Syrians that it is a viable alternative to
the Al-Assad regime — one that will respect minority
rights, preserve Syria’s long tradition of pluralism, and
establish a new, peaceful, democratic Government that
respects the rights of all of its citizens.
Let me now turn to Iran. Canada continues to
believe that the regime in Iran poses the greatest
threat to international peace and security in the world
today. Regrettably, the regime continues to thwart
intensive efforts to find a negotiated resolution to the
crisis provoked by its nuclear ambitions. Last week,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

again renewed negotiations with Iran and, regrettably,
returned to Vienna empty-handed. Evidence is mounting
that Iran’s nuclear programme is not exclusively for
peaceful purposes, and the Iranian regime seems to have
little genuine interest in allaying the concerns of the
international community. Canada is deeply concerned
that Iran is manipulating support for the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy as a cover for a weapons programme
that threatens regional and global security. We appeal
to the United Nations and all Member States to use their
influence with the Iranian regime to press for an urgent
and meaningful change in approach, beginning with
constructive engagement with both the IAEA and the
five permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany.
The Iranian regime also, in our view, poses
a threat to the fundamental human values that all
nations aim to protect and foster. One month ago, the
General Assembly adopted, for the ninth year in a
row, a comprehensive resolution on the human rights
situation in Iran (resolution 67/182). Regrettably, the
systematic repression of human rights has continued.
Executions, including public executions in stadiums
and public parks, and systematic abuses by Iranian
security services, the increasing stifling of freedom
of expression, persecution of ethnic and religious
minorities, and imposition of rigid restrictions on social
and cultural life all continue. And, of course, the Iranian
regime is the foremost regional sponsor of repression,
since it backs Al-Assad’s brutal despotism in Syria. The
Iranian people deserve better than a closed and airless
society, isolated from the international community.
Like all peoples, they aspire to the universal values
of freedom and democracy. They deserve to live in a
country that honours those universal human values,
and to enjoy the same rights and freedoms that this
Organization stands for.
(spoke in French)
Finally, Canada would like to take this opportunity
to address the issue of Palestinian participation in this
meeting and the fact that its representative is seated
behind a nameplate that reads “State of Palestine”. We
fear that Palestine’s participation in this meeting as the
State of Palestine creates a misleading impression. On
29 November, in a statement to the General Assembly
in the context of its adoption of resolution 67/19, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, the Honourable
John Baird, clearly outlined Canada’s position. It
has not changed. It should also be emphasized that

13-21484

resolution 67/19 did not confer statehood on Palestine
any more than it constituted some kind of recognition
of a Palestinian State.
Canada remains committed to the quest for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, whereby two States can live side by side in peace
and security. We welcome attempts to encourage the
parties to resume direct peace negotiations without
delay or preconditions, in accordance with the Quartet’s
statement of 23 September 2011. We share the goal of
a negotiated solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict
that will allow two States to live side by side in peace
and security.
In our view, allowing the Palestinians to participate
under the name of the State of Palestine prejudices the
outcome of the final status negotiations and makes a
resumption of the peace talks more difficult. It raises
expectations without changing the facts on the ground
or improving living conditions, and risks giving the
false impression that Palestine has achieved statehood.
Canada will therefore continue to oppose any attempts
by the Palestinians to appropriate a higher status than
that which is recognized in the United Nations and
other international organizations.
(spoke in English)
Clearly, from our perspective, the best path to
achieving an independent Palestinian State living side
by side in peace and security with Israel is for both
parties to re-engage in direct negotiations immediately.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I am honoured to
participate in today’s open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I would like to express our appreciation to Pakistan
for convening the debate, and to Mr. Robert Serry, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his insightful and comprehensive briefing on the
prevailing situation.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, but I would also like to add
some comments that reflect our national position. Due
to the time constraints, I will limit my comments to the
situation in Palestine.

33

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

There is not a shred of doubt that the situation in
the Middle East, particularly in the occupied territory
of Palestine, continues to face numerous challenges and
the test of time. This is due to a combination of many
factors, such as the absence of any political will for
pursuing the peace process and to continuing acts of
provocation by the occupying Power. Namibia believes
that for a negotiation process to succeed, it requires
an impartial peace broker and committed and willing
partners to carry it through to its logical conclusion.
Currently, those factors appear to be entirely absent,
and that vacuum is filled by negative activities.

Namibia shares the conviction that achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement of the question
of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is
imperative for the attainment of peace and stability in
the Middle East. There is no substitute for negotiations
to that end, but the process of negotiation cannot
become open-ended. While we express our support for
the resumption of the peace process, we caution that
it should not be turned into a perpetual orbit with no
destination. The overwhelming vote of the General
Assembly last year underscored the urgent need to
resume meaningful talks.

Last year, on 29 November, the General Assembly
voted overwhelmingly to accord Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. My
delegation supported and voted in favour of resolution
67/19 because we did not see it as an obstacle to the
peace process; we thought it would enhance it and
send a clear message that international patience was
gradually wearing thin. That important gesture by the
international community was greeted with peaceful
celebrations in the occupied territories and with
punishment for the people of Palestine by Israel, the
occupying Power.

Genuine peace can come about only when parties to
the conflict take bold steps to heal the bleeding wounds
and usher in an era of hope and optimism. We have
therefore come here today to express our support for the
revival of the Middle East peace process, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, including the principle of land for peace,
the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative, and the
existing agreements between the Israeli and Palestinian
sides. Similarly, my delegation reaffirms the legitimate
right and aspiration of the people of Palestine to their
own independent State, and we hope that one day the
Council will recommend its full membership of the
United Nations.

My delegation noted that following that important
vote, Israel, with total disregard for international
opinion, announced its intentions to proceed with
plans for the settlement construction of more than
3,000 housing units in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and, most alarmingly, indicated that planning
would proceed on several thousand housing units in the
E-1 area of East Jerusalem. The construction of illegal
settlements and the apartheid wall of annexation will
not enhance Israel’s security, and they mutilate the State
of Palestine, thus contributing to a hostile environment
that will make the prospect of a two-State solution
impossible to achieve. Such activities are also contrary
to the International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion
of July 2004 and constitute grave breaches under the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
Similarly, we deplore the action of the Israeli
Government in withholding Palestinian tax revenue as
a punishment for Palestine’s admission to the United
Nations as a non-member observer State. The upgrading
of Palestine’s status by the General Assembly is a matter
of legitimate aspiration for the people of Palestine and
the decision of Member States in the exercise of their
sovereign rights and free will.

34

My delegation wants to make one thing clear. Our
position is not biased against Israel, but merely opposed
to its actions. We have repeatedly acknowledged that
Israel, like any other country on Earth, is duly entitled
to adequate security. That ought to be recognized and
acknowledged. However, the pursuit of security should
not be a blatant excuse to violate the human rights of
the people of Palestine. It is our firmly held conviction
that the only way that Israel can guarantee its security
is through the creation of a viable and contiguous
Palestinian State that would exist side by side with
Israel, inside internationally recognized borders. It is
only then that the leopard will be able to lie with the
lamb and the calf will graze together with the lion cub.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to express my delegation’s
deep appreciation to the presidency of Pakistan for
organizing this open debate, which is the third so far
under your presidency.

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

It is reassuring and most gratifying that the
Security Council’s open debates, which address a
number of subjects, have become customary. These
debates provide an excellent opportunity for countries
that, like mine, do not have the privilege of serving
on the Council to participate, share views and make a
contribution in our own small way to global discourse.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that has been delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Since December 2010, the world community has
witnessed a transformation of epic proportions ushered
in by a revolutionary wave of demonstrations, protests
and legitimate struggle for freedom and economic
emancipation as ordinary men, women and youth have
asserted their political rights to bring about change
throughout the Middle East.
The Arab Spring has sent a strong and clear message
across the Middle East and beyond that even the most
selfishly ardent of regimes can never perpetuate the
status quo for any length of time against the will of the
people. It is therefore ill advised for those who, in the
eyes of their own citizens, have lost the legitimacy to
govern to continue clinging to positions of leadership,
unperturbed by the mass loss of lives and destruction
of property that come with their insatiable appetite for
power.

business-as-usual approach, whereby some Members
are preoccupied with the pursuit of strategic interests
and priorities that are not exogenous to the suffering
of the Syrian people. The second and most desirable
choice is to desire and ensure for the Syrian people all
that is enjoyed by the respective populations of all the
protagonists, which is a livelihood that is not dictated by
bombs, massacres and gun battles. For once, the images
of frightened children amid collapsing walls and rubble
should be replaced by the laughter and smiles of happy
children with their families.
Botswana is among the 50-plus countries that have
signed a letter supporting the referral of the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court (S/2013/19,
annex).
On a related issue, it is a matter of deep regret that,
for generations now, the efforts of the international
community to find a durable solution to the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine,
have been fruitless. Botswana has consistently
expressed its position in various forums that there
is merit in the two-State solution. We believe in the
coexistence of Israel and Palestine, living side by side
as two sovereign States that share not only a border, but
a common desire for peace, security and prosperity.
In the interest of peace and the protection of
innocent lives of civilians, and for future generations
that will know no violence, the people of Middle East
need to embrace the virtue of dialogue and reject the
folly of violence. We therefore urge the parties to this
conflict to summon the necessary will and courage to
address all the hurdles that have so far prevented the
achievement of a balanced outcome acceptable to all
concerned.

We are mindful of the fact that, even as we sit
around this horseshoe table of the Norwegian Room,
the people of Syria have had and continue to endure
immeasurable hardship and violence, ironically visited
upon them by those sworn to protect them and ensure
the welfare of their State. The world has, regrettably,
stood by helplessly as the regime of President Bashar
Al-Assad brutally persecutes its own people. Since the
beginning of the conflict 23 months ago, more than
60,000 people, mostly civilians, have been killed. The
number of the internally displaced and those fleeing the
violent repression has more than doubled as more and
more Syrians increasingly find the situation in their
country unbearable.

It is also imperative that all the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions dealing
with this particular issue be fully implemented and
respected. That will go a long way in promoting
basic humanitarian principles, international law and
international humanitarian law, by all parties to the
conflict.

It is for that reason that the United Nations, and
in particular the Security Council, consistent with its
Charter responsibilities, need to assume a higher moral
ground in preventing further massacres of innocent
civilians in Syria. The Security Council has choices
to make with regard to the question of Syria. The
first choice is whether to continue with the current

Botswana fully supports the intensification of
international diplomatic efforts aimed at creating an
atmosphere conducive to furthering negotiations, the
outcome of which should be mutual recognition and
the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. To that effect, we wish to
echo the call of the international community for

13-21484

35

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

each of the parties to fulfil its obligations and act in
accordance with the various international instruments,
and to refrain from any steps that could undermine the
momentum of the negotiating process.
In the same context, Botswana encourages both
parties to shun violence and constructively engage
in acts that support rather than undermine peace. It
is for that reason that the State of Israel should heed
calls to end its settlement activities in order to provide
an impetus for the delicate process of remoulding a
peaceful accord.
In conclusion, transformative change and
accommodation in the Middle East should be the
greatest reward for the children of the region who face
constant confrontation and violence, in order that they
too can live the peaceful and dignified lives that are
experienced by their counterparts elsewhere in the
world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate
you on your presidency of the Security Council this
month and for the work that you are doing, particularly
in convening today’s meeting. I would like to thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing this morning. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine.

14 members of the Security Council to reject those
measures, which clearly stand in the way of peace.
Accordingly, we invite the Security Council to meet in
order to explicitly condemn illegal Israeli settlements
and to promote the peace process in accordance with
instruments of international legitimacy and terms of
reference, and to generate the political will likely to
result in a just and lasting solution.
In addition to settlements, Israel is treating the
issue of East Jerusalem in a way that does not serve the
cause of peace. We would again insist that measures
taken by the Israel to Judaize Al-Quds and suppress
that holy city’s Arab and Islamic identity are null and
void and without legal effect. Al-Quds will remain an
Arab, Islamic and Christian city with its mosques and
churches. There will be no Palestinian State without
Al-Quds and there will be no Al-Quds without the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Security Council must therefore
adopt a decision or resolution that establishes an
international committee to investigate unjust Israeli
practices and all measures undertaken by Israel to
eliminate the Arab Islamic identity of Al-Quds.
A number of Palestinian prisoners have higlighted
their suffering by undertaking a hunger strike. We ask
that an end be put to their suffering and that Israel be
obliged to release them. We also call for the lifting of
the economic siege and of the withholding of tax and
customs revenues imposed on Palestinians and on the
Palestinian Authority. Israel’s unfair policies do not
serve the cause of just and lasting peace in any way
whatsoever. We hope that the new Israeli Government
will adopt an approach that is in harmony with the
peace process and in accordance with international law.

Last year, we saw a historic turn when Palestine
was granted the status of non-member observer State
by the General Assembly, following the recognition
of the State of Palestine by a majority of States in the
world. Although that event was long delayed, it did
take place, and in the right forum. However, that is
still not enough. Consensus on finding a solution for
the question of Palestine and for achieving peace in the
Middle East through the two-State solution requires
the recognition of Palestine as a full State Member of
the United Nations. We therefore invite the Security
Council to support those efforts.

In that regard, we reiterate that the solution to the
crisis in the Middle East depends on Israel’s withdrawal
from the occupied Palestinian territories, the occupied
Syrian Golan and the remaining Lebanese territory
occupied by Israel, as well as an end to Tel Aviv’s
violations of Lebanese sovereignty. The State of Qatar
is committed to supporting the brotherly Palestinian
people in order that it may obtain its full inalienable
rights.

Despite that international consensus, the
Government of Israel has not expressed a sincere interest
in the two-State solution or a genuine desire for peace
based on it. The strongest proof of Israel’s reaction to
Palestine being granted observer State status was its
stepping up its illegal settlement activities, causing

The State of Qatar contributes to the relief efforts
in Gaza through reconstruction efforts following the
Israeli aggression. We note in that regard the visit to
Gaza of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa
Al-Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar, who expressed
the solidarity of the Government and the people of the

36

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

State of Qatar with the besieged Palestinian people.
He undertook to contribute to the rebuilding of Gaza
through a number of projects involving basic services,
including schools and hospitals. The Security Council
must convey a firm message to Israel to end the unjust
siege and stop bombing civilians.
With regard to Syria, the Council was briefed last
week by Ms. Navi Pillay and Ms. Valerie Amos with
regard to human rights, emergency assistance and the
need to provide aid to that brotherly country. I recall
that early this year and for the first time in several
months, the United Nations issued an estimated death
toll in Syria, which has reached over 60,000, while
the number of Syrian refugees could exceed 1,100,000
before the middle of the year. These figures do not even
take into account the internally displaced or those who
suffer food insecurity and lack fuel, energy and other
basic services. They do indicate, however, that Syria
is experiencing an urgent humanitarian disaster that
requires an international intervention on the part of the
United Nations and the international community.
The sole party responsible for the deterioration
of the situation in Syria is the Syrian regime, which
met the will of its people with heavy weapons. The
international community, including the State of Qatar,
has tried to support a peaceful solution to the crisis
through the efforts of representatives like the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, in the hope that the Syrian
regime would respond to his appeals and to the voice of
reason. But at every turn it impedes those endeavours,
choosing instead a bloody approach and a destructive
security situation. Here, I am referring specifically to
the statements of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the Syrian regime, which described the Joint Special
Representative as biased towards a conspiracy targeting
Syria. That demonstrates that the Syrian regime is not
at all ready to engage positively with the international
community or the Syrian opposition.
The recent reports of the use of toxic substances
by the regime in the area of Homs point to the use of
chemical weapons, proving that the regime disregards
the lives of its citizens. The regime has killed or injured
hundreds of thousands of citizens, destroyed entire
neighbourhoods and villages, schools and universities.
It has attacked citizens who were buying bread. It has
committed the worst possible crimes — the slaughter
of women and children with knives, rape and the

13-21484

desecration of places of worship and the looting of
property.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to your delegation, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. We welcome
Mr. Riad Malki, Foreign Minister of the observer
State of Palestine, to this meeting, and we also the
Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing to the Council.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
My delegation welcomes this opportunity to discuss
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. We believe that with sustained focus and
enduring attention, the international community will
find a just, peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict.
It is in this connection that we call for a halt to
Israeli settlements. Palestinian land is taken for the
construction of more Jewish settlements despite the
opposition of the international community, including
in the Security Council. A case in point is the planned
construction of settlements in the so-called E-1 region of
Palestine. The construction of the so-called separation
wall, which has been declared an illegal act, is another
case in point. Those and similar acts will only serve
to threaten the viability of the two-State solution and
impede the peace process and final status decisions.
Nigeria believes that the stalled peace process could
be re-energized through direct negotiations between
the parties. We urge the Quartet to spare no effort to
create an enabling environment for those talks to thrive.
We are mindful of the need for the presence of the
political will, and we call upon both parties to come to
the negotiating table without preconditions. The status
quo must be altered and the State of Palestine must be
created, living side by side in peace and security with
its neighbour Israel, within boundaries recognized by
the rest of the world, with its capital in East Jerusalem.
The situation in Gaza is cause for concern. The
Israeli blockade of the Strip, which continues to
incapacitate the economic and social life of the area,

37

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

has worsened the plight of the people, who struggle
daily. That continued blockade, which leaves the
most vulnerable of society, particularly women and
children, in abject penury, remains a scar on the
collective conscience of the international community.
It violates humanitarian and human rights laws, as
well as relevant United Nations resolutions and other
conventions of which Israel is a signatory. We therefore
call on Israel to fulfil all its obligations as specified in
those conventions.
Nigeria believes that the two-State solution is the
best option to resolve the protracted conflict in the
Middle East. It not only recognizes the right of the State
of Israel to exist, but to exist in peace and security. We
therefore echo the call of Mr. Serry for concerted action
with a view to salvaging the two-State solution.
My delegation believes that there exists an
opportunity for both Israel and Palestine to live side
by side as independent sovereign entities and that
both parties to the conflict need to show genuine
commitment to the negotiation process. The right
of Israel to exist should be recognized by Palestine,
while Israel should withdraw to its pre-1967 border
and should cede East Jerusalem to Palestine to serve
as the capital of the Palestinian State. In light of that,
on 29 November 2012 my delegation voted in favour
of General Assembly resolution 67/19, according
Palestine the status of a non-member observer State.
We now look forward to the admission of Palestine as
a fully fledged, independent and sovereign Member of
the United Nations, as it rightly deserves. That is long
overdue, and we hope that it will be realized this year.
With regard to the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, Nigeria desires to see a speedy and
peaceful settlement of the crisis, driven by a national
reconciliation process led by Syrians themselves.
It is our view that while the Security Council seems
deadlocked on the matter and does not seem to be
inclined to move quickly on the crisis, all sides in the
Syrian conflict should not use that fact as a convenient
excuse to destroy their country and continue to inflict
untold hardships on their helpless populace.
External involvement should assist rather than
polarize the parties to the conflict and compound
sentiments that are already extremely opposed to
each other. We deplore the continued deterioration of
the situation in Syria and observe with regret that the
international community has failed to bring it to an

38

end by using the instruments of dialogue, mediation
and conciliation. We believe that the international
community, especially the United Nations, has the moral
responsibility to ensure that the Syrian Government and
the rebels cease all hostilities in the overall interests of
the country and the region as a whole.
Peace must be allowed to return to Syria, and all
sides to the conflict must adhere to the rule of law
and exhibit basic decency and consideration for the
suffering of their people. The international community
should therefore help the parties come together and
resolve their differences peacefully, like brothers and
sisters. Let the people of Syria themselves resolve
their differences, assisted only by impartial and wellmeaning outside involvement.
The President: The representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
(spoke in French): I know it is late and that we are all
exhausted after the long debate in this Chamber today.
Our debate was essentially on the developments in the
Middle East. But I ask the Council to be bear with me
for a few moments, so that I may respond to what the
representative of Canada said regarding my country.
Canada has once again abused the Council by
making completely impertinent accusations against
my country during today’s debate. In its speech, it
referred in particular to our nuclear programme, which
is essentially aimed at producing energy and electricity.
It is regrettable that the representative of Canada forgot
to say that Israel is the only country in our region that
possesses nuclear weapons.
(spoke in English)
Turning to the allegations regarding human rights,
I should say that, unfortunately, the countries claiming
to be the bulwark of democracy and champions of
human rights are suffering from political paranoia
and manipulating human rights issues to achieve their
politicized and biased goals, while, on the contrary, it
is well documented by the international human rights
monitoring bodies that their own records in this field
are seriously tainted.
Canada is a prime example in that regard. The fact
that human rights in Canada have been systematically
denied to large parts of its population, irrespective of
the political ideology of the different Governments and

13-21484

S/PV.6906 (Resumption 1)

political parties in power, is well known. From failing
in the scope of its international obligations, to failing
in a constitutional and legislative framework, to failing
in equality and non-discrimination, the right to life,
liberty and the security of persons, to failing minorities
and indigenous persons — there seems to be no area
where Canada has not disgraced itself before humanity

when it comes to upholding human rights. I think that
that is enough for tonight.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

13-21484

39
