UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

1902 ndMEETING:
29
MARCH
1976
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

Page
1
agenda (S/Agenda/ 1902) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Kenya, ‘on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007) . . . . . . ..L............‘...................................

1

SIPV. 1902

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security ,Council, numbered in accordance .with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1902nd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Thomas

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by Kenya, on behalf of the African
Group of States at the United Nations, concerning
the act of aggression committed
by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12007).
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform the Council that I have just
received letters from the representatives of India and
the United Republic of Cameroon in which they ask
to be invited, under Article 31 of the Charter, to
participate without the right to vote in the Council’s
debate. If I hear no objections, I propose, in accordance with the Council’s practice and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to invite these representatives to participate without the right to vote in
the Council’s debate.

agenda (S/Agenda/l902)

1.

of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jaipal (India)
and Mr. Oyono (United Republic
of Cameroon),
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption

1976, at 4 p.m.

Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cisse’ (Guinea),
Mr. Maina
(Kenya), .Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. Harriman
(Nigeria), Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Blyden (Sierra
Leone), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamana
(Zambia)
took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

S. BOYA (Benin).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

29 March

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is the representative of Poland, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
address the Council.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act of
aggression committed by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007)

4. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland): Mr. President,
the
delegation of Poland is grateful both to you and to the
other members of the Council for enabling us to present
our country’s position on the issue under consideration. Your successful tenure as President of the Council reinforces our conviction that this time too the
debate will contribute to the furthering of peace and
justice for yet another victim of aggression on the
African continent.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions adopted earlier
[190&h and 1901st meetings], I shall invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table and the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, the
German
Democratic
Republic,
Guinea,
Kenya,
Madagascar, Nigeria, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. I would also join those delegations which have
extended their sincere welcome to the new Permanent
Representative
of the United States, Ambassador
Scranton. At the same time, we truly miss at this table
a man of unusual talents, experience and devotion to
the cause of the United Nations, Ambassador Malik,
who, because of a very unfortunate accident, has to
stay away temporarily
from our deliberations.
The
Polish delegation is looking forward to seeing him
very soon in our midst.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Luvualu
(Angola) took a place at the Security Council table
and Mr. Alar&n (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Neugebauer
(German
Democratic
Republic),

6. In deciding‘ to participate in- this debate, Poland
has been guided by the genuine considerations
of
1

solidarity inherent in the very ideological foundations
of its socio-political
system. Only three months ago,
the Seventh Congress of the Polish United Workers’
Party reiterated most emphatically:

which proved to be the military
forces of South
Africa? South Africa has thus once again revealed
the real nature of its racist policies by placing itself
in the forefront of the imperialist
intervention
in
Angola, an intervention
which in fact has not ceased
to this day.

“In solidarity with progressive and democratic
movements, our party... extends its warm support
to the People’s Republic of Angola and to all nations
fighting against imperialist aggression and intervention, for freedom, sovereignty and democracy.“t

11. In spite of its criminal actions, the Pretoria regime
has the impudence to try to justify its aggression against
the People’s Republic of Angola by the argument of
the so-called protection of its interests. To us in Poland
arguments like this indeed have a familiar and sinister
sound, which we know from our not-too-distant
experiences. In 1939 the Hitler regime also saw fit to
launch an aggression in the name of the protection of
its usurped interests. Its final outcome took a toll of
nearly 60 million human lives.

7. In the course of its entire 30 years as a Member
of the United Nations, Poland has spared no efforts to
implement in practice those lofty objectives. Likewise,
the United Nations has played an outstanding role in
the decolonization
process, inspired as it was by the
initiatives and untiring efforts of the socialist community and other progressive countries. I need only
mention the adoption of the epoch-making
Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, due, as is well known, to the
initiative of the Soviet Union.

12. That is one of the reasons why we share the
prevailing view that South Africa’s action against independent Angola represents a threat to international
peace and security. It is all the more conspicuous an
aggression since, as already pointed out by a number
of representatives
of African States, South Africa
does not border on Angola. To invade the young
Republic it used a territory which does not belong to
it, a territory whose national unity and integrity it
has violated in the pursuit of its expansionist practices.
Especially in this context, the conditions for withdrawal spelled out in South Africa’s letter to the’
Secretary-General
of 21 March [S/12019] are totally
illegal, unjustified and groundless.

8. One of the decisive measures for the final eradication of colonialism
was the advent of independence
in the former Portuguese colonies. Still fresh in our
memories is the struggle, both in the United Nations
and outside it, against the oppressive Salazar regime
for the freedom of the peoples of Mozambique,
GuineaBissau, Cape Verde and Angola. The records of the
United Nations are full of telling information
as to
who were the real friends of the peoples of those territories, unreservedly supporting their just struggle for
independence,
and who actually
obstructed
the
attempts to speed up the decolonization
process.
One has no difliculty
in discerning
them even
now, for in the context of the question of the former
Portuguese colonies, sirens’ voices can still be heard
today. One of the staunchest enemies of Angola and
other former colonial territories on the African continent has always been the South African regime.
We have condemned
it in the past; we continue
resolutely to condemn it today.

13. Already, on 28 January [1882nd meeting], I said
in this very Council that today it is the People’s
Republic of Angola that the South African regime
has chosen to invade from the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia, and tomorrow it may be any other
country of the continent. This warning has not lost its
validity, especially today, when South Africa’s twin
regime in Southern Rhodesia, one of the last bastions
of racism and colonialism,
makes frantic efforts to
prevent itself falling apart under the pressure of the
people of Zimbabwe, of liberated States of Africa and
of the progressive forces all over the world.

9. Thanks to the vigilance and unremitting
efforts
of the Organization
of African Unity, this series of
meetings of the Council has been convened to discuss
and draw proper conclusions from an open armed
aggression by South Africa against one of the youngest
independent States of the world, officially recognized
by the overwhelming
majority of Member States.

14. The fact that South Africa has been compelled to
take steps to withdraw from Angola represents a great
victory for the Angolan people and for all the free
States of Africa, supported by the socialist countries
and all progressive forces of the world. Their joint
action forced the Pretoria regime to take the longoverdue step. Indeed, we conceive of it also as an
illustration
of a certain effectiveness in the efforts of
the United Nations, which should now do its utmost
to consolidate the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the young Republic of Angola.

10. The just struggle of the Angolan people for its
national liberation
had for long been a source of
constant imitation
to the world’s ‘most reactionary
circles, acting in collusion with the forces .of Angola’s
domestic
reaction.
The entire progressive
world
welcomed the most authentic victory of the people of
Angola over forces of aggression and bands of foreign
mercenaries.
Is it not symptomatic
that, when all
other means of intervention
and aggression failed,
the forces of reaction had recourse to their last resort,

15. Poland has always lent its active support and
assistance to the peoples fighting for their freedom and
independence. By the same token, we have supported
the People’s Republic of Angola in defending and
2

consolidating
its young statehood along the road to
complete national liberation. We pledge our continued
efforts towards that end, as we see in it only a natural
consequence of our consistent foreign policy.

security of Africa and which has serious implications
in the context of international
peace and security.
22. I am glad that the Government of Angola found
it possible to send one of its distinguished representatives, Ambassador
Pascal Luvualu,
to address the
Council and put before it the facts relating to the
complaint against South Africa. No one who heard his
statement could have failed to be concerned about
the gravity of the acts committed
by South Africa
against Angola, acts which involved criminal and
wanton outrages against the Angolan population and
which constituted serious violations of international
law.

16. We realize at the same time that more concerted
action of the world community is called for to contain
aggression and racism. That is why we give our full
support to the postulates put forward by the representative of People’s Republic of Angola, Ambassador Luvualu, in his statement in the Council on
26 March [290&h ‘meeting].
I take this opportunity
warmly to welcome the representative
of free and
independent Angola and to express the gratification of
the Polish delegation over this important
contribution to the Council’s debate. We look forward to seeing
the People’s Republic of Angola as a full Member of
the United Nations in the near future.

23. Non-interference
in the internal affairs of each
country and respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States are among the most fundamental
of the principles governing relations among nations.
Most regrettably, those principles have been seriously
violated by the Pretoria regime’s aggression against
Angola. South Africa’s hostility to the Angolan people
and their revolutionary
cause is not new. It is well
known that throughout the period of the liberation *
struggle, South Africa used its wealth and military
strength, in collaboration
with the colonial Power, to
attempt to suppress and frustrate the legitimate aspirations of the Angolan people. As we know, that
attempt failed in the end, but from the time of the
AIvor agreements between,the Angolan people and the
Portuguese Government in January 1975, South Africa
has waged a campaign of subversion in order to impede
progress towards independence.
That subversion
reached a climax with the invasion of Angola by South
African troops at the beginning of August 1975, under
the pretext that their action had the consent of the
Portuguese authorities. As we are now aware from the
correspondence circulated to the Council, that was not
the case. The purpose was to overthrow the people’s
revolution and to establish an authority which would
be amenable to South Africa’s policies.

17. I have concentrated in my statement strictly on
the question under consideration,
that is, the aggression by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola. I think that the desire expressed by the African
Group, including the representative
of Angola, to
keep this important
debate free from extraneous
considerations,
is well-founded and absolutely right.
That is why my delegation cannot fail to express its
regret, and indeed its indignation,
over an isolated
attempt to distort facts on the issue before us. In so
doing the representative of one of the permanent members of the Council, notorious for his slanderous
attacks against the Soviet Union, even went so far
as to try to justify the aggression by the racist Pretoria
regime against the people of Angola. No amount of
abusive rhetoric can deny that that is an objective
fact.
18. As far as my delegation is concerned, we are
confident that the free African States, united as they
are in their common
struggle against colonialism,
racism and apartheid, are perfectly able to judge the
facts for themselves and to draw their own conclusions.

24. During the seven months when South Africa
maintained a presence in Angola, it not only carried
out a ruthless military campaign against the national
liberation forces but inflicted untold suffering on the
civilian population.
The’ representative of Angola has
described how his country-a
new State in need of
international
solidarity and support-was
pillaged, its
people assaulted, its property destroyed, its vital
installations
wantonly wrecked by the South African
forces in a “scorched earth” policy following their
defeat on the battlefield. Such actions demand the most
severe condemnation
of the Security Council as well
as of the international
community,
and simple justice
calls for full compensation
from the South African
Government for the losses sustained by the Angolan
Government and people.

19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Somalia.
I invite
him
to
take
a
place
at
the
Council
table and
--~to make his statement.
20. Mr. HUSSEN
(Somalia): Mr. President, let me
first of all express my satisfaction at the fact that this
important debate is taking place under your capable
guidance. In the course of this month when many
crucial issues have come before the Security Council,
you have shown those qualities of wisdom and impartiality so necessary for the conduct of affairs in
this body.
21. I wish to thank the members of the Council for
having granted my delegation’s request to participate
in the debate on the question of South African aggression in Angola. This is a matter which, in the view of
my Government,
touches directly on the peace and

25. It is a sad commentary on our times, as the representative of Angola has pointed out, that countries
which could have had a positive influence on the
3

situation and which could have deterred South Africa
from its aggressive actions maintained a conspiracy
of silence. Five months after the independence of the
State of Angola had been recognized by the intemational community,
the new nation was still faced with
the intolerable situation whereby South African troops
continued
their illegal and aggressive presence in
Angola in violation of all the norms of international
law.

principal bastion of colonial and racist rule in southern
Africa, has seen one of its fortresses removed withthe collapse of Portuguese colonialism in Africa. The
militarist response of the Pretoria regime. to the reality
of Angolan independence must be taken as a timely
warning of what its reaction is likely to be in situations
even nearer home, when the inevitable confrontations
take place between the African majorities
and the
white minority
regimes in Namibia
and Southern
Rhodesia. If the Security Council does not in the
present instance show its determination
to put an. end
to South African military adventures, then we can be
sure that there will be further South African violations
of international
law with even greater consequences.

26. It was this situation which impelled my country,
along with other members of the Organization
of
African Unity, to insist that a question of such grave
import should come under the close scrutiny of the
Security Council. The United Nations must be particularly concerned with the aggression against Angola
since it was launched from the Territory of Namibia,
for which it legally holds international
responsibility.

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

27. Much has been said by South Africa and States
sharing close relations with that country to the effect
that the situation has eased with the withdrawal of
South African forces to Namibia. But the peace of the
area will continue to be in jeopardy unless South
Africa is made to withdraw its forces and, indeed,
its illegal administration
from Namibia as well.

32. Mr. ALARCON
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, at the very outset I should
like to thank you and, through you, the other members of the Council for this opportunity
to participate
in this important debate. It is a special pleasure for us
to attend this debate because it is taking place under
your worthy and able presidency. It is .a good-. thing
indeed that a debate of such importance
for the
complete liberation of Africa should take place under
the leadership of the eminent representative of Benin,
whose Government and people have been fighting in
the vanguard of the struggle against colonialism
and
racism. That has deep significance; it is a reminder
to the imperialists,’
colonialists
and racists that the
period of slavery and serfdom will never return. We
are all the more pleased because there are firm bonds
of friendship and fraternal co-operation between your
country and mine which are based on our common
devotion to the cause of the complete emancipation
of all oppressed peoples.

28. In my delegation’s view the Security Council must
denounce in the strongest terms South Africa’s armed
aggression against Angola and the violation of its territorial integrity.
Secondly, it must firmly reject the
notion that South Africa had the right to take military
action against a sovereign State in order to safeguard
certain hydroelectric
installations
in which it purportedly had an interest. It is quite clear that South
Africa’s occupation of the area of the dam was illegal
and, therefore, was an open aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Govemment and the people of Angola. A failure to condemn
South Africa on this score would have the effect of
establishing a most dangerous precedent in intemational relations. It would mean that a State which might
claim economic interests, real or otherwise, in another
State could, if it sees those interests thereatened,
secure their protection by a forced military presence.
To admit such a thesis would bring about international
anarchy.

33. I am also pleased to extend my best wishes to
the delegation of the courageous people of Angola. Its
presence here is an honour to all of us. It represents
a people in the vanguard of the struggle for freedom,
a people that has been able to withstand every test,
a, people that was able to draw strength from its
suffering and that, guided by its firm, heroic battleproven vanguard, fought consistently
until victory.
That delegation’s
statement at the beginning of this
debate has, I believe, been particularly enlightening to
all the members of the Council.

29. In my delegation’s
view, the question of the
disposition of the-benefits of the dam on both sides of
the border with Namibia is one which concerns only
-and I emphasize “only’‘-Angola
and an independent Namibian people, as quite correctly stated by the
Political Bureau of the MPLA [Popular Movement for
the Liberation
of Angola] in its statement issued in
Luanda on 20 March.

34. The Angolan‘people
has fought a long and selfless struggle for independence
and freedom.
Its
‘martyrs have been numerous and its sacrifices untold;
its inspiring feats have filled a history of struggle over.
five centuries. Few people in the world have shed so
much blood and made so many sacrifices in trying
to win the right to determine their own future.

30. South Africa’s aggression against Angola cannot
be treated as an isolated incident or one that is unlikely
to recur. The interrelationship
of southern African
problems is recognized by South Africa as much as by
the international
community.
South Africa, itself the

35. From the emergence of European colonialism to
this day, the Angolan people have had to fight, with
4

.

.,.

unusual heroism and courage, to eliminate the most
odious forms of exploitation. From the emergence of
capitalism until its present period of decline and bankruptcy, the exploiters have turned Angola into’s despoiled and martyrized prey. Its coasts were the scene
of the cruelest manhunts, the inhabitants were brutally
uprooted from their land and borne as slaves across
the Atlantic. Millions of Angolans were in this way
transported to the plantations of the Caribbean, where
they forget, with their work and suffering, new nations
which today, during this period of the settlement of
accounts with the oppressors, are reaching out across
the very sea which bore witness to their misfortune
and which today brings them together in common
effort for their final emancipation.
36. There were five centuries of stubborn resistance.
The chronicles- of the Portuguese and South African
historians speak of the struggles of the Angolans ever
since the day when the European oppressors fust
set foot on their shores. There were many who
escaped slavery by seeking refuge in the forests, which,
centuries later, would be the bases for the contemporary revolutionary struggle. It is not by chance that
the slave traders called the Angolans rebels unwilling
to bow to the harsh discipline of their masters. Their
rebellious spirit, which was always evident in the
uprisings of the slaves in the plantations of colonial
Cuba, constituted one of the principal factors in the
creation of the Cuban nation.
37. Ever since its foundation in 1956, the MPLA
has most worthily represented the highest aspirations of the Angolan people, indeed of all the peoples
of Africa which are not prepared to continue to be
subjected to the ruinous voracity of the foreign capitalists. Inspired by the example of Amflcar Cabral
and by the heroism of their founders and under the
enlightened, consistent guidance of their President,
Comrade Agostinho Neto, the MPLA was the only
Angolan organization which fought for independence
and freedom, the only one which unflinchingly fought
the colonialists and their lackeys, the only organization
which was able to mobilize the exploited masses,
reared them in the heat of the struggle and prepared
them for building a new Angola, totally free and independent. There were many vicissitudes and undescribable difficulties which the MPLA had to overcome
during the 15 years of armed struggle.
38. Although they had been ferociously repressed by
the colonialists ever since the glorious uprising of
February 1961,although their militants were massacred
throughout the country, although they later confronted
the colonial army which enjoyed the active collaboration of the imperialists and racists and their African
servants and had to face untold logistical difficulties
arising from Angola’s geographical location at a time
when the balance of power in the area favoured the
reactionary forces, the fighters. of FAPLA [Popular
Armed Forces of Liberation]
continued to be the
standard bearers of armed struggle. Alone, they

*_

.’

.;.

confronted the armed Portuguese, who were trained
and equipped by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and assisted by the South African racists. The
Angolan traitors, the so-called liberation movements
which were fabricated in Washington, Lisbon or
Pretoria, were kept outside Angolan territory as tools
of imperialism. If any armed action was carried out by
these imaginary movements, it was to fight together
.with the Portuguese and kill Angolan partisans of the
MPLA. There is proof of that also in the official
Portuguese chronicles of the period and in the United
Nations records. Then as today, there was in Angola
only one patriotic organization defending the interests
of the people. Then as today, there were Angolans
who were traitors in the service of the colonialists
and racists.
39. During the two decades of struggle which began
in February 1961, neither the Angolan people nor their
Portuguese oppressors were alone. They both enjoyed
the active support of their allies from abroad. The
socialist countries, the African peoples and all the
progressive forces helped the MPLA in its unequal
struggle. The imperialists, the racists and all the
reactionaries and traitors stood actively together with
Portugal in its efforts to annihilate the MPLA.
40. The South Africa racists never concealed their
greedy intentions against the Angolan people. In
Pretoria’s strategy, the other African countries were
always considered as potential vassals, especially
those which were located in areas close to the realm
of apartheid. Hence, they gave open support to the
Portuguese during the colonial war. Hence the plans
to convert the economies of Angola and Mozambique
into subsidiaries of the monopolies of the South
Africans and their imperialist allies. Plans to develop
hydroelectric plants along the borders of the territories
were conceived as part of an attempt to expand white
colonialism in Rhodesia and Namibia and to increase
the exploitation of the people and strengthen the
system of apartheid.
41. Pretoria’s collaboration with the Portuguese
fascists in all areas is very well known. I might
mention that in 1968 the MPLA denounced the
presence of South African officers and soldiers who
were fighting along with the Portuguese in the southeastern part of Angola. In the midst of the liberation
war, Comrade Agostinho Neto, the President of the
MPLA, drew the attention of the world to the external
support which colonialists were receiving:
“We know that recently South Africa has been
providing officers and soldiers to fight in the southeastern part of the country against our forces.
“For the South African racists, the development
of the war in Angola and its effect on South West
Africa is a source of constant concern. On a number
of occasions they have declared that their borders
have to be defended in Angola and Mozambique

because they fear that those countries would serve
as a base for the patriots of South Africa, Rhodesia
and South West Africa.
“They, with the Portuguese, are carrying out
bombings and machine-gun attacks from helicopters.
Recently, they set up a base in Angolan territory,
near the border of South West Africa, which will
be operated by Portuguese and by South African
soldiers.”
42. The reaction of the South African authorities to
the irrepressible advance of the liberation movement
in Africa in recent years should consequently come
as a surprise to no one. Pretoria tried to extend its
system of domination and racial subjection, and that is
why its rulers were seized with anger when the growing
struggle of the African movements in the territories
oppressed by Portugal drew near to the hour of liberation and brought about the defeat of fascism in Lisbon.
The borders of freedom were coming too close to the
principal bastion of racism and apartheid in Africa.
The victory of the MPLA and the subsequent establishment in Angola of a genuinely African Government,
independent and progressive and standing together
with the oppressed peoples of southern Africa, and the
creation in Angola of a revolutionary State which would
serve as an example and an inspiration for millions of
Africans were a threatening reality which made the
racists in Pretoria lose a good deal of sleep.

wish to forget how and where this aggression began,
would remember that simple and specific fact. The
administering Power of that time, Portugal, protested
against the aggression and named the aggressor:
South Africa. No other foreign military force was in
Angola at that time.
45. Between August and October .the imperialist
interference continued at an ever-growing rate. Its
purpose was obvious: to seize Luanda and control
the vital centres of the country before independence
was declared on 11 November. Agents of the CIA,
white mercenaries and puppet troops intervened at the
side of South Africans.
46. It was not until October that Cuba sent its first
instructors to Angola. When they arrived, the imperialists, the South Africans and their lackeys had
already been shamelessly intervening in the country
for many months.
47. On 23 October, in an attempt to deal a death
blow to the Angolan revolution, there was a massive
invasion by South African troops, which, using
between 100 and 150 tanks and advancing 60 to
70 kilometres a day, marched on the capital of Angola,
while in the north the mercenaries were only 25 kilometres from Luanda. In the face of that treacherous
attack by the racists, on 5 November, at the request
of MPLA, the Revolutionary Government of Cuba
decided to send the first military unit to Angola:

43. That is why South Africa launched its shameless
and criminal aggression against the Angoian people,
in a desperate attempt to wrest complete victory from
the MPLA fighters who had been struggling for
20 years with unparalleled selflessness. The aggressive designs of the South Africans went hand in hand
with those of their imperialist allies and partners.
The CIA [Central Inrelligence Agency] of the United
States in fact distributed millions of dollars to its
salaried workers in FLNA [National Front for the
Liberation
of Angola] and UNITA [National Union
for the Total Independence of Angola] to enable them
to commit all kinds of misdeeds and mischief against
the Angolan people. The racist colonialism organized
ryactionary armies to frustrate genuine independence.

48. For Cuba, to give assistance to that fraternal
people, victim of the combined aggression of imperialists, racists and mercenaries, and to contribute
to the defence of its national independence was simply
to fulfil an elementary duty of solidarity. For the
Cubans it has been an honour to wage that battle
together with the heroic soldiers of the Angolan
national army and the fighters of other African nations
that have also stood in the, vanguard of the struggle
against colonialism. If our action has been of any
assistance, however modest, in the victory of the
Angolan revolutionaries, and ifit has therefore aroused
the wrath of the imperialists and racists, we can only
feel pride and satisfaction.

44. It was in those circumstances that early in August
last year-quite unjustifiably and in violation of all
international principles and standards-South African
armed forces crossed the border of Namibia, occupied
a large part of southern Angola and, in fragile collusion with bands of Angolan traitors, began its armed
intervention in what was still a territory under Portuguese administration. That is a secret to no one.
The Portuguese Government protested against that
invasion by South African troops. The Permanent
Representative of Portugal repeated that denunciation
in the plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
21 November.* It would be a good thing if the imperialists and their accomplices who wish to falsify the
facts and ignore who the aggressor was in Angola, who

49. I feel obliged to make some comments on the
statement delivered here last Friday by Ambassador
Huang Hua [290&h meeting]. I shall comment only on
that part of his speech that related directly to South
Africa’s aggression against Angola. Thus, my observations on the statement by the representative of China
will tie in with the continuation of my statement, ‘which
is directly related to. the item at present before the
Council. Seemingly, nothing obliged Ambassador
Huang Hua to come to the first in this ‘series of
Council meetings in order to justify the South African
aggression against the people of Angola and come to the
defence of imperialism with regard to the future steps
it might take in the attempt to save the racist regimes
in Africa. But that is in fact what he did three days
ago in the Security Council, before the entire world.

50. Let us examine the facts. The representative of
China said:

in an interesting study of styles, to establish who
copied whom-whether Pretoria copied Peking, or
whether Peking copied Pretoria.

when the victorv of the national liberation
struggle in Angola was won, the Soviet .social-”
.. imperialists crossed the oceans, committed naked
armed intervention and plunged the newly independent young State of Angola into painful division
and civil war. The South African racist regime...
also openly carried out armed aggression against
Angola and directly interfered in its internal affairs.”
[Ibid., para. 55.1

55.’ Thereb%&&ve
of China-referred on a number of occasions to the Cuban internationalist combatants fighting together with the Angolan patriots,
calling them ‘.‘mercenaries’*. One has the impression
that he was trying to be insulting. Of course, we would
be insulted if the word came from a revolutionary,
but that is not the case.

‘6

:.

.

51. The Chinese leadership knows that that is not
true. It knows also that that statement is an attempt
to justify what cannot be justified. It knows that
with those words it has gone further than the imperialists, indeed it has gone even further than the
racists in Pretoria, in defending the South African
invasion of Angola. When the South Africans attacked
Angola in August last year, Portugal, the administering
Power, protested and denounced the aggression.
Neither Portugal nor South Africa nor anyone else
went so far as to say that there was any other foreign
country intervening in Angola with its armed forces.
52. In another part of his statement Ambassador
Huang Hua said:
6‘. .. what merits further attention is that to contend
with the other super-Power for world hegemony,
the super-Power which flaunts the flag of socialism
pushes feverishly its colonial policy of expansion
and scrambles for strategically important places in
southern Africa. Such a frenzied offensive by Soviet
social-imperialism is bound to bring extremely
serious consequences to Angola, southern Africa
and even the whole African continent.” [Zbid.]
53. There are many other parts of the statement by
the representative of China which are similar to the
ones I have quoted.
54. I invite representatives to compare what I have
just quoted with recent statements by distinguished
spokesmen of imperialism who, concerned about the
fate of the racist minority regimes in southern Africa,
have uttered words very similar to those used by the
representative of China. It is also worth pointing out
that they coincide with the adoption by the Pretoria
Parliament of certain amendments to the Defence Act
which would allow South Africa to attack any African
country. Ambassador Huang Hua did not find time
to condemn those South African threats against
African countries, but he did hasten to justify in
advance any further South African aggression, using,
indeed, the same arguments and the same language
used by the proponents of apartheid. I have with me
the records of the South African Parliament containing
the debate which took place before the amendments
to the Defence Act were adopted. These records are
available to any representative who wishes to indulge

56. I have already said that Cuba gave the People’s
Republic of Angola military assistance, which was
requested by its legitimate Government, precisely to
confront the aggression on the part of South Africa
troops, Portuguese fascists and international mercenaries. Of course, Ambassador Huang Hua said not
one word about-the real mercenaries, the paid assassins
with long criminal
_,_._ --..experience in the Congo, Nigeria,
Rhodesia’ and other African countries, w.ho participated in the South African aggression. That was not
by accident. Later on I shall explain why such discretion was exercised with regard to the white mercenaries participating in the aggression against Angola,
The Council will then understand why the representative of China preferred to omit any reference to this
matter.
57. I should add that Cubans were not the only ones
to faht on the side of the People’s Republic of
Angola; we were honoured to fight shoulder to shoulder
with combatants from other African countries, all
under the command of the legitimate Angolan
authorities.
58. There is something that should not be overlooked
in the statement by the Chinese representative: he
tried to convey the impression that the People’s
Republic of Angola did not f%ht Sought African
aggression. According to him, “mercenaries’*
-meaning Cubans and nationals of other African
countries-fought on its behalf “under the leadership
of the Soviets’*. I categorically reject the racist, antiAfrican overtone.of that assertion. To him, the Angolan
resistance over five centuries means nothing; MPLA’s
armed struggle of more than 15 years means nothing:
In his racist, chauvinist vision he is incapable of
understanding that it was they, the Angolans, fighting
heroically and with determination, courage and selflessness, who won the independence of their country:
first against the Portuguese, later against the South
Africans. That African victory is precisely what gives
a singular historic dimension to the War in Angola. It
has shown that African combatants are capable of
confronting and defeating the racists. It has shattered
the myths propagated by the defenders of white
supremacy. It .has demonstrated that nothing and no
one can prevent -the -.complete liberation of Africa.
‘It has ‘proved that the African people can resist and
fight till final victory. To feign to ignore this or to try
to conceal the profound significance which the victory

of the People’s Republic of Angola has for all of Africa
is to make a futile, though no less contemptible,
effort to save the face of the racists and lessen the
magnitude of the defeat suffered by the aggressor
Pretoria troops at the. hands of the Africans. It is
tantamount to acting as public relations agents of the
worst enemies of Africa, and, even more absurdly,
to assume this shabby role at a time when the historic
confrontation between the peoples of Africa and their
racist oppressors is approaching its inevitable outcome.

that’in the centre of Johannesburg, in two hotels-the
Hotel Diplomat and the Hotel Sterling-in their
respective main-floor bars, the necessary contacts
can be made by anyone wishing to go and fight on
the side of those forces in Angola. Of course, the
publication goes back a bit in time, and it does not
seem that the same opportunities still exist for those
who wish to fight against the Angolan people.
61. The South African regime’s criminal aggression
is responsible for the death of thousands of Angolans,
for much material loss and serious damage to Angola’s
economy. That regime is also guilty of the plundering,
pillaging and depredations of sizable material resources
by its troops on Angolan soil.

59. I said that I would explain why the representative of China was so discreet about the foreign mercenaries who have sown death and destruction on
Angolan soil. The reason is very simple: here it is, in
these photographs and documents which I have
brought to the Council. These photographs were
found by FAPLA troops in the city of Carmona, which
was the centre of the activities of the band known
as FLNA, created and financed by the CIA. They
depict Chinese advisers who were acting together with
the bandits of the CIA. Also found in Carmona by
FAPLA was this document, which contains the records
of two meetings of the FLNA chiefs, in which one
can see their links and those of another secessionist
group with the South African troops.

62. The Security Council must condemn South
African aggression; it must demand that Pretoria put
an end immediately and unconditionally to that
aggression, that it withdraw all its troops from
Angolan territory and that it scrupulously respect the
independence, sovereignty and integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola. The false and cynical arguments
of the South African Government must be rejected
categorically. Pretoria has no right whatsoever to
impose conditions for the withdrawal of its troops
guilty of aggression; nor does it have any right to
occupy the Territory ,of Namibia or to speak on behalf
of its inhabitants, victims of the evil system of
apartheid. The South African Government must be
forced to return to Angola all the property stolen by
the aggressive troops and to compensate the Angolan
people for damage caused in the course of the
aggression.

60. Ambassador Huang Hua will probably be tempted
to reject this evidence, since it was captured by the
Angolan patriotic forces and presented by them to
public opinion. In that case, however, perhaps the
following bit of evidence will be more convincing to
him and to the members of the Council. I am referring
to a magazine published here in the United States
under the suggestive title of Soldier of Fortune-The
Journal of Professional Adventurers.
On the cover,
in full colour, as representatives can see, there is the
photograph of a mercenary operating on Angolan soil.
You can see the flames that are destroying something
which is hardly Soviet sophisticated weaponry, but
clearly the humble dwellings and crops of Angolan
peasants. Inside the magazine there is a report by a
South African newspaperman, written, according to
him, last summer, a few months before the declaration of Angola’s independence. It is accompanied by a
number of photographs, in which you can see grouped
together South Africans, Portuguese and Rhodesian
fascists, white mercenaries and Chinese advisers. They
have many different weapons, too, including South
African and Chinese weapons. Elsewhere in the
magazine, details are given on the procedures which
any aspiring mercenary must follow if he wishes to
join that macabre medley of aggressors. The magazine
lists addresses of recruitment offtces and the names
of recruitment officers. I think it would be of interest
to our African colleagues to note the scandalous fact
that in the United Nations host country one can freely
encounter publications of this type, in which, among
other things, we are told that one Neville Worthington,
P.Q. Box 2773, Pretoria, South Africa, is one contact
for the mobilization of mercenaries for the war in
Angola; and in which, on page, 29, we are informed

63. - The international community as a whole and the
United Nations in particular have a duty to come to
the assistance of the Angolan’people during the period
of national reconstruction which is about to begin.
The struggle of the Angolan people is an inseparable
part of the common undertaking of the peoples of
Africa, Asia and Latin America which are trying to
consolidate their independence and sovereignty. In
their quest for freedom, the Angolan people have made
many sacrifices and they are deserving of the firmest
broadest and most generous solidarity. To help the.
People’s Republic of Angola is, consequently, a duty
which cannot be shirked.
64. The Angolan people, in their struggle and in their
victory, have made an inestimable contribution to the
cause of the entire African continent and of all the
oppressed peoples of the world. Their generous blood
has opened up a new course to the final emancipation
of the country and given hope to millions of men and
women in southern Africa. Thanks to the heroic effort
of the Angolan people and to the firm solidarity of
the Soviet Union and all those peoples which have’
contributed to the triumph over the racists, the dawn
of freedom- now
to illuminate
with steady
---.. begins .-_-gleaming the future at those contending-a2&i%t colonialism and racism.
8

,. :,

*

65. Triumphant
over death, the powerful
and
inspiring words of Patrice Lumumba resound again:

‘,

,.

, : /

,

to express my wholehearted gratitude to all my colleagues and to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, with whom I had the honour and pleasure
of working closely in this most important body. I am
grateful to them for the spirit of sincere co-operation
they have demonstrated
towards us in our common
search for arrangements or solutions to the various
problems the Councilthas
examined during the past
year. We have learnt a great deal and benefited
enormously from our association with which such a
brilliant and talented company.

“The dawn has arrived, brother, the dawn! Look
at our faces.
A new morrow dawns in our old Africa.
Ours alone will be the land, the water, the mighty
rivers
Which the poor black surrendered for thousands
of years;
And the dazzling light of the sun will shine once
again for us,
Drying the tears in our eyes and the spittle on
our faces.
When you break your chains, the heavy fetters
The days of our suffering will be gone, never to
return.”

71. The Security Council has been meeting for several
days to examine the grave question of the aggression
of South Africa against the very young Republic of
Angola. The initiative for this meeting was taken, as
we know, by the group of African ambassadors
acciedited to the United Nations and acting on instructions of the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity following its meetings held from 23 to
29 February at Addis Ababa. The African countries,
which in spite of certain divisive manoeuvres happily
doomed to failure were unstinting in their support for
the Angolan people in their struggle to free themselves
from five centuries of one of the most repressive and
reactionary forms of colonialism,
could not remain
passive in the face of the fact that immediately
after
the acquisition
of its independence
Angola was
threatened in its very essence by South African aggression-particularly
since we are aware that the racist
minority in Pretoria has always striven to stem the
irresistible tide of independence
and democracy in
southern Africa, as if one could erect screens against
the wind of liberty.

66. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Cameroon. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
67. Mr. OYONO
(United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from French): I should like first of all
to express to you, Sir, my warmest and most fraternal
congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for March. The long-standing
bonds of friendship between Benin and Cameroon
derive their origin not only from geography and history
but also from their common passion for independence
and their common determination
to work together
for the total liberation of Africa and the strengthening
of African
unity.
Your wise, enlightened
and
militant leadership is a good augury for the success of
our work.

72. It is natural, therefore, in the face of this new
act of violence committed
by South Africa against
Angola at a decisive turning-point
in its destiny, that
the Security Council should rapidly examine this
matter, which, incidentally,
falls within the context of
a whole series of provocations, defiance and violations
of all kinds so characteristic of the Pretoria tigime both
towards the countries of the region and towards the
international
community as a whole.

68. I should also like to take this opportunity to bid
welcome to the new Permanent Representative
of the
United States, Mr. Scranton. We should like to extend
to him our best wishes for success in the performance
of his new task, a performance which already bears
the imprint
of a style to which we had become
unaccustomed.
69. It is a particular pleasure for me to convey my
most fraternal and cordial greetings to the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola. My country,
Cameroon,
supported
and assisted the Angolan
people in their struggle for independence.
We
welcomed the assumption of international
sovereignty
by the State of Angola with joy, and we recognized
it. I take pleasure in repeating here to that country
the wholehearted support of the Government
of the
United Republic of Cameroon in its noble task of
preserving, building and strengthening
the national
unity to which the People’s Republic of Angola is so
attached.

73. Certainly, after the Security Council had taken
cognizance of this matter, and before it actually
met, the racist minority tigime of Pretoria sent out
many communications.
It kept on invoking reasons of
all kinds, even social and humanitarian
reasons, to
justify the presence of its troops in Angola, finally
declaring its intention to withdraw them by 27 March.
74. Curiously, certain countries have been extremely
sensitive-not,
as we might have expected, to the
grave act of aggression constituted by the violation
of the territorial integrity of Angola, but rather to the
promise of withdrawal of the soldiers and South African
mercenaries from Angolan territory. As if this promise
of withdrawal, although it seems it is being translated
into fact-and
in any case, who could guarantee its
final and total nature, aware as we are of the sense of

70. I should also like to take this opportunity
of
addressing the Council for the first time; on the limited
basis of rule 37 of the provision&rules
of procedure;
9

manauvre of Vorster and his friends--could by itself
eliminate the whole juridical and political problem of
South African aggression against Angola.
75. For Cameroon the situation is clear. The illegal
presence of South African soldiers and mercenaries
in Angolan territory in the area of the Cunene is
an insult not only to the prestige of the State and the
dignity of.the Angolan people but also to the prestige
and dignity of the whole of Africa. This violation is
prejudicial to one of the essential objectives of sovereignty without which there can be no security for
either the Government or the people of Angola: firm
and recognized borders for its territory.
76. This grave violation of the sovereignty and tenitorial integrity of Angola dangerously increases
tension and the risks of a generalized conflict in the
region. No pretext, be it political, ideological or
allegedly humanitarian, can justify imposing on the
Angolan people the residual presence of the South
African troops with which Vorster, when the struggle
for power in Angola was at its most uncertain, sustained
a crushing defeat in his attempt to dismember that
fraternal country.
77. The Security Council must vigorously condemn
the flagrant act of aggression committed by South
Africa against Angola. It must also urgently call upon
South Africa genuinely and unreservedly to withdraw
its troops not only from Angolan territory, in order to
create an atmosphere favourable to the strengthening of
Angola’s efforts to consolidate its independence and
national unity, but also from Namibia, which the racist
minority in Pretoria has been using as a base for aggression and which it continues to occupy illegally in spite
of the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice3 and numerous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
78. With the victory of the Angolan people under the
leadership of the MPLA, South Africa and its friends
must understand more than ever that the myth of the
superiority of the white man,’ which is supposed to
justify his domination of the black man in southern
Africa, has finally been destroyed. It is belief in that
myth that has engendered the serious situation of
dangerous tension in southern Africa and which could
lead to a generalized crisis. Persistence in this unreasonable course of a policy of humiliation against tens
of millions of men, of plundering and systematic
repression, obviously can only lead to further violence
the outcome of which no one can predict. We cannot
but deplore this because, as the President of the United
Republic of Cameroon, His Excellency El Hadj
Ahmadou Ahidjo, stated in submitting to the General
Assembly, the Manifesto on southern Africa4-“We
do not... preach violence, but rather an end to all
violence, and more particularly an end the violence
done to human dignity by the oppressor’ .f Africa.“s
79. Therefore we solemnly appeal to all those who
through their political, economic and military support

encourage Mr. Vorster and his friends in their arrogance to take the opportunity offered to them today
resolutely to cross over into the camp of the true
champions of human dignity, which is trodden underfoot every day in southern Africa, so that they may
work for the establishment in that part of the world of
a genuinely just and democratic society.
80. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I invite the representative of India to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
81. Mr. JAIPAL (India): MY delegation is grateful to
the Council for granting it th& opp&tunity to express
its views on a question that is apparently of the
greatest importance to the African Member States
and understandably fills them with foreboding. The fact
that this question was brought before the Council by
the Chairman of the African Group has special
significance, and we wish to demonstrate our solidarity
with the African States in their constant vigilance
against the expansionist aims of the racist regime in
Pretoria.
82. On behalf of my country, I wish to welcome
the delegation from Angola led by Ambassador
Luvualu. We listened with much sympathy to his statement, and we are especially glad to hear of Angola’s
interest in joining the United Nations, of its respect
for the Charter and of its desire to establish relations
with all friendly States on a basis of sovereign equality.
We welcome also the statement of Angola in regard
to its positive attitude towards Namibia and its people.
83. The question before us is the act of aggression
committed by South Africa against the People’s
Republic of Angola. In point of time, and even
according to the Prime Minister of South Africa, this
act of aggression was first perpetrated on 9 August
1975, when Portugal was administering Angola. The
reason given by South Africa for entering Angola was
that it was forced to do so in order to protect workers
and to safeguard installations that provided certain
services to Namibia. A careful examination of this socalled reason for intervention shows that it was nothing
more than an excuse for expanding the territory under
the illegal occupation of South Africa.
84. The massive nature of its intervention, with its
regular army, tanks, guns and mortars, is proof enough
of the fact that it had been carefully planned well
in advance and was indeed a major military operation.
It was clearly not tantamount to the sending of policemen to guard installations and workers. On the
contrary, it was done without the knowledge of
Portugal and was obviously designed to take full
advantage of the fluid situation following the
Portuguese withdrawal from Angola. It was in fact
totally unrelated to the security of South Africa or the
protection of Namibia. There was never any, danger
either to South Africa or to Namibia or indeed to any
of the installations in Angola. It is no wonder, there-

fore, that the Portuguese Government protested to the
South African Government on three separate occasions
during August 1975.

Angola and to safeguard it against the expansionist
aims of South Africa.
90. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese): The role played by the Cuban authorities in
the naked aggression carried on by the Soviet Union
in Angola is known throughout the world. We are all
clear in our minds as to whom the Cuban representative, Mr. Alarcon de Quesada, serves in his distortion
of my statement and in his absurd and slanderous
charges and fabrications against China. They are not
worth anyone’s attention, nor are they worth refuting.

85. In retrospect it is clear now why South Africa
intervened. It was to push its illegal occupation further
into the newly independent State of Angola, to interfere
in its internal affairs and to divide the national liberation movement in order to frustrate the attainment of
Angolan independence. The racist character of the
South African Government gave its intervention a
malignant aspect whose repercussions were felt far and
wide and went beyond the African continent. There
was no doubt that this racist intervention had to be
stopped at all costs. Had it been allowed to succeed,
its consequences would have been intolerable to the
rest of Africa.

91. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of Cuba has asked to be allowed to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. 1 invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to address the
Council.

86. South African intervention was the original sin
-one that was totally inexcusable and is entirely
deserving of the Council’s condemnation. It is important for the Council to ensure that there is no
repetition of such intervention by South Africa either
in Angola or elsewhere in Africa.

92. Mr. ALARC6N (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I did not put any words into the mouth of
the Chinese representative that did not appear in his
statement last Friday [190&h meeting].
93. With regard to the accusations he repeated here,
as I said in my statement, and as everybody knows,
they coincide with the campaign which the imperialists
have been waging.

87. We have seen South African statements to the
effect that South Africa has withdrawn its forces from
Angola. These statements need to be verified; but
that withdrawal alone would not provide adequate
comfort to the people of Angola. South Africa was
responsible for taking away properties belonging to
Angola, for removing money from its banks and for
causing damage to its roads, bridges, airports, installations and so on. These losses must be made good,
and the persons who were taken away by force should
be returned to Angola. Unless the United Nations
takes steps to that end, South Africa will only be
emboldened to intervene elsewhere, with equally
disastrous consequences or worse.

94. I should like to introduce one more quotation
in this debate. It is not from our sources; it is from
a very well-known book that has made the rounds
throughout the world, Quotations
from Chairman
Mao Tse-tung. The author of the prologue recommends
to Chinese militants that they learn these quotations
by heart and try to implement them in practice.
I should like to read one of them from a work published
by Chairman Mao Tse-tung on 26 May 1939:
“I hold that for us it is bad if a person, a political
party, an army or a school is not attacked by the
enemy, because that means that it has sunk to the
level of the enemy. It is good if we are attacked by
the enemy, since it proves that we have drawn a
clear line of demarcation between the enemy and
ourselves. It is still better if the enemy attacks us
wildly and paints us as utterly black and without a
single virtue; it demonstrates that we have not only
drawn a clear line of demarcation between the
enemy and ourselves but achieved a great deal in
our work.”

88. The tragedy of Angola reminds me of the tragedy
of Africa itself at the turn of the century, when it was
open and free for all European countries to intervene
at will. We have come a long way since then along the
road to international law and order, but it is worth
remembering that the old memories are still very much
alive in the minds of many persons in Africa, and it is
necessary that the Council reassure them.
89. The presence of South Africa in Namibia is not
only illegal; it is also of the greatest menace to its
neighbours. There is even less justification for the
presence of the South African army in Namibia. The
Council should once more call upon South Africa to
vacate Namibia and to withdraw its armed forces
from Namibia. It is surely the Council’s duty to ensure
that the international Territory of Namibia is not used
by the racist Pretoria regime to pose a permanent
threat to Angola or to any other neighbouring State.
My delegation hopes that the Council will not be
deflected from the main purpose of the present discussion, which is to ensure the independence of

I trust that the delegation of China will find time to
study that.
95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
There are no more speakers for this meeting. Before
adjourning I should like to announce to the members
of the Council that I have received from’ the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia a
letter dated 29 March, the text of which reads as
follows:
11

.

-.

‘.

“The Security Council -is now considering the
complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act
of aggression committed by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola, a matter which deeply
affects Namibia.

invitation, in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, to the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and to the four members
of that Council whose names will be communicated
to us very soon.
It was so decided.

“I wish to convev to YOU the desire of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to participate in this
debate without right to vote and to be represented
by a delegation headed by its President and including
four additional
members of the Council whose
names will be communicated
to you shortly.”
96. The Council will recall that in the past it has
addressed invitations
to the representatives
of the
United Nations Council for Namibia when the situation
in Namibia was being considered. In view of the fact
that the debate now relates to a matter which profoundly affects Namibia,
I would suggest that in
accordance with past practice the Council address an

The meeting

rose at 6.25 p.m.
Notes

1 A/31/49 and Corr.1, annex, p. 5.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 2414th meeting.
‘Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.
4 OfJiial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.
s Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1780th meeting,
par?. 18.

12

~..

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United
,,.. Nations.
--.- Sales Section, New York or Gene?&
.
..
, .“. _-. ,_ . .i
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LEs PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les tibrairies et les agences d&ositaires du
monde entier. Informer-vous auprh de votre librai= ou adresservous in : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Genti.
KAK

HOJlYPWTb

H3~AIiEiSl

OPl-AHM

3AUHH

OE’bEAETHEHHhIX

HAURA

mxamn
0ptGu3aqnn
~(lae&tuHeWibxx HauxR noaa~o icynsmb a xnnxcxb~x
xarasnsiax n arenTcmax no ecex paftoxax rapa. HaBOnHTe
cnpaBxn 06 mnaxnfm B
eamex xc~nxut0~ xarfmuxe sum nmume no anpecy: Opramisamfn OCbexxxexxbIx
HasxR,

Cexum

no npoaaxce

H3~amiR,

COMO CONSEGUIR PURLICACIONES

Rbw-Plopx

xnx

Sexesa.

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es& en vtnta en librerias y casas distribuidotas en
todas panes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York __ __..

00300

83-6086 1-Au~st

1984-2.200
