TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 8 DECEMBER 1971

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1609) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . , . . . . . . , . , , . . . .
Admission of new Members:
(a) Letter dated 2 December 1971 from the President of the United Arab
Emirates to the Secretary-General (S/10420);
(6) Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members (S/l 0430) . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
fu) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
f’b) Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add. 1 and 2);
(cl Interim report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10408) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . q . . . . .

6

S/PV. 1609

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President:

Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone).

8 December

1971, at 3 p.m.

2. The report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members had been submitted to the Council in document
S/10430. In its report the Committee recommends that the
Council should have recourse to the provisions of the last
paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure
and that it should adopt a draft resolution recommending
to the General Assembly that the United Arab Emirates be
admitted to membership of the United Nations.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

3. As no member of the Council wishes to speak at this
stage, ‘I shall put the draft resolution recommended in
paragraph 4 of the Committee’s report to the vote.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 609)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

A vote wastaken by showof hands.

2. Admission of new Members:
(a) Letter dated 2 December 1971 from the President
of the United Arab Emirates to the Secretary
General (S/10420);
(b) Report of the Cbmmittee on the Admission of New
Members (S/10430).

The dra-ft resolutionwasadopted unanimously.

4. Mr. JOUEJATI

(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation

from French): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic

wishes to take this opportunity, when the Council has just
taken a decision on the request for admission of the United
Arab Emirates, to congratulate this brother Arab State for
having been able to form itself into an independent and
sovereign State. The union of patriots of that r&on, their
determination to overcome the barriers and artificial fron.
tiers that had separated them from each other and scattered
their ranks, their resolution to exploit their own natural
resources and to devote them to serving the well-being of all
their citizens and the development of all localities, and the
support they are receiving from their brother Arab coup
tries-all these are outstanding features of a political, social
and cultural renascence which is an excellent augury for the
future of the region.

3. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia :
Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10396);
Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
(1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2);
Interim report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
{1968) (S/10408).

5. The new State will have to make creative efforts and
show particular diplomatic capability in order to surmount
the various difficulties inherited from the long era of
dependency. Furthermore, this new State is faced with the
bouriden duty of training, as soon as possible, its own
national technical experts who will make it possible for
them not only to ensure a better utilization of their wealth,
but also to guarantee that they exercise genuine sovereignty
over their resources. This, as a matter of fact, is one of the
main ways-and perhaps the most important way-of
avoiding the effects of any foreign interference or covetousness, should it exist. Its affiliation to the league of Arab
Statei- also makes it possible for it to reinforce its
personality and consolidate its independence, while at the
same time conferring upon it an important and beneficial
role to play.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Adniission of new Members:
(a) Letter dated 2 December 1971 from the President of
the United Arab Emirates to the Secretary-General
(S/l 0420);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Admissionof New
Members (S/1043!)
1. The PRESIDENT: At its 1608th meeting, on 6 December, the Security Council referred the application of the

United

MEETING

Arab Emirates for membership of the United

Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report in accordance with

6. We are full of hope that the union of Arab Emirates,
thanks to the new awareness of its sons and their faith in

rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure.
1

Emirates. We are entirely confident that the United Arab
Emirates is a peace-loving State, able and willing to carry
out the obligations incumbent upon Member States under
the Charter.

social justice and progress, will successfully discharge its
tasks to its own credit.
7. To the people of the United Arab Emirates, to its
Government and, in particular, to its President, Zaid bin
Sultan Al Nahayyan, we offer our best wishes. It is also a
pleasure for us to welcome its special representative, the
Minister of State, Mr. Adnan Pachachi, our friendly and
dynamic colleague whose contribution here in the United
Nations and in serving its causeis indeed unequalled.

16. We are also confident that this emerging nation ln the
Gulf area, which in this century has achieved a rapid and
miraculous degree of economic and social progress, will
participate as fully as possible in the collective efforts of
the United Nations to create a peaceful and prosperous
world and that it will play a constructive and significant
role to that end,

8. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): My delegation can only commend the request for
admission submitted by the United Arab Emirates. This
request showsthe attraction our Organization has for newly
independent States and at the same time reaffirms the
universality of this Organization.

17. Our delegation is most happy to support the entry of
the United Arab Emirates into the United Nations,
18. Japan announced its formal recognition of the United
Arab Emirates on 3 December. We have very friendly
relations with the Emirates comprising the new State, and
trade and other economic relations are also growing,

9. We welcomed with equal satisfaction the favourable
report of the Committee on admissions on its candidacy
and the adoption of the resolution in which the Security
Council recommends to the General Assembly the admission of the new State as a member of our Organization.

19. We recall with great pleasure that His Highness Crown
Prince Khalifa of Abu Dhabi visited Japan last year on the
occasion of the Emirate’s participation in the World
Exposition at Osaka. The Government and people of Japan
look forward to increasingly,close and friendly relations,
both within and outside the United Nations, with the
Government and people of the United Arab Emirates.

10. My delegation voted in favour of that recommendation because we are convinced that the Urrted Arab
Emirates will, as it has undertaken to do, discharge its
obligations as a Member of the United Nations.
11. The circumstances surrounding the birth of the new
State can only reassure us concerning its devotion to the
purposes and principles of the Charter. The six Emirates of
the Persian Gulf have chosen to accede to independence by
peaceful means and to share a common destiny by forming
themselves into a federation. The desire that they have
shown since they have become independent to enter into
the family of nations is another earnest that they will not
disappoint the expectations of the international community.

20. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): My delegation
was glad to vote in favour of the draft resolution which the
Security Council has just adopted, recommending to the
General Assembly that the United Arab Emirates be
admitted as a Member of the United Nations. As in the case
of Bahrain, Qatar and Oman, my delegation was parficW
larly happy at the decision of the Council in view of the
long history of friendship between the British Government
and these States.
21. It was with the individual member States of tha!
Union that Britain concluded, as long ago as 1820, the first
of the treaties which eventually governed our relationship
with all the Arab Emirates-or sheikdoms asthey used to be
known-of the Gulf, and which enabled them to evolve in
stability and prosperity, and also independence, over IS0
years. Nowhere has this evolution been more remarkable
than in the States which comprise the United Arab
Emirates.

12. With the entry of the United Arab Emirates into our
Organization, the group of Arab countries will be honoured
with a new member which is part, like themselves, of the
Islamic civilization and sharesthe same ideals.
13, In the name of my Government, I should like to wish
the new State a peaceful and prosperous future and to tell
it how pleased we shall be to see it soon seated among us
and finally to assure it that our country will give great
attention to the problems which affect its interests.

22. Ten years ago, outside the flourishing trading port of
Dubai, they were largely dependent for economic and social
development upon foreign assistance provided by the
United Kingdom and, in generous measure, by their sister
State of Kuwait. Today, thanks to oil discovery and
development, principally in the State of Abu Dhabi, Wbe
ruler She&h Zaid bin Sultan has been elected President of
the new Union, there is spectacular evidence of economic
and social progress in which all six States have shared, and
it now has perhaps the highest per capita income in the
world.

14. In conclusion, it remains for me only to pay a tribute
to the United Kingdom, which, through its enlightened
policies, has to a large extent contributed to bringing the
United Arab Emirates to the full sovereignty which they
enjoy today.
15. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): The unanimous adoption
of the resolution recommending to the General Assembly
that the United Arab Emirates be admitted to membership
of the United Nations is a most auspicious event, and on
behalf of the Japanese delegation, I am very happy to
express our warmest feelings of sincere congratulation to
the Government and the people of the United Arab

23. The termination of those treaties last week, when the
union of Arab Emirates was formally established, to he
followed later this month by the withdrawal of the last
2

1.
f

!

British forces from the Gulf, marks the end of the old era
and the beginning of a new. As far as Britain is concerned
we have signed with the new State a Treaty of friendship, as
we did early this year with Bahrain and Qatar, and we look
forward to a continuation, on a basis of equality, cooperation and mutual respect, of the close ties of friendship
which we have always enjoyed.
24. At the same time we are glad to see the new State
about to take its place as an equal member of the
international community. We extend to the President and
the people of the United Arab Emirates a cordial welcome
and good wishes for the future.

32. The fact that the situation of dependence has been
ended in accordance with a well-ordered process, and the
accession to international existence of the United Arab
Emirates is a source of particular satisfaction to my
Government. Thus the eighteenth member is joining the
family of Arab States. And as we did in the case of Qatar,
Bahrain and Oman, my delegation would like to tender
them our warmest congratulations. The links of friendship
which united all Arab States to Argentina are well known.
We hope, therefore, that with the admission of this new
Member State-we have voted in favour of recommending
this admission to the General Assembly-Argentina will
have an opportunity, through its delegation at the United
Nations, to maintain very friendly and co-operative rclations with this new State. We should like to welcome it and
to express our good wishes for the prosper@ of this new,
friendly St ate.

25. Mr. KUIj!AGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
The Polish delegation itself supported the unanimous
decision taken by this Council to recommend to the
General Assembly that the United Arab Emirates be
admitted to the United Nations.
26. Today we should, therefore, like to welcome a new
State which shortly will become a fully fledged Member of
the United Nations. We are very gratified to be able to do
SO. We have always supported the right of peoples under
colonial domination to self-determination and to independence. We are pleased when that right finds concrete
expression, as in the case on which we have just taken a
decision, that of the United Arab Emirates, We resolutely
support those who continue to struggle to ensure their
freedom and independence from colonialism. We are not
unmindful of the difficulties faced by new States in
overcoming the effects of colonialism and neocolonialism;
and we also support them in this process.

33. I should like, with your permission Mr.President, to
conclude on a personal note. I should like to welcome the
presence among us of my very old and respected friend,
Ambassador Pachacm. When I see him I cannot fail to recall
the work that we did together 11 years ago in the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly. At that time he
showed clearly how skilful he was as an Arab representative, and today as a Minister of an Arab State he has shown
how he has been able to help to emerge these six Emirates
into a single union and to secure the admission of his union
to the United Nations. I should like to congratulate him on
this and at the same time extend heartfelt salutations.

27. We have taken note of the fact that the agreements
concluded on 1 December 1971 between the Emirates and
the United Kingdom put an end to the relations which
previously existed between the Emirates and the United
Kingdom
pursuant to the special Treaty and to the
promulgation
of the Constitution of the United Arab
Emirates.

34. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from French): My delegation, which in the course of recent
months has had the satisfaction of welcoming three new
States from the Gulf region, can today only express its
gratification at seeing the culmination, as it were, of the
representation within our Organization of that region of the
world. Convinced as we are that the new union of Emirates
is capable of fulfilling the obligations deriving from the
Charter and that it is sincerely prepared to do so, we are
particularly pleased at the recommendation which has just
been adopted. We are quite certain that the General
Assembly will take the hoped-for decision and will soon
make it possible for this new Arab State to be seated
among us.

28. We have also noted the declaration in which the
President of the United Arab’Emirates accepts, on behalf of
the Emirates, the obligations contained in .the Charter of
the United Nations and solemnly pledges to fulfil them.
29. It only remains for me to fulfil the pleasant duty of
expressing our conviction that the United Arab Emirates
will contribute to the efforts of the United Nations to
achieve its goals, that is, to preserveinternational peace and
security, especially in their own region, and to bring about
the most fruitful co-operation possible among nations. We
also hope that the Emirates will be successful in the
economic and social development of their new State.

35. I should not like to fail to take this opportunity of
welcoming its representative, Mr. Pachachi who, as Ambassador Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina has just recalled, is well
known in this Organization and is an old friend of ours. He
has come here again to give us further proof of his long and
fruitful experience.

30. As representative of Poland, once again I should like
to welcome the United Arab Emirates and to, assure them
of our desire to maintain the best relations of friendship
and co-operation with them.
31. Mr.

DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
It is with profound satisfaction that my
delegation has taken note of the letter of 2 December 1971,

from

signed by the President of the United Arab Emirates, Zaid
bin Sultan Al Nahayyan, in which he states that in
accordance with the agreements concluded between his
Government and the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, pursuant to which
Abu Dhabi, Sharjah, Umm Al Quwain, Ajman and Fujairah,
united under the name of the United Arab Emirates, has
acceded to independent life and become part of the
international community as a sovereign State.

ORTIZ

36. For the country which I represent and although
long-standing ties link us with the Gulf region, the very

Spanish):

3

,

names of the Emirates which today make up the union still
have the same fascination. They evoke the image of a
mysterious Orient, where the sands of the Arab peninsula
merge on the shimmering horizon with the limpid watersof
the Gulf. Weknow that this idea which we have of that part
of the world, faithful to its traditions and attached as it is
to its own spiritual values, is still true, although today those
sands and those waters are bristling with metallic towers
which show the riches which were hidden under the austere
surface of the earth and in the depths of the sea. Its
resources promise to lend themselves to the sort of
exploitation and development we are prepared to collaborate in and which, as has been already accomplished in
neighbouring States, will help to improve living conditions
and the social welfare of the population.

42. We are also confident that the United Arab Emirates
make a significant contribution to the stability and
progress of the entire Gulf area.

will

43. For those reasons the United States Government
WEUIdY
SUppOJFts
the application of the United Arab
Emirates for membership of the United Nations.
44. Mr. VINCI (Italy): My delegation supported wholeheartedly the resolution just adopted which recommends
the admission of the United Arab Emirates to the United
Nations. A new Arab Member is going to join in our
Organization and we draw particular satisfaction from the
event for several reasons.
45. The first is that we see in this admission a further
significant step towards the achievement of universality,
which my country has consistently fostered for a long time.
We are convinced, in fact, that the fulfilment of this
principle may enable this forum to offer greater opportunities for improved relations and closer peaceful cooperation among nations.

37. In this connexion we should like to express our
pleasure that the accession to independence of the six
Emirates of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Umm Al Quwain,
Ajman and Fujairah has terminated the agreement which
previously bound them to the United Kingdom and has led
to their federation. We consider this a very wise decision on
the part of their leaders, who correctly gauged the need to
unite their efforts in order to establish a State which would
be capable of assuming its responsibilities, both internally
and internationally.

46. A second reason is that we believe that membership of
this Organization will help the federation of the six
Emirates to come into the mainstream of international life.
The new Member will thus be more closely associated with
the other 17 sister Arab States, in the centre of the
international community. It will contribute to its activity as
well as to the renaissance of the Arab world.

38. At a time when the United Arab Emirates is preparing
to become the 132nd Member of this Organization, we
should like to express to this State, its President, its
Government and its people the very sincere wishes for
peace, prosperity and progress. We are convinced that the
wisdom which has been displayed by its leaders in uniting
shows that they desire to maintain all the significance of
the old name of “Trucial States”.

47. Finally, the admission of the six Emirates as a
federation is proof of the far-seeing and successful efforts
of their leaders to prevent a political fragmentation of the
region which would have been disastrous for the progress
and the peace and security of their proples. I wish to
convey to the federation my Government’s desire to seethe
United Arab Emirates progress steadily in unity in all fields
and to see our relations with them flourish. To this effect
the new State could not have made a better choice than to
entrust its first contact with the world Organization and
with Member States to a statesman of the calibre of
Minister Adnan Pachachi, who is well known in my countrY
as well as in these circles, in which he gained the
confidence, the respect, the esteem and the affection of so
many of his former colleagues. That is why I associate
myself with those who have expressed esteem and friendship for Minister Pachachi.

39. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): The United
States Government was pleased to support the proposal
that the Government of the United Arab Emirates become
the 132nd Member of the United Nations, as a single entity
representing several component members. Furthermore we
heartily congratulate those member States of the union on
their co-operation with the United Kingdom and with each
other which led to the termination of the former Treaty
relationship and culminated in their achievement of full
independence on 2 December 1971, My Government formally recognized the United Arab Emirates on 3 December.
40. Although the United Arab Emirates is itself a new
entity, its member States are one people, some 200,000
strong, bound by long-standing ties of friendship and
co-operation. In recent years its member States have made
remarkable progress towards building a modern administrative structure and in co-operating with each other and with
neighbouring countries.

(translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation supported

41. The United Arab Emirates comes before the United
Nations as a State qualified in terms of population,
‘resources and policy to play a useful contributing role in
the deliberations of this body. It has also given firm
evidence of its support for the principles of the United
Nations Charter and has pledged to be a constructive and
co-operative Member of the United Nations.

the proposal for the admission to the United Nations of the
new State, the United Arab Emirates. The founding oft1G-s
State and its admission to the United Nations is yet another
step forward in the historic process of the liberation of the
peoples of the Arab peninsula from their colonial past,The
Government of the Soviet Union has always given andwill
continue to give the broadest and the most comprehensive
assistance to colonial countries and peoples in their stn@e

48. My Government is confident that the federation will
contributk positively to the work of the United Nations, We
look forward to co-operating with its delegation in all
bodies of the United Nations.
49. ‘Mr. ISSRAELYAN

4

(Union Soviet Socialist Republics)

for independence, and to young countries which have
received their independence in their struggle for the
strengthening of their sovereignty and the development of
an independent national economy. This position of principle of the Soviet- Union has frequently aided the peoples
of many countries, including the Arab States, to stand firm
and not to yield to the pressure put upon them by
imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism.
50. This policy of the Soviet Union is a firm basis for the
establishment, development and consolidation of friendly
relations between the Soviet Union and other States.
51. In connexion with the declaration of the independence of the United Arab Emirates, the President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of the Soviet
Socialist Republics, Mr. Podgorny, on 8 December this
year, sent the following message to the President of the
United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Zaid bin Sultan Al
Nahayyan :
“Your Highness, please accept our sincere congratulations on the occasion of the declaration of the independence of the State of the United Arab Emirates and our
good wishes for the well-being and progress of the people
of the United Arab Emirates on the path of independent
development. The Soviet Union, whose policy is unchangingly based on the principles of equality and the
self-determination
of peoples and which supports the
development of friendship and business-like co-operation
between all countries, hereby declares its recognition of
the State of the United Arab Emirates as an independent
and sovereign State and expresses its willingness to
establish diplomatic relations with it and to exchange
ambassadors.
52. Mr. LANG (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation was pleased to support the admission of the
United Arab Emirates to membership of the United
Nations. We would like to congratulate that country on its
presence in this the most important world Organization. We
have no doubt that in future this area will offer its best and
most effective contribution to advance the interests of
world peace and cooperation.
53. Mr. MAGENGE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
French/: The delegation of the Republic of Burundi voted
with the greatest pleasure in .favour of the admission of the
new State. By our positive vote we wanted to testify to our
devotion to the principle of the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples, as recommended by the
General Assembly in its resolution 1514 (XV). Apart from
the fact that that principle is endorsed specifically in a
written provision of the resolution, freedom and independence are the inherent natural rights of all men. Those are
the reasons that led us to cast a favourable vote and to
support the application for admission to membership of the
United Nations of the United Arab Emirates.
54. May I be permitted, through that delegation, to
convey my Government’s most sincere congratulations to
the Government ‘of the United Arab Emirates. The congratulations that we are addressing to the first President of
that united State are extended also to the United Kingdom

Government, which has just made a generous gesture by
granting independence to one of its many colonies. The
United Kingdom still has a great deal to do in the field of
decolonization, but my delegation would be remiss in its
duty if it did not congratulate that country for the work it
has already accomplished.
55. On 2 December the six Emirates came into being as a
single State, in accordance with the principle of unity and
also with the principle of co-operation with the former
metropolitan country, the United Kingdom, with which the
federation signed a Treaty of friendship on 7 December of
this same year. Those two acts-the unification of the six
Emirates and the signing of the Treaty with the United
Kingdom viewed from this angle-are the first signals that
the new State has got off to a good start, and augur well for
its success, for the trend towards co.operation is the
manifest concern of the decolonized countries and of those
which are in the process of decolonization. That is why my
delegation often wonders with astonishment why the
colonial Powers and the apologists for apartheid still doubt
the universal desire to try to forget the causeswhich divide
men in order to embrace the ideals which unite US.
56. Mr. CHEN (China) (translated from Chinese): With
regard to the application of the United Arab Emirates for
admission to membership of the United Nations, during the
Committee meeting held on 7 December I stated clearly the
position of the Chinese delegation, which is as follows.

57. The Chinese delegation agrees to the admission of the
United Arab Emirates to membership of the United
Nations. However, we are informed that there exist some
differences among certain Arab States in this connexion.
The People’s Republic of China enjoys friendly relations
with many Arab States, and it is our fervent hope that they
will proceed with consultations and negotiations among
themselves in order to reach an agreement on this question,
because that would be in the interest of the solidarity of
the Arab States and in the interest also of the struggle of
the Arab .peoples against imperialism, colonialism and
neocolonialism.
58. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The endorsement by this
Council of the application of the United Arab Emirates to
join this Organization concludes an exciting phase in the
life of the Arab peninsula and in the political development
of the many States which compose that important and
strategic area of the world. When the General Assembly
gives its stamp of approval in the next few days the voices
of all the representatives of the Gulf States for the first
time will be adequately heard in this Organization. I am
sure that together they will make an excellent and
constructive contribution to the ideals and objectives which
we have set ourselves.
59. Of course my country, Somalia, has always valued its
long historical and cultural relationship with the people of
the Gulf States. Many Somalis have lived and worked in
that region and many intrepid merchants from the Gulf
have throughout the centuries sailed to our ports, bringing
their wares and, what is more important, associating our
people with their rich cultural heritage.

60. The United Arab Emirates will begin their role in the
life of the international community with two very important assets. The first is political unity which has been
manifested by the success of the rulers and the representatives of these six Emirates in forming a federation which
will enable them to speak with one voice on all matters
affecting their external relations. In this respect my
delegation is pleased to convey to Sheikh Zaid bin Sultan
Al Nahayyan, the first President of the federation, our
sincere and brotherly wishes for the progress and the unity
of the people. The second important asset, which will
certainly help the new State to ride out the stormy
international seas, is the great natural wealth which it
possesses and the natural tolerance and abilities of its
people.
61. My delegation is confident that in the challenging
years ahead during the stage of nation-building the new
Government will utilize these assets to the maximum so
that it can build for its people a State in which all of its
inhabitants can find true self-fulfdment and happiness.

Questionconcerningthe situation in SouthernRhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent
Representativeof the United Kingdom of Great Br$ain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Presidentof the Security Council (S/l 0396);
(b) Fourth report of the Committee establishedin pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
(S/l0229 and Add.1 and 2);”
(cl Interim report of the Committee establishedin pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
(S/10408)
68. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw attention to the fact
that an interim report of the Committee establishedin
pursuanceof Security Council resolution 253 (1968) was
submitted to the Council on 3 December1971in document
S/10408 and has been included in the agendafor this
meeting.

69. In accordancewith the decisiontaken previously by
the Council I invite the representativesof SaudiArabia, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Zambiaand Ghanato
participate without the right to vote in the discussionof the
presentitem.

62. The PRESIDENT: I should now like to make a
statement as the representative of SIERRA LEONE.

In view of the limited number’of seatsavailableat the
Council table, I invite the representativesto take the places
reservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamberon the
understandingthey they will be invited to the Council table
whenevercalledupon to speak.

63. I would now wish, on behalf of my Government, to
congratulate the United Arab Emirates on the unanimous
adoption of the draft resolution recommending to the
General Assembly that the new State be admitted to
membership of the United Nations.

70.

64. Our rich and rewarding relations with our Arab friends
and neighbours of both Africa and the Middle Fast are
important considerations in the execution of our country’s
foreign policy. The United Arab Emirates has fulfilled all
requirements for admission to the United Nations and
applied for membership under the conditions stipulated in
the Charter. My delegation supports this recommendation
in the sure expectation that a State of some 40,000 square
miles and about 300,000 persons, endowed with tremendous natural resources and significant human potential, will
be accorded an opportunity to participate actively in the
activities of the United nations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroo&
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. A. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. J. Odero-Jowi (Kenya), Mr. V. Mwaanga(Znmbia) and Mr. R. Akwei (Ghana) took the placesreservedfor
them in the Councilchamber.
71. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I have no statementto make
to the Council today, but I shouldlike to inquire, in order
that progresscan be made on this question of Southern
Rhodesia,whether the delegationof the United Kingdom is
in a position to provide alrswersto the many questionsthat
wel’e raisedat the last two meetingsof the Council on the
questionof Southern Rhodesia.

65. May I also take this opportunity to welcome in our
midst the special envoy of the President of the new
sovereign State, Mr. Adnan Pachachi, who is no stranger to
many of the members of the Council?

72. I shouldalsolike to inquire whether other membersof
the Council now feel in a position to let the Council have
the benefit of their views so that the Council can proceed
to formulate a draft resolution necessaryto deal with the
question.

66. The Government and the people of Sierra Leone look
forward to very friendIy relations with the Government and
the people of this union for many years to come.

73. Mr. CHEN (China)(translatedfrom Chinese):I should
like to make a statement on the question of Southern
Rhodesia.

67. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I should like to say
that in accordance with the second paragraph of rule 60 of
the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council I
shall immediately request the Secretary-General to transmit
to the General Assembly the text of the resolution just
adopted, together with the verbatim record of this meeting.
At the same time I shall draw attention to the Council’s
decision to make this recommendation subject to the
expiration of the time-limit set forth in the fourth
paragraph of rule 60,

74. The essenceof the question of Southern Rhodesiais
the Zimbabwe people’sstruggle againstforeign colonialist
rule and for national independence.On 11 November1965
the colonialist authorities of Southern Rhodesia,with the
connivanceand the support of imperialism,colonialismand
neocolonialism, and in defiance of the firm oppositionof
* Subsequently
issued
asOfj%ial Records of tileSenrrityCOUSCil~
Twenty-sixth Year, Special SupplernentNos. 2 and 2A.
6

the people.of Zimbabwe and the rest of Africa, flagrantly
declared the so-called independence of Southern Rhodesia.

assisting the colonialists and neo-colonialists in carrying out
aggression, suppression and plunder against the independent
African countries and peoples. The only solution to the
question of Southern Rhodesia is the realization of the
national independence of the Zimbabwe people.

75. Since then, the colonialist authorities of Southern
Rhodesia have become even more unbridled in enforcing
their fascist rule of the South African type over the people
of Zimbabwe and have intensified their suppression of the
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for national independence. Furthermore, the colonialist authorities of Southern
Rhodesia have stepped up their military, political and
economic collusion with South African and Portuguese
colonialists in carrying out threats and plotting various
schemes of subversion and aggression against African
countries, thus posing a grave menace to the independent
African States and peoples.

80. The Chinese Government and people totally reject this
fraud devised by the British Government and the colonialist
authorities of Southern Rhodesia, and firmly support the
Zimbabwe people and other African countries and peoples
in their just struggle against the colonialist rule in Southern
Rhodesia and for national independence. The Zimbabwe
people is a great and staunch people. Its struggle against
colonialist rule will surely win the support of all the
countries and peoples in the world that love peace and
uphold justice.

76. The British Government should be held responsible for
the question of Southern Rhodesia. The British Government has all along obstinately rejected the demand of the
Zimbabwe people for independence on the racist pretext
that the people of Zimbabwe have not undergone the
‘Yraining for self-government”. Furthermore, the British
Government has collaborated with the Ian Smith colonialist
authorities in contriving behind the backs of the people of
Zimbabwe and the rest of Africa a so-called proposal for
the settlement of the question of Southern Rhodesia, which
they attempt to impose on the people of Zimbabwe.
Flaunting the signboard of “majority rule by the Africans”,
this proposal is in fact a big fraud.

81. We are deeply convinced that the Zimbabwe people,
strengthening their national unity and persevering in a
protracted struggle, will surely overthrow the colonialists
rule and win national independence and freedom.
82. The PRESIDENT: After the statement I shall now
make as the representative of Sierra Leone, the representative of the United Kingdom may wish to answer some or all
of the questions raised by the representative of Somalia on
the item we are now discussing.
83. Speaking now as the representative of SIERRA
LEONE, I should like to say a few words on behalf of my
delegation.

77. As a result of the prolonged brutal rule and plunder by
the foreign colonialists, the people of Zimbabwe are poor
and backward economically. The experience of Afro-Asian
countries proves that without political independence it is
impossible to achieve independence in the economic field.
AS long as colonialist rule and plunder exist, development
of the national economy is impossible.

84. My delegation listened very attentively to the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom on 25
November [I602nd meeting] in which he outlined the
proposals for a settlement 1 reached between Sir Alec
Douglas-Home and the rebel leader Mr. Ian Smith. The
proposals constitute an attempt by the British Government
to break the deadlock which has existed for six years, but
leave very much to be desired and also leave unanswereda
number of vital questions which have been at the centre of
the Rbodesian problem.

78. In these circumstances, how many people in Zimbabwe can possibly meet the economic and educational
qualifications as stipulated in the “proposal”? How can
one expect the people of Zimbabwe, who are being
oppressed and plundered, to reach the same level as the
colonialists in the economic field? This is indeed a
mockery of common sense. Therefore the “majority rule by
the Africans” referred to in the proposal is but a mirage
which can never be realized. Small wonder that Ian Smith
should say with certainty after the publication of this
proposal that “no European need harbour any anxiety
about the security of his future in Rhodesia”.

85. When the Smith regime unilaterally declared Rhodesia
independent on 11 November 1965, the Security Council
was convened the following day on the request of the then
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. Among
the points made by the then Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. Michael Stewart, were
the following:
“A group of persons who were until recently the
Government of Southern Rhodesia have purported to
make a declaration that Southern Rhodesia is independent of Britain, The British Government regards this as
illegal and invalid since only the British Parliament has
the right and authority to accord independence to
Southern Rhodesia. This illegal act has been performed in
the hope and with the intention of establishing a form of
Government which would ensure that power to control
the future of Southern Rhodesia remains in the hands of

73. Then what, after all, is the proposal aimed at? After
the Southern Rhodesian colonialist authorities have revised
the Constitution in accordance with this proposal, which
cannot possibly be realized, Britain will “confer independence on Rhodesia as a republic” and “will also terminate
its economic and other sanctions”. That is the essenceof
the question. In other words, it is aimed at legahzing the
fascist and ra.cist rule over the Zimbabwe people by the Ian
Smith colonialists, and openly cancelling the the “sanctions” against the colonialist authorities of Southern
Rhodesia by the British, the United States an.d other
colonialists, old and new. In this way Southern Rhodesia
will be made into another South Africa-a hatchetman

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971,
document S/10405.

7

’

!

’

I

a white minority comprising only one twentieth of the
population.“2

The main points of the proposal may be summar&~
follows.

The Secretary of State went on to say,

91. First, a complicated new voting system will be set up
to allow eventual parity between European and African
members in the Rhodesian House of Assembly. At ihe
point of parity each of the two main races will have ,20
seats.

“Now that this illegal declaration has been made, the
only lawful Government of Southern Rhodesia is the
Government of the United Kingdom. That Government,
however, has no physical presence in Rhodesia, and in
Southern Rhodesia there is therefore now no rule of law.
It is, clearly and unmistakably, a British responsibility to
reestablish the rule of law in Southern Rhodesia so that
in due time that country may enjoy not the mere name of
independence but the full substance of freedom for all its
peoples ,“s

92. Secondly, once parity has been achieved provision
made for the creation of 10 additional seats to be electea3
on a common roll of European voters and qualified African
voters. If adopted, it is argued, this would open the way for
a potential and ultimate majority of 10 African seats.
93. Thirdly, it provides for a declaration of rights whi&
would be justiciable.

86. When, in 1969, the Smith regime held a so-called
referendum and adopted the Whaley Constitution, which
sealed the fate of the 5 million blacks in the country, and
then proclaimed itself a republic in March 1970, Her
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Commonwealth and Foreign Affairs, who again was Mr. Michael Stewart, put it
succinctly in a speech in the House of Commons when he
said, “Rhodesia’s self-declared republican status is as illegal
as its unilateral declaration of independence in 1965 .”

94. Fourthly, a commission is to be set up to look inzo
racial discrimination. It will have an advisory role, and the
Land Tenure Act will remain unchanged.
95. Finally, the United Kingdom will provide a &50-m%
lion aid programme to be spread over a period of 10 yean
“‘to be matched appropriately by sums provided by
Rhodesia” and to be used for African educational and
economic advance.

87. Yet in spite of these declarations we see in the
proposals of the British Government, as outlined by Sir
Colin Crowe on Thursday, 25 November, that in the
negotiations culminating in the proposed constitutional
arrangements the illegal and iniquitous Constitution of
1969, which the British themselves have denounced,
formed the basis for discussion. By revolving the discussions
around the 1969 Constitution and declaring that the
Constitution of Rhodesia will be that adopted in Rhodesia
in 1969 as modified by the present arrangements, the
British Government clearly gave recognition to the present
illegal constitutional state of affairs in Rhodesia.

96. Under the existing Rhodesian Constitution, whi&
according to the United Kingdom representative, will now
be amended, provision is made for parity between Euro
peans and Africans on the basis of African contributions lo
income tax. Since the Africans were estimated to cantrib
ute only 1 per cent, it was calculated that on that b
parity could not be achieved for ‘100 years. Majority ruBe!
was completely ruled out because it was impossible to
achieve. In the existing House of Assembly, there are SO
European and 16 African members. Of the 16 Africans, 8
are directly elected and the other 8 are indirecffy elected by
electoral colleges consisting of chiefs, headmen and towncillors.

88. My delegation unreservedly submits that any negotiation with the Smith regime should have taken asits base the
1961 Constitution, whichis the only 1egaIConstitution in
Rhodesia and which offered greater scope for progress
compared with that of 1969.

97. The new proposals remove the income-tax qualific3te
tion and substitute one based on a permutation of
property, income and educational qualifications. A ne%’
roll-the “higher African roll”-is to be added to the
already existing European and African rolls. It will permjf
Africans with the same property, income or educatiod
qualifications as Europeans to be registered. As the number
of Africans registered in this roll increases, additionsI
African seats will be created on the basis of two seats for
every registered 6 per cent of the European roll in &
House of Assembly, up to 50 seats. At the point of paritb’,
that is, 50 African seats to 50 European seats, all the
registered Africans are to decide by referendum whether
their 24 indirectly elected representatives should be Rplaced by directly elected representatives.

89. In his frank and lucid presentation of the proposals
some two weeks ago, Sir Colin Crowe admitted that the
proposed constitutional arrangements “are rather complex,
and I must ask you to follow me in an exercise in
arithmetic” [I602rrd meeting, para. 261. We have always
known the United Kingdom, the mother of Parliaments,
which has played a key role in the preparation of the
Constitutions of a large number of Member States of the
United Nations, to be always in favour of simple straightforward constitutional documents. But in this instance it
has chosen to hand out a rather complex document. Why
has it done so? Is it the result of connivance with the
Smith regime? One may well ask.

98. At the parity stage also, a Government-appointed
commission will ascertain whether the next stage-that is,
African advance beyond parity-is acceptable to the People
of Rhodesia as a whole. When this is ascertained, then a
common roll for Africans and Europeans, based on the
same income, educational and property qualification% will
be created to elect 10 additional members.

90. My delegation would at this point attempt an analysis
of the United Kingdom White Paper on Southern Rhodesia.
2 Ibid., T&ntieth Year,1257th meeting, para. 13.

3 Ibid., pala. 19.
8

99. It is quite conceivable that unless there takes place a
remarkable and immediate economic and educational advancement among the Africans, very few w4l qualify to
vote for the common roll seatsthat are supposed to provide
them with the ultimate political majority to govern the
country. We have no doubt of Britain’s intention to make
these 10 seats automatic, but are we certain that Ian Smith
and his regime would consider them in the same manner?
Already we are told that Mr. Smith has said in S;?isbury
that when parity is attained the commission appointed by
the Rhodesian Government would have to ascertain
whether the creation of the post-parity common roll would
be acceptable to the people as a whole “or whether some
alternative arrangement such as, for example, the retention
Of the parity concept, would be preferable”. Does this not
clearly indicate that Mr. Smith does not see the agreement
as guaranteeing unimpeded progress to majority rule? It
would seem so to my delegation.

question of racial discrimination is merely a declaration of
intention. Sir Colin Crowe asserted that the “Rhodesian
authorities have intimated their firm intention within the
spirit of the proposals to make progress towards ending
racial discrimination,” [ibid., pm. 45]. In our view, any :
settlement in this connexion should include an immediate ’
end to racial discrimination. It is necessary for an agreement to be reached with regard to the immediate repeal of
the Land Tenure Act as part of any just settlement.
104. It is extremely difficult for my delegation not to
harbour misgivings over the agreement in general when we
are made to understand that the entire negotiations were
carried out over the heads of the African leaders. It is true
that Mr. Joshua Nkomo, the leader of the Zimbabwe
African People’s Union (ZAPU), was whisked from detention in a remote area to hold a one hour and ten minute
discussion with Sir Alec. But Mr. Nkomo was not allowed
to communicate with members of his party. Mr. Sithole,
formerly leader of the Zimbabwe African National Union
(ZANU), was prevented from meeting the British Foreign
Minister on the ground that he was serving a prison term.
According to the Rhodesian authorities, there were 93
detainees and 2 rest&tees. Only 3 1 of these will be released
as soon as arrangements are completed, What will happen to
the rest? Are they to be left to rot in detention because
they oppose the Smith rigime’s illegal acts?

100. As can be seen from the foregoing, the arrangements
proposed for increasing African representation in the House
of Assembly set no fixed date as to when parity is to be
achieved. It leaves the suggestion that it will be a very long
time from now and gives no clear indication that the
Africans will be able to go on even then to obtain a
parliamentary majority. In the view of my delegation, the
constitutional arrangements proposed under the first principle do not correspond to the “principle and intention of
unimpeded progress to majority rule”. As wasstated earlier,
the maximum majority the Africans will ever be able to win
is 60 seats over 50 European seats, and at an unspecified
time in the future.

105. One wonders whether it is not the normal practice to
release political prisoners and detainees in order to ;enable
free participation of all shades of public opinion at an
opinion sounding of this magnitude where the future of
millions of persons are in the balance. Both the United
Kingdom Government and the illegal regime of Ian Smith
seem to think otherwise.

101. Nor are we certain, once indepdndence has been
conceded to the white-settler Government, that the necessity to reduce racial discrimination, and particularly to
amend the Land Tenure Act, will be deemed necessary
since it has been relegated to a Rhodesian commission
whose recommendations will be accepted only, to quote
Mr. Smith, “subject to considerations that any Government
would be obliged to regard as of an overriding character”.
For purposes o! recapitulation, I should point out that the
Land Tenure Act divides Rhodesia 50-50 between 250,000
whites and more then 5 million blacks and provides a legal
basis for many acts of, racial discriminatioh, such as the
current attempt by the Smith rBgime to remove some 3,000
longestablished African families from mission laids in the
so-called white areas.

106. I now come to the question of guarantees against
retrogressive amendment of the Constitution. The United
Kingdom White Paper made’mention of the institution of a
blocking mechanism which will provide that any proposed
amendments to the specially entrenched provisions of the
Constitution should have the approval of two thirds of the
members of both the Senate and the House of Assembly
voting separately, and also of a simple majority of each race
in the House of Assembly. In the view of my delegation,
the agreement looks rather thin in this connexion. Who will
guarantee these so-called guarantees? In the absence of any
effective external guarantee, it is the fear of my delegatidn
that once Rhodesia is granted independence legally and
becomes a sovereign State, it can retrogressively amend the
Constitution. Any attempts by the United Kingdom, or for
that matter any other Government, to question its authority to do so would be tantamount to interference in its
internal affairs. This constitutes a legitimate ground for fear
for the black people of Southern Rhodesia and for black
Africans as a whole.

102. According to the Home-Smith agreement, until the
commission, composed of two Europeans and one African,
reports on the matter, no further evictions of Africans from
“white” lands, under the apurtheid-style Land Tenure Act,
we are told, will take place. But is this good enough? My
delegation does not think so. Abundant evidence exists to
show that the Smith rigime has evicted a large number of
Africans from their God-given land in the past and has
embarked on a policy of carving out Bantustans on the
South African pattern.

107. The British representative has stated categorically
that his Government will not change its policy with regard
to the present Rhodesian rdgime until the opinion of the
people of Rhodesia as a whole has been consulted and the
proposed Constitution accepted by them. My delegation
understands this to mean that there will be no change in
their policy with regard to the mandatory sanctions

103. The proposals, regrettably, make no mention of a
reversal of the harm that has already been done, and the
agreement reached between the British Foreign Minister
and the Rhodesian rebel leader on this all-important
9

instituted against Southern
253 (1968) ofMay 1968.

113. My delegation holds the position that the Africans of
Southern Rhodesia constitute the overwhelming majority
of the Rhodesian population as a whole, and that they are
therefore the people primarily and most seriously affected
by the British pronouncement and the British proposals. At
this stage we are anxious-and rightly so-to know how
they, our brothers and sisters of that land, feel on this
all-important and very crucial matter.

Rhodesia by resolution

108. The fourth report of the sanctions Committee
[S/l 0229 and Add.1 and 21 brought to light certain

violations of the sanctions committed ty three countries
with the knowledge and approval of their respective
Governments. I have in mind the importation of graphite to
the Federal Republic of Germany and of meat to Switzerland, and the exportation of wheat from Australia, notwithstanding the Council’s resolution preventing such transactions.

114. The United Kingdom representative has said that a
test of the acceptability of the proposals will be carried out
by a Royal Commission. Like the representative of Somalia,
my delegation is also anxious to know whether serious
efforts will’ be made to educate the African masses as to the
ramifications of the proposals. We would have expected the
composition of such a commission to include at least some
members of Commonwealth countries and representatives
of the United Nations as well, in view of the very active role
this Organization has played m the entire Southern Rhodesia problem in particular.

109. Only last month we learned that the United States
Congress enacted a law, which has now obtained Presidential approval, to end the embargo on purchases of Rhodesian chrome. Although the law is designed to come into
effect on and after the end of January next year, the
United States Congressional action, which at this stage
constitutes an intent, may well become the most important
single action by a permanent member of the Security
Council towards the erosion of the sanctions. As usual, the
United States justification for its decision rests on the
dubious arguments that others have been violating the
sanctions.

115. We would no doubt have liked to know what the
African leaders think of the proposals and what their
collective reaction is towards them, My delegation would
like to have it placed on record that these proposals for a
settlement were negotiated between Sir Alec DouglasHome, on behalf of the British Government, and Ian Smith,
on behalf of the rebel regime in Salisbury representing a
total of less than 250,000 whites. No African nationalist
leader, representing the more than 5 million blacks, was
allowed to participate in the negotiations. The Africans are
not to be made a pawn in the game of ideological posturing
and power politics.

110. Another disappointing aspect of the proposals lies in
the selection of Lord Pearce to head the United Kingdom
Government “test of acceptablity” Commission. It is well
known that Lord Pearce was one of the five law lords
sitting on the Privy Council when the one and only
constitutional case concerning Rhodesia since the unilateral
declaration of independence came before it. The case
concerned the legality of the Smith regime’s power of
detention. Although the other four judges ruled that the
detention was illegal, Lord Pearce nevertheless differed and
proffered a dissenting opinion. In the considered opinion of
my delegation, the record of this appointed Royal Commissioner has so far evinced no sympathetic understanding
of the cause of the black Rhodesians. What guarantee do we
now have that his lack of understanding will alter? None
whatever.

116. The least the United Kingdom could now do is to act
immediately on the Soviet proposal and bring both
Mr. Joshua Nkomo and Mr. Ndabaningi Sithole to present
their views to the Council here in New York.
117. My delegation reserves the right to intervene at a
later stage of the debate.
118. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist RepubI should like to point Out
that the Security Council correctly took a well-founded
decision to invite the leaders of the ZAPU and ZANU
parties, Mr, Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, to attend a meeting Of
the Security Council in order that the Council could hear
them and receive from them information about the true
situation in Southern Rhodesia and about their assessment
of the’Home-Smith agreement.

111. The document presented last Thursday by the United
Kingdom representative falls far short of Cecil Rhodes’
motto : “Equal rights for every civilized man south of the
Zambezi”. Rhodes’ definition of a civilized man as one
“whether white or black, who has sufficient education to
write his name, has some property or work, in fact is not a
loafer”, if adhered to, is sufficient to qualify the Africans
for immediate majority rule. How far from this concept of
civilization the Smith regime has veered can be clearly seen
in the various illegal acts undertaken over the past 30 years
to deprive the Africans of their God-given rights and to
discourage them systematically from the pursuit of higher
education.

lies) (translated porn Russian):

119. In this connexion, we should like to ask YOU,
Mr. President, when you plan to hold a Council meeting
with the participation of Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, and
also to ask the representative of the administering Power,
the representative of the United Kingdom, to inform- us of’
the current situation with regard to the invitation to
Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole.

112. Black Rhodesians, civilized or otherwise, will have to
wait for a very long time without even a sniff of Cecil
Rhodes’ equal rights. No one can deny that they have
shown the patience of Job and have reposed an often
touching faith in Britain’s desire to see fair play in their
country. These hopes will now, no doubt, be dashed to the
ground.

120. We all noticed during the statement by the reF@sentative of Somalia, Ambassador Farah, that he oorrectIY
pointed out that we should all state our viewsand consider
the adoption of some form of resolution. We SUPPOe thh
10

remark by Ambassador Farah, but we can, of course, only
take a decision if we hear the representatives of the
Zimbabwe people. At the 1605th meeting we were in
essence refused an opportunity to study the documents and
memoranda received by Home from the leaders of the
African parties under the pretext that they could not be
published. In those circumstances we cannot know and
shall never know the opinion of the representatives of-the
Zimbabwe people. What kind of decision can we then
take?

leaders, he did say that because they had been handed to
the British Foreign Minister in confidence they could not
be disclosed for that reason. However, is it not possible for
those persons who were interviewed by Sir Alec DouglasHome to be contacted by the administering Power and
asked whether they would have any objection to their
memoranda or the record of their interviews being made
public so they could then be presented to this Council?
130. Secondly, when France, in 1958, allowed its Territories to choose whether or not they wished to have
independence within the framework of the French community and they were given the right to express themselves
they were told what benefits they would get if they said
“yes”, and they were told exactly where they would stand
if they said %o”. Is not such a choice necessaryalso for the
people of Southern Rhodesia? Should they not be told at
this stage what to expect? We know, for example, that if
they say ‘fies” what they would get is what is contained in
the White Paper published by the United Kingdom. But if
they say “no”, they are left in complete darkness. Surely
on this very elementary point one would have thought that
the British Government, in all fairness to the people of
Rhodesia, would make its position quite clear.

121. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation insists that
the voice of the Zimbabwe people should be heard, that its
point of view should be made known both through oral
statements by the representatives of the two progressive
parties and in the form of the documents whose existence is
known to us and which should be brought to the noticeof
the members of the Security Council. Only in those
conditions of course could the Security Council make an
informed and valid judgement on this matter.
122. The PRESIDENT: I should state that on 2 December
197 1 I addressed a letter to the representative of the United
Kingdom referring to the decision taken by members of the
Council.

131. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist RepubThe Soviet delegation finds
the answer/given by the distinguished representative of the
United Kingdom completely unsatisfactory. We are, of
course, prepared to wait until the representative of the
United Kingdom has received instructions in answer to the
inquiry he made concerning the decision of the Security
Council about the invitation to Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole.
But, on the other hand, it is perfectly clear, as the
representative of Somalia said, that we cannot consider the
question on the agenda if we do not hear the representatives of the Zimbabwe people. We are all well aware of the
position of the Zimbabwe people in Southern Rhodesia and
we wish to know their opinion. We are told that the leaders
of the most powerful progressive parties are in prison and
that the administering Power cannot apparently exert
influence on the Rhodesian authorities to secure their
release. And, at the same time, the administering Power,
which has at its disposal documents received from those
leaders, claims that those documents are confidential and
that it cannot show them to us. This gives the impression
that the administering Power is quite simply deliberately
unwilling to acquaint the Security Council with the
opinions of the representatives of the Iargest parties of the
Zimbabwe national liberation movement.
lics) (translated from Russian):

123. I am prepared to call on the representative of the
United Kingdom if he has something to say about this.
124. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I am afraid I
have not very much to say, Mr. President.
125. At our meeting on 2 December, it may be recalled, I
gave an answer to the representative of Somalia on this
question. At that meeting, I gave the answersto a number
of questions which had been asked and also said that I did
not wish to interrupt the expression of viewsby members
by continually intervening-and, of course, a number of the
questions still required answersfrom my Government; but
some of the questions asked are answeredin fact in the text
of the proposals. At the moment, therefore, I have not a
further intervention to make.
126. As far as the question of invitations to Mr. Nkomo
and Reverend Sithole is concerned, Mr. President, I have
indeed referred your letter to my Government and I await
its instructions. But, of course, you will realize that-as you
will recall I explained in our consultations-we are not in a
position to require that the Rhodesian authorities should
act on this. I shall let you have the reply of my Government
just as soon as it comes in.

132. The Soviet delegation, therefore, once more repeats
its position, which is that the Security Council, when
discussing this item, must of necessity hear the opinion of
the Zimbabwe people,

127. As far as the question of the memoranda is concerned, equally I explained in my intervention last time the
reasons why it was not possible to make those memoranda
available.

133. The PRESIDENT: As a result of consultations with
the Members of the Council, it appears to me that there is a
general willingness to meet again tomorrow afternoon in
order to discuss the matter referred to by the representatives of four Arab States in their letter dated 3 December

128. The PRESIDENT: As soon as the reply referred to
by the representative of the United Kingdom is received, a
meeting will be convened.
129. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): When the representative of
the United Kingdom addressed himself to the question of
the circulation of statements which had been handed to Sir
AIec Douglas-Home when he was in Rhodesia, and also to
the record of interviews he held with particular African

[sflo4q9].

134. Since there is no objection, we shall meet again then.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
1

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publicofionr
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributor:
to: United
Nations,
Solar Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Lcs publications
dcr Nations
Unisr
sent en vent8
dam
Isr librairies
et lea agancas
ddpositairsr
du monde cnticr.
Informer-vow
oupr&r
de votre libroirie
ou odressez-vour
6:
Nations
U&s,
Section dcs venter, New York ou Gan&vs.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PURLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacionac
de lor Nocionsr
Unidor
ortdn
en todos porter
del mundo,
Conrulte
o su librsro
Vontos,
Nuova
York o Ginsbra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIDAS

en vanta en librertor
o dirijase
at Nacionw

Price: U.S. $1 .OO (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

y cows distribuidoros
Unidas,
Socctin

do

82220-October

1973~-2,050
