S/PRST/2012/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 March 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6730th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 March 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about reports of repeated
incidents of cross-border violence between Sudan and South Sudan, including
troop movements, support to proxy forces, and aerial bombardments, and
views the situation as a serious threat to international peace and security. The
Council urges the two countries to implement and respect the letter and spirit
of their February 10 Memorandum of Understanding on Non-Aggression and
Cooperation, which was agreed under the auspices of the AU High-level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP).
“The Security Council demands that all parties cease military operations
in the border areas and put an end to the cycle of violence. It further demands
that the Governments of Sudan and South Sudan take no action that would
undermine the security and stability of the other, including through any direct
or indirect form of support to armed groups in the other’s territory. The
Security Council condemns actions by any armed group aimed at the forced
overthrow of the government of either Sudan or South Sudan. The Security
Council affirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both Sudan and South Sudan.
“The Security Council reiterates that the core objectives of the
international community and all stakeholders in Sudan and South Sudan are
the peaceful co-existence of two fully viable states, embracing democratic
governance, rule of law, accountability, equality, respect for human rights,
justice and economic development, in particular the establishment of the
conditions for conflict-affected communities to build strong and sustainable
livelihoods.
“The Security Council recalls the 28 June 2011 Framework Agreement
between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N) on political and security arrangements for Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan states, and urges them to return to direct talks to
resolve all political and security issues on the basis of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and of the agreed principles of the Framework Agreement.
The Security Council urges them to resolve the underlying issues that have
12-25284 (E) 060312

*1225284*

S/PRST/2012/5

fuelled the current conflict in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, to end all
violence, and to agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities. The Security
Council strongly supports the efforts of the AUHIP and the UN to assist in this
regard. With regard to the humanitarian situation, the Security Council
emphasizes the grave urgency of delivering humanitarian aid to avert a
worsening of the serious crisis in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, and
demands that the Government of Sudan and the SPLM-N cooperate fully with
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies and organizations, and
ensure, in accordance with international law, including applicable international
humanitarian law, and guiding principles of emergency humanitarian
assistance, the safe, unhindered and immediate access of United Nations and
other humanitarian personnel, as well as the delivery of supplies and
equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently perform their task of
assisting conflict-affected civilian populations in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile States. The Security Council welcomes the tripartite proposal by the UN,
AU, and League of Arab States in this regard, welcomes its acceptance by
SPLM-N, and encourages the Government of Sudan to do the same.
“The Security Council deeply deplores the continued failure of the
Sudanese and South Sudanese security forces to redeploy from the Abyei Area
in accordance with the 20 June 2011 Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
for the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area (S/2011/384) and the 8
September 2011 decision of the Abyei Area Joint Oversight Committee
(S/2011/593). The Security Council welcomes the decision of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism to establish and move forward with the Joint
Border Verification Monitoring Mechanism, in accordance with the 29 June
2011 Agreement on Border Security and the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism. The Council urges the parties to agree on a map that will outline
the area of operations for the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and the area of
operations for border monitors. The Council demands that the two countries
accelerate implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement and the immediate
establishment of the Abyei Area Administration, and work actively toward a
long-term political resolution of Abyei’s final status. The Council demands
that the Governments of Sudan and South Sudan facilitate the safe and
dignified return of persons displaced from Abyei to their homes, and grant full,
safe, and unhindered humanitarian access to the Abyei Area. The Council
emphasizes the need for a safe and cooperative migration season.
“The Security Council regards the settlement of oil and financial
arrangements between the Governments of Sudan and South Sudan as a critical
element of the two countries’ security, stability and prosperity as viable states.
The Council affirms that any unilateral action related to the oil sector is
detrimental to the security, stability, and prosperity of both states. The Security
Council strongly urges both states to work within the framework of the
AUHIP’s January 2012 comprehensive proposal in order to reach mutual
agreements without delay on transitional financial arrangements and
commercial oil arrangements.
“The Security Council urges the Governments of Sudan and South Sudan
to ensure that clear procedures for acquiring nationality in the respective states
are in place, together with relevant documentation regarding residency or right
to employment. If such arrangements are not in place before the end of the

2

12-25284

S/PRST/2012/5

April 8 transition period, the Council urges both states to agree on an
extension.
“The Security Council strongly urges the Governments of Sudan and
South Sudan to reach agreement on the status of disputed areas along the
Sudan/South Sudan border, and to agree on and swiftly implement a process
and timeline for demarcation of the border under the facilitation of the AUHIP.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to UN peacekeeping
missions in Sudan and South Sudan. It calls on Sudan and South Sudan to
cooperate fully with the UN missions to ensure them free access throughout
their areas of operation and to ensure unhindered and expeditious movement of
all personnel, including by swiftly granting visas and travel permits, as well as
of equipment, provisions, supplies and other goods, including vehicles, aircraft
and spare parts, which are for the exclusive and official use of UN missions.
“The Council strongly urges Sudan and South Sudan to continue working
within the context of the AUHIP-facilitated negotiations process to reach
agreement on all outstanding issues as soon as possible, and encourages the
continued partnership among the AUHIP, the UN and other key international
stakeholders to combine their efforts in support of those negotiations.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to a peaceful and
prosperous future for the people of Sudan and South Sudan. The Council
expresses its gratitude and full support for the continuing work of the AU
High-level Implementation Panel for Sudan and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki, as well as of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios, and stresses the collaborative partnership between the UN and the
AU in this regard. The Council calls on the Governments of Sudan and South
Sudan to extend their full cooperation to the AUHIP.”

12-25284

3
