36

General ABsembly-Sixteenth Session

Recalling that in 1960 the Committee included a
survey of social conditions in its observations and conclusions on the report on progress in the Non-Self-Governing Territories since the beginning of the United
Nations, 10
H a-ving received a report on social advancement prepared by the Committee in 1961,11
1. Approves the report on social advancement prepared in 1961 by the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories, and considers that it
should be read with the earlier reports approved in
1952, 1955 and 1958 and with the survey included in
the report on progress achieved in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit the
1961 report to the Members responsible for the administration of N:on-Self-Governing Territories, to the
Economic and Social Council, to the regional economic
commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and to the
specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration;
3. Expresses its confidence that the Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories will bring the report to the attention of the
appropriate authorities.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1695 (XVI). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Considering that it is essential that the peoples of
the Non-~elf-Governing Territories be widely acquainted with the Declaration,
1. Invites the Administering Members to take immediate steps, with the active participation of the
representative bodies and organizations of the indigenous inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, for the widest possible circulation and dissemination in those Territories of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples;
2. Further invites the Administering Members to
take immediate steps for the inclusion of the Declaration in the curricula of all educational institutions in
all Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
immediate and large-scale circulation and dissemination
of the Declaration, through all the appropriate media
of mass communication, in all the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
4. Invites the Administering Members to extend to
the Secretary-General their fullest co-operation in the
circulation and dissemination of the Declaration in all
the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Requests that the Declaration be circulated and
disseminated in the principal local languages as well as
in the languages of the Administering Members ;
:11> Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 15
(A/4371),
part two, section C.
11
Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4785), part
two.
-'

6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
for the General Assembly at its seventeenth session.

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1696 (XVI). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Recognizing the importance of rendering assistance
to colonial countries and peoples in the field of g<:'.neral
and specialized education,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and training
f~cil~ties for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Terntones under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,12
Noting with satisfaction the further response to its
resolution 845 (IX) inviting Member States to extend
their offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Expressing regret that, despite the increased interest
among inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in such offers, a large number of the scholarships offered by Member States remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that in several instances
students who have been granted scholarships have not
been accorded facilities to leave the Non-Self-Governing Territories in order to take advantage of such
scholarships,
~ecalling paragraph 5 of its resolution 845 (IX) by
~h1ch _the Secretary-General is requested, in consultation ~1th the Administering Members and specialized
age_nc1es concerned, to establish a simple procedure
which would enable offers and applications made
through the United Nations or the specialized agencies
to be brought to the attention of the Administering
Members, and thereafter, in the case of applications,
to the attention of the offering States concerned together with any observations the Administering Members may have submitted,
_C~nsidering that the procedure requiring the transm1_ss10n of observations by the Admiajstering Members
prior to the submission of the application to the offering
Stat~ c~uses a serious delay in the processing of those
applications,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on offers of study and training facilities under General Assembly resolution 843 (IX);
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1540 (XV) of 15 December 1960;
3. invites once again the Administering Members
concerned to take all necessary measures to ensure that
all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are utilized by the inhabitants of the NonSelf-Governing Territories and to render effective
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
u Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 39, 40, 41,
42, 43 and 44, documents A/4862 and Add.l and 2.
