VI.

37/17S.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/91 of 5 December 1980 and
36/ 161 of 16 December 1981 and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 1980/54 of 24 July 1980 and 1982/2 of
27 April 1982,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, w5 prepared pursuant
to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/8 of 28
April 1980,
Recalling also the appeal of the Secretary-General in his
note verbale of 11 November 1980, as well as those of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
Having heard the statements made before the Third Committee by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees 104 and by the representative of the SecretaryGeneral106 on 15 November and 3 December 1982
respectively,
'
Recognizing the number of persons who have returned
voluntarily to Ethiopia,
Deeply concerned that the repeated appeals of the Secretary-General, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council have yet to give rise to an adequate
l"!sponse,
1. Endorses once again the appeals of the SecretaryGeneral, the General Assembly and the Eco'nomic and Social Council concerning assistance to displaced persons and
voluntary returnees in Ethiopia;
~- Com_mends the efforts made by various organs of the
Umted Nations and specialized agencies in mobilizing humanitarian assistance to the displaced persons and voluntary
returnees in Ethiopia;
3. Appeals once again to the Governments of Member
Stat_es ~d to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations ~d all voluntary agencies to contribute generously to assist the Government of Ethiopia in its efforts
to provide relief and rehabilitation for the displaced persons;
4. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Re~ugees to intensify his efforts in mobilizing humanitarian
assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of
numbers of voluntary returnees, as well as for displaced
persons;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
report to the Economic and Social Council at its second
re~lar _session o~ 1983 and ~o the General Assembly at its
thirty-eighth sess10n on the implementation of the present
resolution.
I /Oth plenary meeting
17 December 1982

'37/176.

Humanitarian asmstance to refugees in Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/182 of 15 December 1980
and 36/156 of 16 December 1981 on humanitarian assistance
to refugees in Djibouti,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/3 of 27 April 1982,

"'" A/35/360 and Corr .1-3.

'."6 Official_ Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-seventh Session

Third Committee, 62nd meeting, paras. 7-13.

199

Having heard the statement made before the Third Committee on 15 November 1982 by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 104
Having considered with satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General on humanitarian assistance to refugees in
Djibouti, 107
Appreciating the determined efforts made by the Government of Djibouti, despite its limited economic resources,
to cope with the growing needs of the refugees,
A ware of the consequences of the social and economic
burden placed on the Government and people of Djibouti
as a result of the influx of refugees and the subsequent impact
on the national development and infrastructure of the counlry,
Deeply concerned about the continuing plight of the refugees and displaced persons in the country, which has been
aggravated by the devastating effects of the prolonged
drought,
Noting with appreciation the concern and unremitting
e~forts of the Office of the United Nations High Commiss10ner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations the
intergovernmental and non-governmental organization~ and
th~ benevolent organizations which have worked closely
with the Government of Djibouti in the relief and rehabilitation programme for the refugees in that country,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
S~~retary-General on humanitarian assistance to refugees in
DJ1bout1 107 and of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; 108
. 2. Appreciates the efforts made by the High Commissioner to keep the situation of the refugees in Djibouti under
constant review and invites him to intensify his programme
of humanitarian assistance to the refugees in the country;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to or~ani~e ad~quate pro~ra~es of assistance for the refugees
m DJiboun and to mamtam close contact with Member States
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
benevolent organizations concerned to mobilize the necessary assistance to the Government of Djibouti to enable it
to cope effectively with the refugee situation, which has
been aggravated by the debilitating effects of the drought;
4. Appreciates the assistance provided thus far by Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to the relief and rehabilitation programmes for
the refugees and displaced persons in Djibouti;
5. Calls upon all Member States, the organizations of
~he United Nations system, the specialized agencies and
mtergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
continue to support the efforts being made by the Government of Djibouti to cope with the ever-growing needs of
the refugee population and other victims of drought;
6. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugee_s, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, to
send an mteragency mission to Djibouti to evaluate the needs
and the magnitude of the aid required to finance the relief
and rehabilitati<;>n programmes for the refugees and to report
to t~e Economic and Social Council at its second regular
s~ss10n of ~ 983, and to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session, on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
I /Oth plenary meeting
17 December /982
N37/420.
See Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/17/12). chap. II. sect.·B.6. ·
107
10•
