36

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

l. Decides to establish an international university
under the auspices of the United Nations to be known
as the United Nations University;
2. Decides that the United Nations University
should be guided, inter alia, by the following objectives
and principles:
(a) Toe concept of the University sbould be that
of a system of academic institutions and not of an
intergovernmental organization;
(b) Close co-ordination should be maintained between tbe activities of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Insdtute for Training and Research and other organizations in the United Nations system and those of the
University;
(e) Binding guarantees, under law,. of ~cademic
freedom and autonomy should be wntten mto the
char,ter of the University;
(d) Selection procedures should be established _so
as to ensure tbe higbest intellectual and moral quahty
of the personnel of the University;
(e) The structure of the University should consist
of a programming and co-ordina!ing ce~tr~l º!gan ~d
a decentralized system of affihatrd mst1tut10ns, mtegrated into tbe world university community, devoted
to action-oriented research into the pressmg global
problems of human survival, development and welfare
that are the concem of the United Nations and its
agencies, and to the post-graduate training of young
scholars and ,research workers for the benefit of the
world community;
(f) The research programmes of the institutions of
the University should include, ª!llº~g other matters,
coexistence between peoples of d1ffermg cultures, tangues and social systems, peaceful relations between
States and the maintenance of peace and security,
human rights, economic and social change and development the environment and the proper use of resources,
basic' scientific research and the application of the
results of science and technology in the interests of
development;
(g) Capital costs and recurrent cost<; should be met
from voluntary contributions for the University made:
(i) Directly by Governments or through the United
Nations, the specialized agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency;
(ii) By non-governmental sources including foundations, universities and individuals;
Toe University should also be authorized to receive
assistance for its projects, particularly fellowships, from
the United Nations, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and other intergovernmental organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in close _cooperation with the Director-General of the Umted
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ,to establish a Founding Committee of the United
Nations University 6 to define further the objectives and
o The Founding Committee of the United Nations University will be composed of the following persons: Mr. Ahmed
Bsmat Abdel Meguid, Mr. Roberto T. Alemann, Mr. Sune
Bergstrom, Mr. Borislav Bo.fovié, Mr. Andrew W. Cordier,
Mr. Roger Gaudry, Mr. Felipe Herrera, Mr. Abdul Ra~zak
Kaddoura, Mr. Yusuf K. Lule, Mr. Robert Mallet, Mr. V1ctor
A. Oyenuga, Mr. Gopalaswami Parthasarathi, Mr. Hugh N.
Robson, Mr. Victor Sahini, Mr. Abdus Salam, Mr. Seydou
Madani Sy, Mr. Senjin Tsuruoka, Mr. Puey Ungphakorn,
Mr. Victor L. Urquidi and Mr. Stephan Verosta.

principles of the University and to draft its charter,
consisting of not more than twenty experts chosen with
due regard to geographical distribution and major
academic, educational and cultural trends in the world,
taking into account their fields of study as well as the
need to include outstanding young scholars, half of
whom are to be designated by the Secretary-General
and the other half by the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with the specialized agencies and
programmes concerned, including -the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to commence
efforts for raising the necessary funds in order to permit
the launching of the United Nations University at the
earliest possible date and to make recommendations
to the General Assembly conceming the location of the
programming and co-ordination centre and of the other
ins•titutions, in consultation with the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the Executive Director of
the United Nations lnstitute for Training and Research
and taking into account the views expressed thereon
by the Founding Committee of the United Nations
University and the offers of facilities and other types
of contributions;
5. Invites the Executive Board of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit to the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session such comments and observations on the
draft charter as it may consider appropriate;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through
-the Economic and Social Council, the draft charter of
the United Nations University as well as a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972
2952 (XXVII). Second General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 2823 (XXVI) of
16 December 1971 on the report of the Special Interna.tional Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization,
H aving considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its sixth session, 7
and in particular the recommendations contained in
its resolution 33 (VI) of 2 June 1972 on the Second
General Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, 8
Bearing in mind the importance of the goals and
policy measures related to industrial development that
are included in the International Development Strategy
for thc Second U11itcd Nations Developmcnt Dccadc 9
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session., Supplement No. 16 (A/8716).
s /bid., annex 11.

9 Resolution

2626 (XXV).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Scconcl Committee

and the necd to review the progress achieved during
thc Decadc,
1. Takes note of thc report of the Industrial Devclopment Board on thc work of its sixth s-:ssion;
2. Decides to convene a Second General Confcrence
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Vienna, at the highest possiblc level of governmcntal representation, for a period of two weeks in
the early months of 1975, in accordance with the
provisions outlincd by the Industrial Dcvclopment
Board in its ,resolution 33 (VI);
3. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
its Permanent Committec to carry out the functions of
an intergovcrnmental preparatory committec for the
~econd General Conference of the Unitcd Nations Industrial Development Organization and to discharge
these functions as appropriate during their scssions
schedulcd befare the convening of the Conference;
4. Directs the Industrial Development Board ancí
its Permanent Committee to undertake, in connexion
with thc functions entrusted to them in paragraph 3
abovc, the following tasks:
(u) Preparation of the provisional agenda for the
Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and its submission
to the General Assembly for approval;
( b) Review and approval of the preparatory arrangements for the holding of the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization. including the preparation of adequate
documentation which should cover in a concise and
comprehensive way the majar subjects to be discussed
at the Conforence;
(e) Discussion and formulation of draft proposals
and recommendations for consideration by the Conference in connexion with the various items on its
agenda;
5. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress of the
preparatory work for the Second General Conference
~f the United N ations Industrial Development Organizatmn.
2106th plenary meetinR
11 Decemher 1972

2953 (XXVII). Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Pro~ramme and the
United Nations Industrial Development Or,
~anization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolu1ion 2823 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, in which it decided to set up an Ad Hoc
Committee on Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
llaving considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committec on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, 10
1

º A/8646.

Taking note of Industrial Developmcnt Board resolution 35 (VI) of 2 Junc 1972 11 and of the decisions of
the Governing Council of the Unitcd Nations Dcvelopmcnt Programmc :¡t its fourtccnth scssion, 1 ~
Bearing in 111ind thc central role of thc Unitcd Natinns
Industrial Devclopmcnt Organization with rcspcct to
thc activitics of the Unitcd Nations system in thc ficld
of industrial developmcnt,
Aware of the importance of industrialization for thc
succcssful achievement of the goals of the Intcrnational
Devclopment Strategy for the Second United Nations
Devclopment Decadc, 1:1
l. A pproves with appreciation the report of thc
Ad !]oc Committee on Co-operation bctwcen thc Unitcd
Nat1ons Developmcnt Programmc and the Unitcd
Nati~ms Industrial Dcvelopmcnt Organization and, in
particular, the stress laid therein on the nced for
devising special forms of assistance to industry and
new techniques suitable to the more complcx nature
of this field;
2. Endorses the decisions takcn, on the basis of the
recom11;endations of thc Ad l-Joc Committee, by the
Industnal Development Board at its sixth session, as
ex pres sed in its rcsolution 34 (VI) of 2 June 1972, 14
and by the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme at its fourteenth scssion;
3. Reaf]irms thc central role of thc United Nations
Industrial Development Organization in co-ordinating
the activities of the United N ations system in 1he field
of industrial development and welcomes thc rcadincss
of the United Nations Development Programmc to assist
t~e United Nations Industrial Devclopmcnt Organiza11011 fu_lly !n implc~1cnting its co-ordinating role by
consultmg 1t on proJects in the ficld of industry;
4. Reaffirms f urther the importance of thc programme of Special Industrial Services and the need to
maintain its separate identity as a programme specifically devoted to serving most effectively shorHerm,
urgent and unforeseen requirements in the field of
industry;
5. Approves the guidelines for the operation of the
programme of Special Industrial Services proposed by
the Industrial Development Board in its resolution 35
(VI) and endorsed by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme at its fourtecnth session, as follows:
(a) The programme of Special Industrial Services is
established to meet special needs in the field of industry,
as desoribed in the report of the Secretary-General of
23 October 1965, 15 especially paragraph 10; the provisions contained in that report will be interpreted
flexibly from time to time by the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and the Exccutive Director of the United Nations Industrial Dcvelopment Organization in order to take account of
the changing needs of the industrial sector in the
developing countries;
(b) In the operations of the programme of Special
Industrial Services, ful! consideration will be given to
11 Sce Official Records of tlze General Assemb/y Twcntysev~.nth S~ss/011, Supp/ement No. 16 (A/8716), ann~x JI.
1 - O{ficwl Records o/ t/1c Eco11omic and Social Council
Fi/ty-third Sessio11, Supp/ement No. 2A (E/51R5/Rev.1)'.
para. 199.
i:i Resolution 2626 (XXV).
14 See Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly Twentyseventh. Session, ~upplem~nt No. 16 (A/8716), an~ex IT. ·
1 ~ Ib,d., Twent1eth Scss1on, Annexes, agenda item 40 document A/6070/Rev.t.
'
