TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

10 DECEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l564)

Page

.. ... ... ...... .. ......... .,....... ..

Adoption of the agenda . . , , . , . . . , . . . , , . . , . . , . , . . . . #., . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , ,
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):

Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/l0005 and Corr. 1) , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . .

S/PV. 1564

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
WithJiguses. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-FOURTQ

Held in New York on Thursday,

President:

Mr. Y. A. Malik (Union
Socialist Republics).

of Soviet

10 December 1970, at 3 pm.

3. Members of the Security Council have also
received advance copies of the text of a draft resolution
prepared during informal consultations
for consideration. This draft resolution is contained in document S/10036. The English text of this draft resolution
has been reissued for technical reasons.

The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain andNorthern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.
Present:

4. Some representatives have expressed a wish to
speak before the Council proceeds to vote on the draft
resolution. The first speaker on my list is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l564)
1.
2.

MEETING

Adoption of the agenda.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/5488):

5. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): May I first be permitted
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Security Council.
6. We meet again for the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus and have before
us the report of the Secretary-General for the period
ended 1 December 1970. In the first place, I wish to
state that the Government of Cyprus has accepted the
recommendation
of the Secretary-General
for the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus for a further period of six months. I make
that statement in view of the fact that, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964, Cyprus must signify its acceptance.

Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/l0005 and Corr.1).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 26 December 1963from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nationsaddressed to the President of,the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation ‘in Cyprus (S/l0005 and
Corr. 1)

7. I take this opportunity of expressing our deep
appreciation for the positive work carried out by the
United Nations Force on the island in co-operation
with my Government. The Force has made an impor?
tant contribution to the pacification of Cyprus. In fact,
it has become well known that the peace-keeping work
in Cyprus has been particularly successful.

1. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian):
In
accordance with the usual practice established in the
Council for the consideration of this question, I
propose, with the consent of the members of the Security Council, to invite the representatives of Cyprus
[S/10033], Turkey [S/10034] and Greece l;S/lOO35] to
take places at the Council table pursuant to their
request to participate in the discussion of this question
‘without the right to vote.

8. In this connexion I should like to convey to the
Commander of the Force, Major General D. Prem
Chand, and to the officers and menunder his command,
the expression of our warm appreciation.
9. I should now like to place on record again our
deep gratitude to the Secretary-General for his genuine
concern over the problem of Cyprus and for his
dedicated efforts towards achieving a just and peaceful
solution of the problem, Our profound esteem for his
outstanding work as the head of the United Nations
is very sincere and genuine.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. 2, Rossides
: (Cyprus), Mr. U.H. Bayulken
(Turkey), and Mr. D.
S. Bitsios (Greece), took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfrom
Russian): The
Security Council will consider the question of Cyprus
on the basis of the report by the Secretary-General
submitted to the Council on 2 December 1970 in docui merit S/l0005 and Corr. 1.

10. Further, I should like to express our appreciation
to his Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. OsorioTafall, for his constructive work in the island, and
to the collaborators and assistants of the Secretary1

.

General, Mr. Bunche and Mr. Rolz-Bennett, who have
been faithful in carrying out their duties with regard
to Cyprus. And, of course, our appreciation and thanks
go to those countries whose valuable contributions in
military contingents and voluntary funds have made
it possible for the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
to operate in Cyrpus.

It may be recalled in this respect that proposals by
the United Nations Force in Cyprus regarding the eIimination of confrontation were agreed to by my Government, as was stated in the report of December 1969
[S/9521, para. 77).
16. Another question referred to in the present report,
under “Observations”,
as needing attention is the
problem of displaced persons and their rehabilitation.
We are in full agreement with the need to solve this
problem also. My Government’s policy has all along
been to encourage and assist the return of the Turkish
Cypriots. That is consistent with its over-all policy
towards a return to normality. Thus, it has built or
repaired about 350 houses belonging to Turkish Cypriots in various villages; but in most cases the owners,
as the report indicates, did not return. Presumably,
they were discouraged by the Turkish Cypriot leadership from returning, except in areas where such return
would serve a political purpose-such as, for instance,
the extension of an enclave-which
in itself runs
counter to normalization-or
for other political advantage. In that sense, they have all along been pressing
for the return of the Turkish Cypriots to sensitive areas
near confrontation, such as Omorphita and Neapolis,
which would not help normalization but would have
the reverse effect. Thus the Turkish Cypriot leadership
has given political rather than humanitarian overtones
to this problem. In consequence, out of sixteen villages
in which such houses were built by the Government,
in eleven not a single Turkish Cypriot has returned
and the rebuilt houses still remain unoccupied. That
is no encouragement to build more houses.

11. The report shows that the situation during the
last six months has remained generally calm. As is
indicated in the report, shooting incidents have been
further reduced from thirty to twelve in the corresponding period of last year. The Secretary-General in his
observations remarks, however, that:
“The record of the past six months shows neither
progress towards further normalization and limitation of confrontation nor a return to the tense and
explosive situation which existed prior to the commencement of the intercommunal
talks in June
1968.” I;$/10005 rind Cow.1, parn. 115.J
12. The situation is described as one of “negative
stability” [iOid.]. The Secretary-General continues by
expressing regret that he must once again voice his
disappointment
that notwithstanding
the persistent
efforts of his representatives in Cyprus regarding a
return to normal conditions, especially to freedom of
movement along all roads for unarmed citizens, the
situation remains unchanged.
13. As was mentioned in his previous report, that
of June 1970 [S/9814], there are 123 public roads,
including five main communication roads, on which
Greek Cypriots have no freedom of movement 01
access. Those roads are obstructed by armed Turkish
Cypriots from the enclaves. The Secretary-General
made earnest and repeated calls upon the Turkish Cypriot leadership to open up those roads, as also the
enclaves, in response to the Government’s normalization measures, particularly since all Turkish Cypriots
enjoy full and unrestricted freedom of movent on all
roads on the island.

17. We express the sincere hope that the question
of normalization-in
respect both of the opening of
the public roads to all citizens and of the return of
the Turkish
Cypriots to their homes-will
be
approached in a new and positive spirit to achieve the
understanding and co-operation necessary for their
proper solution, thereby creating a better climate of
confidence that would facilitate and enhance progress
in the current intercommunal talks.

14. As stated in the present report, “this longstanding anomaly has again given rise to a number
of incidents” [$/ZO005and Corr.1, para. 851. It obviously is a great anomaly when over 80 per cent of
the population of the island is still prevented from moving on so many of its communication roads. The solution of this situation by peaceful means should not
be beyond the reach of all concerned.

18. However, there is another, more hopeful, aspect
of the situation, as may be seen from the report, While
progress on the vital aspects of freedom of movement
and elimination
of confrontation have not shown
improvement, “an encouraging exception to the pres- 1
ent immobility
is the increased co-operation between j
the two communities in the economiC field” ~SlIOOO5
and Corr.1, para. 1171. Indeed, in this field and in
that of public services considerable progress in normalization
has been achieved through closer cooperation between Greek and Turkish Cypriots0 As
the report states, many more Turkish Cypriots have
found employment in Government-controlled
areas.
Among encouraging signs of co-operation is the
increasing participation of Turkish Cypriot representatives in such bodies as the grain and loan commissions,
in the Labour Advisory Board, in the marketing boards
for agricultural products and also in improvement
boards in mixed villages.

15. Further, the observations of the SecretaryGeneral emphasize the need to reduce the dangers .of
close military confrontations in sensitive areas of the
island and refers to
‘L . . t a number of suggestions . . . made to the
Turkish Cypriot leadership which, if agreed to,
could, at minimum risk to them, help to generate
an atmosphere of increased mutual confidence and
contribute significantly to the improvement in the
living conditions of their community.” [Ibid., para.
116.)
2

19. Furthermore, the growth in trading and industrial activity has brought about increased contacts
between Greek and Turkish Cypriots, mainly in the
private sector. However, despite this positive development of intercommunal
co-operation in many fields,
which essentially benefits the Turkish Cypriots, the
policy of the Turkish Cypriot leadership towards a
separate economy has regrettably, as the report notes,
not been reversed. This policy of separatism is contrary
to the very interests of the people of Cyprus as a whole
and is particularly retrograde at a time when efforts
are being made the world over to unify the economies
of nations. The realities of life and the common interests of Greek and Turkish Cypriots emphasize the obvious need for co-operation within a single economic
system. The spirit necessary for such co-operation
does exist among the Cypriot people, Greek and Turkish alike, as has been reported by the SecretaryGeneral. It would blossom in the economic sector as
well as the political sector were it not discouraged by
outside influences.

introduces the element of reason and justice as a vital
factor in the effort to solve the problem.
25. Furthermore,
the talks have definitely contributed to a better climate in the island and to the
prevailing calm. In spite of basic differences of
approach that still exist, my Government is determined
to continue the talks with patience and perseverance,
and with inexhaustable goodwill, towards a workable
solution. Both the interlocutors have stressed that
despite divergent views about major problems the local
talks provide the only course for solving differences
and eventually reaching over-all agreement.
26. We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
observation that the talks should be steadfastly and
honestly pursued with the aim of achieving a reasonable
and workable solution which would be neither avictory
nor a defeat for either side. For, indeed, no solution
can be a good solution if it is good for one side and
bad for the other. A solution is either a sound and
workable solution, a just solution, when it is a victory
for both sides, or it is an unjust, unsound and unworkable solution, in which case, it is a defeat for both
sides.

20. In the field of agriculture, which is the mainstay
of the island, a situation of severe drought, which
reduced the grain and olive crops by one half, was
this year met with assistance from the Government
to both Greek and Turkish Cypriot farmers valued at
f500,OOO and a total of 3,000 tons of barley, as well
as the distribution of food, with the assistance of the
World Food Programme, valued atf300,000, to Greek,
and Turkish villages alike.

27. The fundamental disagreement appears to be on
local government, which prevents substantial progress.
This is a new element. It did not exist in the Constitution under the Zurich and London Agreements on
which the Turkish Cypriots depend somuch. However,
the question is there now; it is being discussed and
it has proved to be the most difficult and intractable
problem in respect both of its meaning and of its
application.

21. It is significant to note in this respect that this
drought brought the Greek and Turkish farmers in the
stricken areas closer together, as the Secretary-General
has remarked, and created a spirit of solidarity among
them. That is an indication that the community of interests between the two elements of the population is
a powerful factor in guiding them towards the positive
value of collaboration and away from the sterility of
division and antagonism, As the Secretary-General
remarks in his observations, this development “seems
to indicate that with goodwill and when their common
interests are involved a rapprochement between the
communities is definitely possible” libid.]

28. As I stated at the last Security Council meeting
on this subject, last June:
“Upon the accepted norms, local government
could only have application to specific geographical
localities; it never has been nor could it be determined on ethnic criteria. Nor could it be conceived
as extending verticalIy from bottom to top to the
point of creating a State within a State. Straying
from the norms of a unitary State into the negativeor otherness of division”-constitutional
wise--“ does not provide a solution; it only aggravates the situation.

22. A growing spirit of conciliation and trust among
the people is the essential element for progress towards
solving the problem and bringing an auspicious influence towards solution of the problem.

“The Government of Cyprus, while making every
possible concession in order to meet the other side,
cannot possibly go beyond the framework of a unitary State in a way that wouId destroy the integral
unity of the island.” [1543rd meeting, paws. 22 and

23. This brings us to the intercommunal
talks. That
their pace is slow there can be little doubt. The prospects for a long-term settlement are a matter of
speculation; they do not seem very bright at present.
However, perseverance in a good effort and for a good
cause is always a virtue and should bring its reward.

23.1

29. The process of negotiation towards accommodation should always be governed by the over-all purpose
of achieving a solution which is just, workable and
enduring. To that end, we cannot abandon fundamental
principles
and universally accepted constitutional
norms. What we seek is a just and democratic solution
within the principles of the Charter and the relevant
United Nations resolutions on‘C.yprus, Our objective

24. Independently, however, of their actual yield at
any given time, the talks have their merit as a means
of communication
and exchange of views. There is
a dialogue; reasoned arguments have to be used, and
if they are to have any weight, they have to be based
. on fundamental
principles of the Charter. This
3

solution could not have failed to notice the string of
incidents and could not but have felt disappointed at
their regrettable consequence on the already slow and
laborious process of confidence-building
between the
two communities.

is an independent unitary State in which all Cypriots
will enjoy equal rights of citizenship without discrimination as to race, language or ethnic origin.
30. The Turkish Cypriot people already have, and
will continue to have, full autonomy in all matters concerned with religion, education, culture, personal
status and the like, They are also ensured of proportionate representation in all fields af public life. Our overriding concern is to achieve a settlement anchored
within the positive framework of mutual understanding, conciliation and unity.

39. Paragraph 35 of the report reiterates the importance attached by the Secretary-General to the consequences of these incidents. With the Council’s permission, I shall quote again from the report’:
“While, as already stqted, the military situatidn
has remained generally calm, certain acts of violence
and incidents have occurred which, even though they
have not seriously endangered the peace, have
tended to augment tension and to add to the sense
of mutual distrust. Some of these incidents, particularly the fatal shooting of a Turkish Cypriot
civilian and the wounding of two others at a National
Guard summer camp near Trikomo, are described
in some detail below.”

31. To that end, progress in normalization, in a prevailing situation of calm, and the continuation of the
talks will, we hope, create the necessary climate for
the solution of the problem, which in its nature is simple
but has been artificially complicated in a manner contrary to the interests of the people of Cyprus, both
Greek and Turkish. We trust that in an enlightened
new approach to this problem, and in the spirit of our
times, a solution will be reached not only in the interest
of the people of Cyprus but also in that of peace and
security in this sensitive region of the Mediterranean.

40. The report allocates several paragraphs-37
to
50-to the tragic events at Trikomo, where the shooting
of three Turkish Cypriots during illegal apprehension
was followed by an equally illegal and unconstitutional
judicial process.

32. The PRESIDENT
(translated~om
Russian): I
thank the representative of Cyprus for the words of
welcome and congratulations he has addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

41. This incident,.in which an individual was killed,
with twenty-seven wounds fired from close quarters,
and in which the culprits were pronounced not guilty,
was enodgh in itself to trigger the apprehension of the
Turkish Cypriots with regard to the practices and intentions of the Greek Cypriot Administration.

33. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Turkey, on whom I now call.
34. Mr. BAYULKEN
(Turkey): Mr. President, I
should first like to associate myself with the congratulations that have been expressed to you upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to extend our very best wishes to you.

42. Paragraphs 61 and 62 follow with the incidents
in Zeybekkay, where the Greek Cypriot administration
appeared to be manoeuvring to change the established
practices between the two communities.

35. I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the members of the Security Council for giving my
delegation the opportunity to participate in the deliberations of the Council today.

43. Again, in paragraphs 87, 88, 89, 90, 91 and 95
we find reference to top-level appointments, such as
cabinet posts, by the Greek Cypriot administration in
open contravention of the constitutional requirements.

36. We are meeting once again to consider the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nation Force
in Cyprus. We have before us the report of the
Secretary-General dated 2 December 1970. As usual,
it is a comprehensive report and brings us up to date
with the situation on the island. I shall take it as a
term of reference for my remarks.

44. Challenging established practice, this chain of
appointments cannot fail to impress one as a new
attempt to engage the basic principles of the problem.

“The situations in the last six months has remained
generally calm, but sporadic acts of violence and
a somewhat large number of incidents have tended
to increase tension’and distrust between the two
communities.”
I;sllOOOS and Corr.1, para. 2.1

45. During the period in which these tension-building
incidents took place, the cry of mask, namely the
subversion of independence, found new, intensive and
repetitive echoes in the voices of official Greek Cypriot
leaders, inspiring further distrust. It is no secret that
distrust between the two communities lies at the root
of the present difficulties. I am sure I am not pronouncing Solomon’s wisdom when I say that peaceful resolution lies in mutual effort at building up confidence.
But I must regretfully bonfess that the events I have
listed above and the pronouncements I have mentioned
have not been conducive to that end.

38. Indeed, he has focused his concern on the heart
of the matter which has prompted our increased worry
in the last six months. All those dedicated to a peaceful

46. If the Council will recall, in every previous
appearance before its members my delegation has
stressed the building of confidence and the nurturing

37. The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his
report, summarizes the conditions in Cyprus for the
period under consideration as follows:

4

of goodwill as the first imperative for the attainment
of a peaceful and agreed settlement. As I have always
emphasized, trust is the weathercock which determines
the atmosphere of the relations between the two communities in this critical period of intercommunal
talks.
As all of us dealing with international affairs are well
aware, trust is not a simple matter of spiritual or intellectual atmosphere. Indeed, trust is the basic problem
of security. This is especially true with the Turkish
Cypriot community. Their past experience and their
present position dictate their concern.

materially affect the course of events in cYPI*Us in
the months ahead.” [143&f meeting, prims.
32 md
34.1

50. The above statements express the grave concern
of the Secretary-General,
of UNFICYP
and of mY
delegation with regard to the importation
and distribution of those arms, Paragraph 28 of the present
report
raises the question of distribution once again, drawing
a distinction between light and heavy arms. In view
of the foregoing statement by the secretm-y-Gene~al
as quoted from his report of 1 I June 1968, and with
full regard for the consequences of that distribution
respecting intercommunal security and confidence
as
voiced by my delegation in 1968, I must emphasize
my Government’s refusal to accept any distribution.
I am sure that the descriptive passage in paragraph
28 of the report does not denote acquiescence
on the
part of the United Nations.

47. The report mentions two developments vitally
involving this aspect of the problem, developments
which, I must state, have aroused the grave concern
of my Government.
48. Paragraph 28 of the report deals with the distribution to the Greek Cypriot police of arms from the stocks
imported in 1966. It will be recalled that the importation
and distribution of those arms had elicited the concern
of the Council and of the Secretary-General.
In fact,
in his report to the Council on 11 June 1968, the
Secretary-General referring to attempts to distribute
those arms, stated:

51. The second point of concern on armaments
finds
mention in paragraphs 29 through 33 of the report.
With your permission, I will quote the first two paragraphs of that section:
“On 13 June 1970, an UNCIVPOL
patrol
was
refused access to the Limassol docks where military
stores were being unloaded, Not since 1967 had
UNCIVPOL
been prevented from entering
the harbour; nor would it appear, as far as UNFICYP
is
aware, that any sizable shipment of military
stores
arrived at that port in 1968 or in 1969.

“The Force had always refused to accept any distinction between light and heavy arms, as the undertaking given to me by the Government of Cyprus
covered all weapons without distinction.”
[S/8622,
pnra. 26.1

49. I beg the forbearance of the Council as I repeat
my delegation’s statement at that time by quoting from
the verbatim record of the 1432nd meeting:

“The attention of the Government was drawn to
this new restriction on UNCIVPOL’s
freedom
of
movement, which was considered contrary
to an oral
agreement concluded in September 1964 providing
for UNFICYP
to be given advance notification
of
the arrival at Limassol of ships carrying
military
stores and for members of the United Nations
Force
to be admitted to the docks at the time of unloading.”

“Finally, I have to refer to a matter which goes
to the very root of the sense of security with which
the Turkish community must be provided if the present atmosphere is to prevail. I refer to the heavy
and Iight weapons which the Greek Cypriot Administration imported’ to the island in December 1966..
Council will recall the tangible increase in tension
and worsening of the situation which was incurred
as a result of that move and the concern which the
Secretary-General expressed in his addendum to the
report of 8 December 1966 [S/7611/Add.f].

52. As the Council will immediately
recognize,
this
is a matter that involves the security of the Turkish
community. It is also a matter of mutual trust between
the two communities. And, last but not least, it is a
matter that envenoms the general atmosphere
of the
island, thus jeopardizing peace and calm.

“ . ..

53. The agreement of 1964 with regard to the import
of arms has been in operation for the last six years.
On many occasions the Secretary-General
has expressed his grave concern over the importation
of arms
and military material and equipment. My Government
cannot accept any change in the implementation
of
this agreement. Once again, I must reiterate
our desire
to draw attention to the grave consequences
of such
a move.

“It is our earnest hope that UNFICYP
will continue its representations with the Greek Cypriot
Adminstration
in order to dissuade it from such
action, calculated to create new tensions and suspicions. In the name of my Government, as well as
in the name of reason, I also call upon the Greek
Cypriot leadership to reconsider such a step. We
maintain the hope that the Greek Cypriot leaders
are sufficiently endowed with sagacity to weigh the
advantages and dangers of such a move. Is it better
to distribute a few hundred new and shiny arms,
many of them really heavy weapons of mass destruction; or is it wiser to exercise restraint and allow
the fresh attempts at reconciliation which are now
afoot to flourish? The answer to that question will

54. The report takes up normalization
as another
important item. In paragraph 72 it says that “since
my last report, the situation with regard to normaI
conditions has not changed significantly,
although
there
have been some encouraging developments,
particularly in the field of public services”.
The report
5

goes on to point out some developments in the
economic field, in agriculture, in public services and
in social insurance.

59. I must conclude my statement with refernce to
that aspect of the problem which is a matter of disappointme,nt as well as hope for us all. I am referring
to the intercommunal
talks. This contradiction finds
expression in paragraph 115 of the Secretary-General’s
report, in which he states that “with the passing of
time, this situation is threatening to become the way 1
of life of all Cypriots”.

55. In this connexion, in paragraph 117 the SecretaryGeneral expresses his hope for the establishment of
a number of common services and mixed institutions
whose main objective would be to serve the Cypriots
as a whole. The Secretary-General believes that such
services and institutions would also help to achieve
a rapprochement between the two communities. We
agree with him. Several proposals were made by the
Turkish community for the establishment of such
institutions. In fact, as I said in my previous intervention before the Council, the Turkish community stands
ready to reciprocate with goodwill any offer, any proposal that does nor entail an implicit or explicit infringement of its constitutional rights and prerogatives. But,
regrettably, in most instances no progress has been
achieved. The Turkish proposals were either laid on
the shelf or subverted to political ends.

60. My Government has on many occasions drawn
attention to this danger, which is inherent in the continuation of the situation. The Turkish community of
Cyprus has endured and proved that it can withstand
all the hardships of a physically separate existence.
The longer this separation continues, the more it
becomes normal.
61. The passage of time can thus only render a solution more difficult. This is the disappointing aspect
of the talks.
62. The Secretary-General,
in paragraph 119 of his
report, states that the negotiations should be “steadfastly and honestly pursued with the aim of achieving
a reasonable and workable compromise, which would
be neither a victory nor a defeat for either side”.

56. There are more than 20,000 people on the island
who have been displaced since 1963. They are living
away from the shelter of their homes, away from their
farms, deprived of their livelihood. Surely their return
to their own ancestral locations is a very important
aspect of return to normal conditions. The SecretaryGeneral recognizes in his report that they constitute
an important element in the process of normalization,
and states that “with some goodwill, it should be possible to approach the whole problem . . . from a
humanitarian rather than from a political point of view”
[S/l0005 and Corr.1, para. 841. We are informed by
the report that UNFICYP is prepared to assist in their
return. The Turkish community has already proposed
a joint committee with the participation of UNFICYP,
but unfortunately the situation has remained stagnant.
The ordeal of the 20,000 Turkish Cypriots continues
unchanged.

63. He further states: “I believe that the elements
necessary for a political settlement in Cyprus do exist
and that a compromise solution could be worked out”
[ibid, para. 1201.

64. I fully share that sentiment. My Foreign Minister
expressed the position of my Government on this
important issue during the general debate at the twentyfifth session. of the General Assembly and with your
permission, Mr. President, I will quote the relevant
passage. He said:
“The peculiar nature of the Republic of Cyprus,
composed of two national communities and based
on the equality of rights of those two different ethnic
entities as well as their proportional participation
at all levels of public activity, has been ratified by
constitutional and contractual provisions.

57. In addition to the deprivation of this important
segment of the population of the use of their property,
the Turkish community as a whole is deprived of its
share of the public revenue of the State, as well as
the aid that Cyprus is receiving from international
sources. When one talks of normalization, surely this
aspect of the problem cannot be excluded.

“The main objective of the talks that are under
way between the two communities of Cyprus is to
explore the possibilities of a return to constituionality
and the restoration of normal conditions. These
negotiations, which have been going on since June
1968, have not thus far led to an agreement between
the two communities of the island.

58. As a final point on normalization, I should like
to take up paragraph 85 of the report. The position
of the Turkish Cypriot community on this issue is clear.
It is living under ,difficult conditions; it is struggling
for the protection of its constitutional rights. It has
extended its co-operation to the dangerous limits of
its security; under the prevailing conditions in the
island, its security necessarily remains its prime
concern. Past experience has justified this sensitivity.
Indeed, I feel 1 must return to the initial theme of
my remarks: namely, the building up of confidence
and the nurturing of goodwill. Confidence and goodwill
breed a sense of security; security leads to co-operation
in other areas. I am sure that the members of the Council will agree with me that the cart should not be placed
before the horse.

“Despite the lack of optimism which is increasingly felt, we should like to go on hoping that some
day in the near future the door will onen to a just
and equitable solution of this question, safeguarding
the independence of Cyprus as well as the respective
rights and interests of the two communities within
the framework of the balance established, recognized
and respected at the inception of the State.“’
1 Officinl Records of the Gerwral Assembly, Twenty-jftli Sessim
Plennry Meetings, 1849th meeting, paras. 110-I 12.

6

65. We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General
’ “positive stability” -if I may use this term as the
in the concluding part of his report-more
specifically
antithesis of “negative stability”--can
only be estabin paragraph 120-refers to the purpose of the interlished in Cyprus by a positive conclusion to the negotiacommunal talks within the context of these general
tions between the two parts of the population. I have
principles. Indeed, since the very beginning of the
very often stated and reiterated to the Council: there
; efforts to work out a peaceful solution, the Turkish.
is no more rational formula than that of negotiations
community has been motivated by the same purpose
between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, But
expressed by the Secretary-General and has directed
I have also contended that the rate of these negotiations
itself to the re-establishment
of an independent,
should be speeded up and lead to a result as quickly
sovereign and unitary State, based on local autonomy,
as possible in the interests of the entire population
not on local government. Let me repeat that we conas well as that of peace and security.
tinue to hope that in the near future the door will open
to this just and equitable solution.
73. We maintain that stand in the assurance that it
would be to the detriment of all parties concerned if
66. Finally, may I be allowed to express once again
the ill omen which seems to fIow from the comments
my Government’s appreciation to Secretary-General
of the Secretary-General were to be realized, that is
U Thant, and Under-Secretaries-General
Bunche and
to say, to use his own words, that the present confrontation is threatening to become the way of life of all
.Rolz-Bennett, as well as to the Special Representative
Cypriots.
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and the Commander of the Force,
General Prem Chand, and all those serving under them.
74. It is for this reason that we are happy that the
report is not entirely devoid of a certain note of optiToday if we can look forward with some hope it is
mism since the Secretary-Genera! tells us that the two
due largely to the constructive and patient efforts of
those devoted people.
parts of the population now understand that the problem of Cyprus cannot be solved by resort to force.
67. Before concluding, I should also like to express
75. If this is the guiding motive of all sides and
our appreciation to the contributing
countries that
underlies the views of all in Cyprus, then it would
make it possible for UNFICYP to continue its imporbe opportune and consistent that the military confrontant task.
tation which the report details, be reduced, if it is not
possible to eliminate it totally. We continue to support
68. The PRESIDENT
(transZated fiotx Russian): I
any effort to this end made by the Special Representathank you for the kind words you have addressed to
tive of the Secretary-General and of the Commander
the President.
of the United Nations Force. I should like to express
our praise here for the services that they have rendered
69. The next speaker on my list is the representative
to the cause of peace.
of Greece, on whom I now call.
76. Furthermore, we are happy to read in the report
of some new encouraging events tending towards a
return to normal which did take place during the period
covered. We note, for example, the progress achieved
in the field of agriculture, where the Greek and Turkish
Cypriot farmers who have received governmental
assistance to confront the drought, have co-operated
more closely together. The Secretary-General has also
infokmed us of certain progress achieved in the field
of public services and others.

70. Mr. BITSIOS
(Greece) (itzterpretatiotz jkm
French): Mr. President, my delegation is very happy
to see. you presiding over the work of the Security
Council, and wishes to congratulate you. I wish to
thank you, Sir, as well as the other members of the
Council, for having granted my request to be allowed
to present the views of my delegation on the report
of the Secretary-General covering the past six months.
It is always pleasant for me to offer to U Thant the
assurance that the Greek Government
highly
appreciates the unflagging interest that he has shown
in the situation in Cyprus, in a return to normalcy,
and in the welfare of the population as a whole. Thus
the findings that he periodically submits to us on the
development of the situation in the Republic of Cyprus
are of great interest to us, and will, once again, be
the basis on our observations.

77. We also support any steps tending to increase
co-operation between the two elements of the population in different fields and particularly in the field of
the economy, in the field of displaced persons as well
as the restoration of freedom of circulation along the
road network where the Greek civilian population still
continues to experience difficulties. All of these collateral measures will lead to the creation of an
atmosphere of confidence which will greatly assist the
two negotiators, Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash, in
their delicate and difficult task.

71. What is striking in the conclusions of the report
is that the Secretary-General should state that the present situation in Cyprus is “one of ‘negative stability’,
qtiiet on the surface, but strained, abnormal and fraught
with the serious danger inherent in the continuing close
confrontation of well-armed and trained forces” [ibid.,
para. 1151.
72. This
delegation.

qualification
dois
not surprise
Our view was and remains that

78. Speaking of negotiations, we note another positive observation by U Thant when he assures us that
he will continue to believe that the necessary elements
for a political settlement do exist.

my
the
7

79. It is in fact satisfying to note that the conversations are continuing and that on all sides qualified personalities of the parties concerned have in their statements, which the report mentions, stated that despite
the existing difficulties, their desire is to maintain these
contacts and to arrive at a soIution.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resokltion

was adopted unanimously.

2

87. The PRESIDENT
(translated fiorn Russian):
Some members of the Council have put their names
down to speak after the vote.

80. On 5 September last, the Under-Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Palamas, made the following
statement concerning the problem of Cyprus:

88. Sir COLIN CROWE (United Kingdom): It is
gratifying to see that the Security Council is unanimous
in agreeing to the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus.

“The policy on the Greek side is still unchanged
in the sense of continuing the conversations between
the Cypriots in order to achieve a solution of the
Cyprus problem. There is no change in the position
on the Greek side concerning the framework of the
conversat@ns taking place.”

89. We are all agreed on the need to achieve a permanent settlement of the problems of Cyprus. We are
all agreed that, in the long run, the only basis for such
a settlement will be found in the continued existence
of an independent and unitary State, in which all the
peoples of the island can live peacefully side by side.
We are all agred that efforts must be made to overcome
the differences which so unhappily exist between the
two communities on the island. We are agreed, too,
that the best hope of doing this lies in the intercommunal talks.

81. Furthermore, in Brussels, Mr. Caglayangil and
Mr. Palamas exchanged views on the situation in
Cyprus. They particularly expressed their hope that
the intercommunal
conversations in Nicosia would
soon lead speedily to a positive result.
82. That was and still is the position of the Greek
Government. It will, as in the past, continue to encourage the holding of conversations between Greek and
Turkish Cypriots, and it is to be earnestly hoped thzlt
they will be imbued with a new dynamism that will
allow them to arrive at a long-term solution to the
many elements of the problem.

90. I should like to take this opportunity of thanking
the Secretary-General for another admirable and clear
report. This report bring’s out very well just how much
the United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) contributes to the creation and preservation of an atmosphere in the island which allows the
intercommunal talks to continue and have some chance
of success.

83. In the meantime we support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General for a six-month prolongation
of the mandate of the United Nations force in Cyprus
according to the terms of Security Council resolution
186 (1964) of 4 March 1964.

91. It would also be appropriate for me at this point
to join in the tributes which have been paid to the
Secretary-General’s
Special Representative on the
island, Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
and to the Commander of
UNFICYP,
General Prem Chand, both of whom so
deservedly enjoy the confidence and admiration of US
all.
92. My Government shares the Secretary-General’s
regret that more progress has not been made towards
a return to normal conditions on the island, but we
welcome the fact that there have been somk signs,
however few, of such normalization, and we share the
Secretary-General’s
hope that progress can be made
towards that end, for example, by the establishment
of common services and mixed institutions whose main
objective would be to serve the people of Cyprus as
a whole. Practical forms of intercommunal
cooperation in the administrative
and economic fields
are one of the best ways of building up trust between
people.

84. My Government,
whose contribution
to the
financing of this operation has now risen to $9.25 million, will do all in its power to maintain this contribution, while hoping that the appeal launched by
the Secretary-General will find a favourable echo
among the other Members of our Organization.
85. Before concluding I should like to repeat the
thanks of my delegation to the Secretary-General and
to his distinguished assistants, both here and in Cyprus
for the patience and perseverance with which they
have, over a long period of years, carried out a peaceful
mission which does honour to the United Nations.
Their mission would not have been possible without
the understanding and the sense of responsibility which
the Security Council has consistently shown and without the spirit of solidarity which the Member States
have shown who are participating in the composition
of the United Nations force, as well as those who have
contributed so generously to its financing.

93. My Government believes that, in all the &cumstances, the Secretary-General was right to recommend
a further six-month extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP and we welcome the fact that the Security
Council has agreed to that recommendation.

86. The PRESIDENT
(Translatedfiom Russinrz): The
list of those wishing to speak before the vote is
exhausted. If no representative wishes to speak now,
the Security Council will proceed to vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/10036.

94. I am therefore glad to be able to state that the
United Kingdom
will maintain its contipgent in
2 See resolution 291 (1970).

8

UNFICYP for the period of the renewed mandate and
will meet all its costs. Provided other major contributors agree to maintain their voluntary contributions at the same level as before, we are prepared in
addition to make our usual voluntary financial contribution of&312,500 towards the cost of the Force for each
of the two quarters, beginning 16 December 1970. We
hope, however, that the Secretary-General will continue to keep in mind the possibility of further reductions in the strength and cost of the Force, if the operational needs of the situation should permit them.

further reductions can and should be contemplated.
This is particularly important because the difficulties
of meeting UNFICYP costs have abated only slightly.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
to
obtain additional pledges, as well as payments on previous pledges, and we hope that present contributors
and others will respond. At a time when the United
Nations is seeking to revitalize its peace-keepingprocedures it would be most incongruous if UNFICYP’s
task in Cyprus were to be prejudiced by lack of necessary financial support. My Government is prepared
to do its part, but considers that no single Member
should bear a disproportionate
share of the burden.
In this connexion, I shouId like once again to make
clear that in Iinking the amount of our payments to
the amounts paid by others, the United States hopes
to encourage additional contributions.

95. Those who bear the burden of providing financial
and material supportfor UNFICYP cannot be expected
to do so indefinitely. We are therefore-and
I stress
this-anxious
that the parties to the dispute should
now make a more intense effort to achieve a constitutional settlement,

100. The United States notes with pleasure that in
the period under review-June to December 1970-the
serious incidents which occurred during the previous
review period were not duplicated. As the SecretaryGeneral points out in his report, however, a number
of dangerous incidents did occur, most notably the
one at Trikomo on 11 August. Fortunately, these were
handled with good sense and calmness by all parties.
Perhaps we may hope this portends a permanent reduction‘in intercommunal tension. Cyprus needs internal
stability: it is the essential precondition for progress
towards lasting intercommunal arrangements and for
further general economic growth.

96. Mr. PHILLIPS
(United States of America): May
I first of all say how pleased we are to have present
with us today the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
as well as
the Commander of the United Nations Force, General
Prem Chand. They deserve, I think, the thanks of us
all for the very important services they are rendering
the United Nations in helping foster conditions which
we hope will facilitate progress towards a peaceful solution of the problems of Cyprus.
97. The United Nations Force in Cyprus has continued to perform its functions with high efficiency
and great skill. It has prevented incidents from occurring, and has handled those which did occur during
the past six months in a manner which prevented their
escalation. In the United States view, the presence
of the United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) continues to be necessary for the maintenance of peace in Cyprus. Accordingly, we have supported extension of the UNFlCYP
mandate for a
further six-month period. We consider that the purpose
of that extension, like the previous ones, is not to give
permanent status to UNFICYP,
but to facilitate the
attainment of a satisfactory solution of the intercommunal problem and thus permit not only the withdrawal
of UNFICYP
in due course but also the resumption
of a normal life by all the people of Cyprus.

101. We observe with regret that the intercommunal
talks seem to have lost momentum, virtually no progress having been made in the last six months. Both
sides seem to have adopted more rigid positions. Yet
those talks represent the best method of settling the
intercommunal
problem. Unless the talks can move
forward in a spirit of accommodation and trust, Cyprus
and its neighbours and friends can never be sure that
the stability of the area will not be disrupted. We therefore urge both sides to redouble their efforts to deal
with the difficult but far from insoluble constitutional
problems of a Cyprus settlement. It is important that
semantic difficulties and disputes over abstractions
should be bypassed, so that there may be the necessary
concentration
on specific measures which
will
safeguard the legitimate rights of all elements in Cyprus
within the framework of a uhified, independent
and
democratic State.

98. We regret exceedingly the necessity of having
to point out that that return to normal conditions was
not advanced during the past six months. As the
Secretary-General stated in his excellent report:

102. While this process is going on, the parties should
continue at the same time to seek agreement on
measures which will tend to normalize living conditions
in Cyprus for all its inhabitants. We applaud the serious
efforts now being made to settle the long-standing problem of refugees. For too long this subject has been
bedevilled by what appear to us to be pohtical considerations, while human beings continue to suffer. We
hope the current efforts will produce real and lasting
results. If they should not, we suggest that the parties
consider a resort to some type of independent thirdparty assistance to ascertain facts, evaluate difficulties
and assist the two sides in arranging equitable remedial
measures. It seems to us that the United Nations itself

“The situation now prevailing in Cyprus is one
of ‘negative stability’, quiet on the surface, but
strained, abnormal and fraught with the serious danger inherent in the continuing close confrontation
of well armed and trained forces.” [s/10005 and
Corr.1, para. 115.1

This assessment must remain very much in our minds.
99. My delegation believes that, for the moment,
UNFICYP should not be further reduced in size. As
and when the intercommunal
situation improves,
9

is best fitted to provide this independent third-party
function. The impartial expertise of the SecretaryGeneral Special Representative, together with his
highly competent staff, is already at hand. Such thirdparty assistance could be useful in pushing through
to fruition the long-standing proposals for the elimination of confrontation through a reciprocal pull-back
from areas of close armed contact between the two
communities.

the Foreign Minister of Turkey pledging not to spare
any effort or sacrifice for the achievement of peace
andjustice in Cyprus. The emphasis of the Prime Minister of Greece on the independent
and unitary
framework of Cyprus and the consolidation of ditente
and peace is likewise most welcome.
108. Today we have heard our colleagues, the
IAmbassador of Cyprus, the Ambassador of Turkey
and the Ambassador of Greece, and we express to
them our appreciation for their constructive attitudes.
With all the parties we have the most intimate relationships, spiritual, cultural, political and economic, apart
from the historic ties of neighbourliness which bind
us all together. Therefore let us voice the sincere hope
that, with the contribution of all, unity and peace will
reign in independent and sovereign Cyprus.

103. Though the danger in Cyprus may be smaller
today than it has been at certain periods, it obviously
still exists. We are sure that all members of this Council
will join with us in expressing the hope that before
it is time again to consider an extension of the
UNFICYP mandate some real progress towards a solution may be made. Peace-keeping in Cyprus, as
elsewhere, is intended to facilitate peace-making and
not to substitute for it. We hope all interested parties
will quickly demonstrate their intention to do their
share to bring about a just and equitable solution to
the Cyprus problem.

109. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): The Council is
meeting again to consider for the second time this year
the extension of the life of the United Nations PeaceKeeping Force in Cyprus. The report of the SecretaryGeneral, contained in document S/l0005 and Corr,l
of 2 December 1970, which is before the Council and
covers the period from 2 June to 1 December 1970,
has provided this body with a fair, balanced and objective analysis of the situation existing in the island.

104. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The Security Council has
good grounds for renewing for another six months the
United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in Cyprus. We
wish to pay the Secretary-General, his staff, his Special
Representative in Cyprus, the Chief of Staff and the
personnel of the United Nations Force in Cyprus a
high tribute for the salutary role they are playing in
calming the tension between the two communities and
circumventing every possible misunderstanding which
may lead to aggravation of the tension.

110. Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
and to his Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
as well as .to the Force Commander, Major General
Prem Chand, for the serious efforts they have made
in their various areas of influence and authority to bring
together the peoples of the island. Thanks to them, my
delegation notes, there has been a considerable reduction in the number of shooting incidents that took place
this year in comparison with previous years, and no
member of the Peace-Keeping Force suffered any casualty in action during the-period under consideration.
We note in particular the reduction in manned military
posts from fifty-nine to fifty-six.

105. On the whole, as the report in our hands clearly
concludes, the situation has remained calm. However,
the few incidents which have occurred are regrettable,
as they entailed unnecessary loss of life. These can
be avoided through more co-operation, which is necessarily conducive to the removal of mistrust. The
Government of Cyprus and the Turkish leadership are
showing statesmanship and exercising restraint, and
we appeal to them to enhance this process. It is essential now for Cyprus and for its independence and unity,
which we all uphold, to transform the “negative stability”, of which the report speaks, into a positive and
durable one.

111. It is a matter of concern to my delegation, as
I believe it is to all delegations gathered here today,
that no significant improvement has been made on last
year’s position. At the same time, it would not be doing
justice to the efforts of all concerned to say that some
encouraging developments had not been observed. In
the area of semi-autonomous
and non-governmental
institutions, for example, closer co-operation between
Greek and Turkish Cypriots is much in evidence. This
is indeed substantiated by the return of the Turkish
Cypriots to the grain and loan commissions and their
participation in the newly established labour advisory
board and in other areas of mutual co-operation, such
as public services and social insurance and to some
extent in the fields of agriculture and rehabilitation1

106. Many activities in the economic and technological training fields point to positive developments in
the consolidation of communal links. The more these
grow the more the oneness of interests and aspirations
emerges. That is the goal to work for. Although the
talks between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash have
not yet removed the differences, there are signs of
progress and many points of agreement, and we appeal
to both leaders to intensify their efforts. Their country
would reap the most beneficial results from their
agreement. If they could accomplish this, they would
have the gratitude of Cyprus and the esteem of the
international community1

112. Some achievements are also noticeable in the
intercommunal
talks going on between the two interlocutors, Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash, who represent the Greek and Turkish Cypriot elements, and even
though little significant or far-reaching gains have been

107. We are most encouraged in our sincere wishes
for the prosperity of Cyprus and the concord of its
citizens by the statements of the Prime Minister and
10

made, yet my delegation agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s evaluation that the talks have helped considerably to reduce the political crisis, lessen tension,
make it possible to conduct daily work in an easier
atmosphece and thereby dissipate suspicions existing
between the two sides.

119. The trend which we already noted last June has
continued, it is true, and the number of firing incidents
has again decreased. Nevertheless, in Trikomo there ,
has been loss of life; despite the constant efforts of,
the United Nations Force, no progress has been made I
towards a desirable military disengagement; freedom
of movement remains hindered; the persistence of deep
mistrust and suspicion are a continuing obstacle to the
return home of thousands of displaced Turkish Cypriots; while in the economic sphere, the trend towards
separate development has not really been stopped.
Over the years this uneasy and absurd existence has
become the daily way of life for the island population.
Between the two communities, though they are inevitably destined to live and to work together, the gulf
grows wider every day, and armed men stand guard
on either side of the abyss.

113. Apart from this, however, no substantial progress has been made in advancing the intercommunal
talks after two and a half years. From the report of
the Secretary-General,
we note that no significant
advance has been made towards a return to normal
conditions, particularly in the area of freedom of movement for unarmed citizens along all roads in the island.
114. Perhaps one reason preventing any major armed
clashes could be attributed to the attitude of the leaders
of both communities.
In his address to the United
Nations last October at the 1882nd plenary meeting,
His Beatitude, Archbishops Makarios,
specifically
referred to the determination
of both sides to solve
their differences at the conference table. VicePresident Ki.iciik has also made public his hopes for
a solution based on a partnership which takes into
account their national identities and communal interests.

120. It is clear that the indefinite maintenace of the
United Nations Force, while fortunately helping to
avoid the worst, is not sufficent to prevent the rising
danger. It is clear that a return to normal means that
there must be, and soon, a political solution between
the parties directly concerned based on a sincere desire
to co-exist in peace and to co-operate with respect
for the legitimate rights of the reconciled communities,
but also with the constant concern to work together
so that the Republic of Cyprus may be a State fully
and peacefully enjoying the prerogatives of sovereignty
and independence, a country where the energies of
all are employed in ensuring the welfare, prosperity
and dignity of all.

115. The restraint demonstrated in the speeches of
the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey this
afternoon no doubt echoes the general outlooks of theil
Governments and reflects in the main the fact that
all sides of the dispute are agreed that the problem
cannot be settled by force; that an independent,
sovereign and unitary State of Cyprus is desired by
all without exception.

121. Yet this solution, which has been pursued in
vain for years and which we all earnestly desire, is
in no way beyond reach. Our Secretary-General
already told us this in his report dated 1 June; he
reminds us again today that “the elements necessary
for political settlement in Cyprus do exist”[iDid., pam
1201 and he feels that a compromise can undoubtedly
be arrived at, particularly with regard to the crucial
question of local government. As of now, the report
tells us, “there are a number of helpful measures which
both sides could take without endangering their political and security positions” [iDid., para. 1161.

116. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in document S/10036 because it is convinced that the removal of the Force would result in
a worsening of the situation.
117. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interl pretatian fior?z Frerzch): Regularly every six months
our Cquncil meets to consider a report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus. Regularly, the only solution is to ask the Security Council to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Force for a further six-month period. Regularly, this
recommendation
is unanimously
approved by the
Council, in view of the agreement to such extension
by the parties directly concerned.

122. The suggestions made to the Turkish Cypriots
could, if agreed to, help to create an atmosphere of
greater mutual trust and go far towards improving the
living conditions of their community. And a determined
move on the part of the Government to solve the problem of displaced persons would perhaps help, by putting an end to a painful and alarming situation, to start
things moving towards the necessary greater understanding and greater unity. The Cypriot Head of State,
too, speaking at the l882nd plenary meeting on 23
October last from the rostrum of the United Nations,
assured us that “this problem is simple in nature and
easy of solution when free from artificial complexities
introduced from outside”. His Government, as he said
among other things, ‘Lwas seeking ajust and democratic
solution based on the free will of the people of Cyprus
in conformity with the principles of the Charter and
the reIevant resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly”.

118. The French delegation has once again supported
such a resolution. However, it would like once again
to indicate its misgivings at the perpetuation in Cyprus
of a precarious and threatening situation. That situation
has rightly been depicted by our Secretary-Genefal as
“quiet on the surf&e, but strained, abnormal and
fraught with the serious danger inherent in the continuing close confrontation of well armed and trained
forces” [ibid., pam. 1151, and all delegations have
repeated these words from the Secretary-General’s
excellent report.
11

123. Finally, on 21 September last, the talks between
the representatives of the two communities WelIt intO
their fourth phase. In the opinion of those principally
involved, “despite divergent views about major points,
the local talks have provided the only course for solving
differences and reaching eventual over-all agreement”

spread to their leaders. As the resolution says, it is
the leaders that should display greater moderation and
resolutely pursue their concerted efforts with new
dynamism, as has also been emphasized, so that an
anguished population may at last know peace.

[ibid., para. IO].

129. There have been many such exhortations over
the past seven years; in the end, they must surely be
heeded.

124. Despite the profound differences that subsist on
the problem oflocal administration, the Turkish Cypriot
representative feels that “as a result of these talks. . .
the political crisis had considerably abated, tension
had lessened and daily work was being conducted in
an easier atmosphere” [ibid.]. If a final settlement is
unfortunately not yet in sight, the two parties, we are
told, do now recognize that “a settlement can be
worked out on the basis of an independent, sovereign
and unitary State of Cyprus in which the two communities participate” [ibid., para. 120).

130. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): My delegation
voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/10036 because we believe it is basically
in the best interests of all the people of Cyprus.
131. It is with a certain amount of disappointment
that we observe from the report of the SecretaryGeneral that the period under review has been marked
by an atmosphere of “negative stability”. We have
always held the view that unless substantial progress
is made towards resolving Lhe outstanding political
questions on the island the presence of the United
Nations Force might become a permanent feature of
the island.

125. In the circumstances, my delegation feels that
the maintenance of the United Nations Force for a
further period of six months could, by avoiding fresh
confrontations,
help to smooth what the report
describes as an arduous road to areasonable and practical compromise.

132. We hope that the intercommunal
talks, which
started two and a half years ago, will produce answers
that will lead to a long-term settlement of this important
problem.

126. But it should be emphasized once again that the
presence of the United Nations Force is justified only
to the extent that it can facilitate such a development.
The quasi-automatic prolongation, in difficult financial
circumstances, of an operation decided upon almost
seven years ago could certainly not be viewed favourably if its only effect was to crystallize a dangerous
situation and serve as a pretext for the indefinite postponement of the necessary compromise. From that
point of view I should like, in concluding, to make
two comments.

133. The question of financing peace-keeping operations of the United Nations is an important and urgent
one. It is obvious that the system of financing such
important peace-keeping efforts of the United Nations
through insufficient and uncertain voluntary contributions from Member States is unsatisfactory and
unrealistic to say the least. We hope that the Security
Council will recognize the absurdity of that anomaly
and move speedily to take corrective measures. The
Secretary-General cannot be expected to finance this
expensive yet necessary effort from empty coffers.

127. First, like the Secretary-General we regret that
the parties are still more or less reluctant to respond
positively to the repeated appeals of the Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and the commander of
the Force, General Prem Chand, “to reduce, if not
altogether eliminate, close and dangerous military confrontations in several sensitive areas of the island”
[ibid., para. 1165. The Secretary-General’s choice of
the Cyprus team has been particularly fortunate. It
may be said that the Cyprus team is a model team.
Both parties then should take advantage of the presence of men as impartial, moderate and imbued with
the spirit of justice and peace as Mr. Osorio-Tafall
and his colleagues, ‘so that they may play their role
as catalysts Of debnte, entente and co-operation, and
so that they may conciliate what is opposed and unite
what is divided,

134. We express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, to
the Commander of the Force, to the officers, men and
civilian staff of the United Nations Force in Cyprus
for the commendable manner in which they have performed their important duties. We are grateful to the
parties immediately
concerned for the restrained
manner in which they have explained their respective
positions. We have every reason to believe that that
feeling of cordiality will be reflected among the people
of the island itself.
135. Without being over optimistic, I venture to say
that this may be the last meeting of the Council 1 shall
attend as a member of the Security Council. I therefore
consider it appropriate to take leave of my colleagues
on the Council, I have enjoyed working with all Of
them, and will always cherish the co-operation and
assistance they have given me throughout my two long
and sometimes bitter years as a member of the Security
Council.

128. Our second observation is that this year’s serious
drought led the farmers of the two communities to
co-operate more closely and to settle with ease a
number of local disputes-even in zones regarded as
very sensitive. This spirit of co-operation in a time
of natural disaster surely suggests we can expect more
of men’s wisdom. The climate of reconciliation that
for a while prevailed among simple peasants can surely
12

136. It has not always been possible for me to agree
with the positions taken by certain members on all
the issues that have been before the Council. I can,
however, say that even when agreement did not exist
understanding remained a permanent attribute of the
Zambian delegation,

142. While the basic problem of Cyprus remains
unsolved, it is understandable that the SecretaryGeneral has had no choice but to propose a further
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Force
in %X-us. The presence of the United Nations Force
continues to be, in large measure, a guarantee of continued tranquillity and a prerequisite for any prospect
of progress in the intercommunal talks,

137. Wheti we became members of the Security
Council two years ago we had high hopes of the ability
of the Security Council to resolve the outstanding problems threatening international peace and security. As
we make our exit from the Council, it is necessary
to state that our high hopes have been considerably
deflated by the Council’s inability to protect the interests of small States and to enforce its own decisions.
The Council suffers from a very serious crisis of confidence in the world today and that dangerous state of
affairs will continue unless this principal organ of the.
United Nations is prepared to grow and undergo natural
changes that will bring it more in line with the realities
of 19’70. We cannot continue forever to live in the year
1945 and the sooner we recognise that reality the better
for all of US and the better for the United Nations.

143. Since the Security Council now has decided to
extend the mandate of UNFICYP,
I am authorized
to state that Finland is prepared to maintain its contingent with UNFICYP for the next period under the
same arrangements as before. We are similarly prepared to continue voluntary financial contributions for
the maintenance of the Force on the island,
144. However, with regard to the manner in which
UNFICYP
is being financed, I am obliged to repeat
once more my Government’s view that reliance on
voluntary contributions, from arelatively small number
of Member States, is unacceptable in principle and
unsatisfactory in practice. We firmly hold the view
that peace-keeping operations based on decisions that
the Security Council has taken on behalf of all Member
States should be paid for by all, and we trust that
this principle will be upheld in any future agreement
on the financing of peace-keeping operations.

138. From a purely selfish point of view we are very
happy to be coming to the end of our turn, because
the Security Council will no longer have the representative of Zambia to kick around, Were someone to ask
US what our contribution
had been in the Council during
the last two years, I would simply say, I do not know.

145. Let me conclude by commending, on behalf of
my Government, all those who have worked and continue to work, with such great patience, for a peaceful
settlement in Cyprus.

139. The PRESIDENT
(translared from Russian): I
believe I shall not be at fault if I express gratitude
to the representative of Zambia for his personal contribution and for the contribution of his country to
the work of the Security Council. I should also like
to thank him for the good wishes which he has extended
to the Security Council and to the members of the
Council on his departure.

146. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA
(Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spnlzish): I too wish most cordially
to congratulate you, Ambassador Malik, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Your outstanding abilities and well-known international expertise guarantee the success of your tenure.
We know that you are achieving that success to
everyone’s satisfaction.

140. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): The SecretaryGeneral states in his report on Cyprus that the situation
there has remained generally calm and that no major
incidents have occurred during the last six mpnths.
But the report does not convey any sense of progress.
The Secretary-General, on the contrary, describes the
situation as one of “negative stability”. He adds that
with the passing of time this situation is threatening
to become a way of life in Cyprus, a way of life in
which the continued presence of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force has become an integral part. This
is a matter that must cause considerable concern.
141. We are,‘of course, aware of the complexity of
i the issues in the intercommunal talks and we do not
underestimate the difficulties involved. But the warning repeatedly voiced by the Secretary-General that
the passage of too much time might hamper rather
than facilitate a settlement seems to us more than amPlY
justified. The Security Council cannot resign itself to
the automatic renewal, every six months, of the United
Nations peace-keeping presence on the island. Having
created the conditions in which the intercommunal
talks can take place, the Council is entitled to express
its firm expectation that these talks should be carried
on with energy and determination.

147. I am also happy to congratulate the Ambassador
of Syria, Mr, Tomeh, on the skilful way in which he
discharged his duties as President during the month
of November. We were not at all surprised at his
success, for we know his diplomatic ability and his
deep humanity.
148. May I now express the hopes of Nicaragua that
a happy and fraternal understanding will be achieved
among the noble people of Cyprus. While, in the resolution that we have unanimously adopted this afternoon,
we state that “in the present circumstances the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus is still needed
if peace is to be maintained in the island”, nothing
could please us more than to hear-and I would hope
that it could be very soon-that the Unite< Nations
presence is no longer required for the mamtenance
of peace in that noble nation.
149. If the Republic of Cyprus is, as we know it to
be, one of the great treasures of history, peace for
our friends the Cypriots should be the greatest treasure
13

for them: peace of mind, peace in the souls of men,
peace in the thoughts of men, peace in the homes of
men, and peace that will reaffirm the great future of
that nation, born, as were all our nations for freedom
and glory.

worsen the situation in Cyprus in accordance with
Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964. .
158. Today the Security Council is once again considering the Cyprus question in connexion with the
report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the period from 2 June to 1
December 1970.

150. That is hope of my country, Nicaragua. I speak
these thoughts very happily this afternoon, congratulating our outstanding Secretary-General, U Thant, for
the excellent report he has submitted to us-excellent
because it is constructive and gives us guidelines
regarding the United Nations operation in Cyprus. My
congratulations are also addressed to his distinguished
assistants, all of whom are worthy of our highest
admiration.

1.59.- The Soviet delegation could not fail to note the
fact that this report mentions that the talks in Cyprus
between representatives of the Greek and Turkish communities are continuing with a view to settling the problems that have arisen between them. We sincerely hope
for the speedy success of these talks since only through
such talks, based on mutual understanding and goodwill and free from outside interference, can conditions
be created which would ensure a peaceful life and security for all Cypriots-both
Greek and Turkish-who
are all citizens of a sovereign State, the Republic of
Cyprus.

15 1. The PRESIDENT
(translrrtedfiom Russian): I
thank you for the words of welcome and congratulations you have addressed to the President of the Security Council.
1.52. Permit me now to make the following statement
as representative of the SOVIET UNION.

160. The delegation of the Soviet Union would, in
particular, like to say that it shares the concern, expressed in the Secretary-General’s
report, over the lack
of progress on fundamental questions in these talks.

153. The position of the Soviet Union on the question
of Cyprus has been explained on many occasions in
statements by the Soviet Government and in statements by representatives of the Soviet Union in the
Security Council and elsewhere. This position remains
fully valid and unchanged.

161. The report contains a recommendation
that the
stationing of United Nations Forces in Cyprus should
be extended once again for a further period of six
months.

154. The Soviet Union has based and still bases its
position on the fact that the question of Cyprus should
be settled by peaceful means in the interests of the
people of Cyprus and in the interests of the relaxation
of tension in that part of the world. Such a settlement
should be based on respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus, which, as a sovereign State Member of the
United Nations, pursues a policy of peace, a policy
of non-alignment with military blocs,

162. In this connexion it should be noted that almost
seven years have already elapsed since the United
Nations forces first appeared in Cyprus for reasons
which are well known. Such a lengthy stay in the island
cannot in any way be regarded as normal. The Soviet
delegation still maintains that this United Nations operation cannot, and should not, continue indefinitely.
It stands to reason that such a lengthy stationing of
foreign troops in the territory of an independent
sovereign State, even under the auspices of the United
Nations, can only be a short-term exceptional measure,
which should be terminated
at the very first
opportunity. The Soviet delegation expresses the hope
that this opportunity will present itself not later than
the end of the next six-month period for the stationing
of United Nations forces in Cyprus. On this understanding only, and also in view of the position taken
on this question by the parties concerned and, in particular, by the Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
the Soviet delegation will not now raise the question
of the withdrawal of these forces from the territory
of cyprlls.

155. There is, and there can be, no doubt that the
solution of the domestic affairs of Cyprus is a matter
for the Cypriots themselves. The question of Cyprus
must be settled without outside interference. The lawful rights of the Greek and the Turkish people in Cyprus
must be fully respected by all. The Soviet Union is
resolutely opposed to any attempt to infringe upon the
sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus and to any plan
to settle the question of Cyprus behind the back of
the people of Cyprus to the detriment of their,interests
and to further the imperialist purposes of certain
Powers which are members of NATO.

163. With regard to the resolution just adopted by
the Security Council, the Soviet delegation considers
it necessary, in particular, to note that, in connexion
with the proposal to extend the stationing of United
Nations forces in Cyprus for a further period of six
months, the resolution reaffirms the provisions of
Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964
and also subsequent decisions of the Council on the
Cyprus question. We regard this circumstance as a
key factor in determining the attitude of the Soviet
Union to the resolution which has just been adopted.

1.56. It is our deep conviction that, in order to ensure
the complete independence and integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, all foreign troops should be withdrawn
from its territory and all alien military bases there
should be dismantled.
157. The Soviet delegation would also like to
emphasize the need for all States Members of the
United Nations to refrain from any action likely to
14

164. The delegation of the USSR is instructed to state
that, for the reasons indicated, the Soviet Union did
not vote against the adoption of the resolution providing for an extension of the stationing of United Nations
forces in Cyprus for a further period of six months,
on the understanding that thi.s extension is to be
effected in full accordance with the provisions of the
first resolution of the Security Council on the Cyprus
question to which I referred, namely, that the functions
of the Uhited Nations forces in Cyprus will remain
limited as before and that the present arrangements
for their financing will be maintained, that is to say
that the financing will continue to be on a voluntary
basis.

is a matter which might create a psychological situation
in which the guard who has responsibility finds himself
obliged to fire.
170. Now, in this case there was admittedly excess.
That is why the guards were punished. But how many
cases do we hear of every day in which there is such
excess? According to the law, if one is in a restricted
military area and is called upon to stop, and does not
stop, the guard is entitled to shoot. Therefore, the
coroner was not unjustified in finding that there was
no criminal responsibility.
171. At the same time the guards were tried on disciplinary offenses and the court punished those responsible for so acting, in confusion. One was sentenced
to forty days, and the other to two months imprisonment. The Government paid compensation of 14,000
in one case, andf8,OOO in another, andf300 in yet
another. So I think that this extraordinary blowing up
of this case is merely a propaganda affair and has no
relation to realities. But let us compare that situation
with any other situation.

165. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I have asked to speak in
order to express my profound thanks and gratitude
to the Ambassador of Nicaragua for the very warm
and courteous thoughts he has expressed about me.
166. The PRESIDENT
(tr.nnslated Franz Russian):
The representative of Cyprus has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I now call upon him.

172. At midnight those three Turkish Cypriots chose
to go into a restricted military area; they left the public
road and took a special road to go there. They were
in a car without lights on, and this was considered
suspicious.

167. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): At the outset I should
like to thank the members of the Security Council for
their kind words in respect of Cyprus and for the understanding they have shown of the problem. First of all,
I should like to thank particulcZrly the representatives
of Nicaragua and of Syria for their warm words concerning the history of Cyprus and its position in the
world. Then 1 should like to refer to the deep understanding of the problem of Cyprus shown by the representative of France. He has hit the nail on the head
and has shown that he has studied the question deeply
and in a spirit that derives from dedication to the principles of the Charter and to the need for their application
in the world if we are to have peace. I therefore thank
him particularly for mentioning the rights of the Cypriot
people, as a single whole, to self-determination,
and
also for realizing and emphasizing that the question
of Cyprus is a simple one that could easily be solved
if there were no outside interference.

173. Now we come to another incident in the report:
Limnitis.
A Greek Cypriot teacher has missed a
convoy. He therefore asks a guard from UNFICYP
to accompany him to a Turkish Cypriot post in order
to be allowed to go to his village for a legitimate purpose. There he is manhandled, without cause, by the
Turkish armed men, merely because he asks to pass.
This was not a restricted military area and he had to
go there for alegitimate purpose. True, when the matter
was taken up then, those responsible said: “When there
is a legitimate purpose and he is accompanied by
UNFICYP
we will allow it”, which means they recognized that it was a legitimate purpose.
174. Now I come to the other point raised by the
representative of Turkey: the arms. I would remind
him that Cyprus is a sovereign State, a Member of
the United Nations and not a vassal State of Turkey;
Turkey cannot dictate to Cyprus what it shall do and
what it shall not do, what arms it should have for its
police and what arms it should not have. Cyprus is
a Member of the United Nations and it has complete
independence and sovereignty. It may, of its own
accord, accept a United Nations Force, but only to
the extent that it is willing to accept such a force.
From the very beginning the Republic of Cyprus has
said that its decision of arming itself, when necessary,
was its sovereign right. It agrees to co-operate with
UNFICYP,
but grqnts no right to any other State to
interfere in its internal affairs.

168. Next I want to thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for speaking about the independence
and unity of Cyprus-about
the people of Cyrpus living
together side by side as one people and to the United
States representative for his reference to the need for
a solution in Cyprus within the framework of a unified,
independent and democratic State. Then I should like
to thank all the other representatives who spoke,,abont
the position of Cyprus and the problem before VS.
169. Now I should like to say a few words-or
perhaps more than a few-to the representative
of
Turkey, who made a disparaging statement about the
Government
of Cyprus regarding an incident in
Trikomo. That incident took place in a restricted military area-no one was allowed to enter it, neither
Greeks nor Turks nor any one else-and
as we all
know, military discipline in such areas is very strict,
and one has to be very careful. Suspicious movements
of persons who run away when they are asked to stop

175. Then I should like to point out discrepancies
in statements of the representative of Turkey. On the
one hand he says that he wants and treasures the
independence of Cyprus, and on the other hand. he
15

treats Cyprus as a vassal State and tramples upon its
independence.
On the one hand the representatives
of Turkey speak about being opposed to etzosis and
wanting to save the independence of Cyprus and on
the other they are ready to throw away the independence of Cyprus if they can get a part of its territory.
I shall quote only one instance. The former Foreign
Minister of Turkey, Mr, Erkin, said that the “radical
solution . . . would be to cede one part of Cyprus to
Greece and the other, closest to the Turkish Asiatic
coast, to Turkey”.

revenge this is not making any effort toward normalization. I am reluctant to do this, but in the circumstances I have to refer to a letter which I sent to the
Secretary-General on 7 October 1970 in which I drew
his attention to a speech delivered by the commander
of the Turkish contingent. He said to his men that
they must continue the spirit of revenge against the
people of Cyprus. In his statement Cyprus is referred
to as “the southern sector of Turkey”. That commander, who is a responsible person, has already
annexed Cyprus to Turkey and speaks of it as the
southern sector of Turkey and, in another part, as “the
Cypriot part of Turkey”. Then he says: “Let your
flame of revenge and grudge against those who aim
at oppressing us and trying to usurp our rights always
remain alive and let your desire for revenge last
forever.”

176. Now, why this discrepancy between proclaiming
the independence of Cyprus and being so sensitive
about anything that is said in a sentimental way in
CYPIUS about the’hatural desire for enosis on the one
hand and the trampling upon independence if they were
-to have a bit of Cyprus, on the other?

181. We are desirous of having peace and calm in
the island. For that reason I did not circulate this letter;
I said that we would let it alone. But when I hear
so many propaganda efforts being made because of
an incident in Trikomo, an incident that took place
in a climate of tension-created
by these types
of words-I cannot help but show such inflammatory i
statements to the Security Council in order that it may
realize the situation.

177. These discrepancies are indicative of a situation
that is not natural. I$ is not natural because Turkey’s
actions do not accord with its statements on the
independence of Cyprus; we have said that very many
times. If it really wanted the independence of Cyprus
it would have helped in the conciliation and normalization on the island.
178. When the Turkish representative speaks of the
constitutional
rights of Turkish Cypriots, to what does
he refer? To the divisive provisions and the imbalance
of a constitution that brought the trouble. These are
provisions characterized by the Mediator appointed
by the Secretary-General
under Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) as those of the oddity of a constitution. But if these rights were to be revived they
would lead to the same situation. Therefore the efforts
in the talks should be to bring a logical constitution
in accordance with the norms for a State that can be
viable, a constitution that can be workable. So if Turkey wants to have an independent Cyprus-and we
hope that Turkey will eventually come to take this
position-it
should help towards achieving accommodation in the sense of a unitary State, with the Greeks
and Turks in Cyprus living together in a spirit of understanding and mutual respect as one people, with all
their rights guaranteed but in a unified State, not in
a State divided from top to bottom.

182. My main statement was made with the aim of
promoting co-operation and understanding, but when
such poin’ts are raised I have to reply to them.
183. The next question I have to discuss is with regard
to the displaced persons. I have said that they have
refused to return and that that was the main reason
why more houses had not been built, as had been
explained by one of the interlocutors in these talks,
Mr. Clerides. When the displaced persons do not return
to eleven villages out of sixteen and leave the houses
unoccupied and derelict, how can the Government continue to build more houses which would not be
occupied? To show that the purpose is political, I would
refer to the report of the Secretary-General
of 8
December 1967, which says:
“For considerable time, the Government has
urged the refugees to return to their homes, assuring
them that they will be in safety there, and in some
villages it has repaired or rebuilt abandoned Turkish
Cypriot houses in the hope that this would attract
some Turkish
Cypriot families back to their
homes.‘“X

179. The representative of Turkey asks that the Cypriot Government
should pay the Turkish Cypriots in
the enclaves-who
refuse to recognize the Government
and who are in rebellion against it-a part of the
revenue. The Government
does a great deal in a
humanitarian
spirit for the Turks, but to ask the
Government to subsidize with revenues an adminstration which is set up in opposition to it is going to the
extreme. As a matter of fact, in other analogous cases
there is no similar treatment. We have taken quite a
different line in Cyprus, one leading towards the peaceful solution of the problem; that is what we are doing.

But it did not attract them. The statement
Secretary-General continues:

180. When the representative of Turkey speaks about
a climate of calm on the island and about normalization,
does he not agree that it must be in the sense of conciiiation and not of continuing enmity? If you incite t0

’ Official
Supplement

of the

“These measures have so far been of no avail,
however, and despite the unsatisfactory existence
which they lead in the most overcrowded refugee
centres, such as Kokkina, where housing facilities
are so inadequate. . , [they] have not returned home.
Records of rhe Security
for October,
November

S/8286, para. 127.

16

Council, Twenty-second
Ye@-,
nnd December
1967, document

It is known that the Turkish Cypriot leadership does
not favour the return of the refugees to their former
homes located in Government-controlled
areas at
present. To justify this position, the Turkish Cypriot
leadership stresses consideration of security and
safety of the refugees, although there can be little
doubt that one of the major reasons for its attitude
is a political one” -this is just, what I have said
before-“ namely that as long as no acceptable political solution has been found, the maximum possible
number of Turkish Cypriots must remain outside
the Government’s authority.“”

for fresh air, but he did not understand what I said
to him. . . Then the soldier ordered all of us to be
alighted from the car and we did so. He then ordered
us to pull up our hands and we did so, and then
he made us run to the nearby military camp. Outside
the gate of the camp we stopped and we were surrounded by another five or six soldiers with guns.
One of these soldiers, who were all unknown to,me,
ordered us to in line and he started kicking us. At
this particular time I heard a shot and in the meantime
I saw an officer coming from the camp along the
gate. After the shot, I saw my friend Fevsi lying
on the ground and Mustafa started running away
where the soldiers opened fire against him. At this
stage, I got afraid and ran away and I was shot as
well and I was wounded on my right hand. I succeeded to arrive on the Risso Famagusta road and
the soldiers running after me but not shooting,”
[S]lOOO5 and Cow.1, par’a. 41.1
188. .As to the observation of Ambassador Rossides
that there was some propaganda and exaggeration in
the statement that I made to the Council, I should
like to reply by reading further from the report of the
Secretary-General:
“UNFICYP
was not able to carry out a thorough
enquiry into this most regrettable intercommunal
incident. This was primarily due to the fact that the
shooting occurred at a National Guard camp which
UNCIVPOL
was not able to enter. For this reason,
its investigations were confined in the main to securing, where possible, relevant statements and other
pertinent
information
as well as attending the
Coroner’s inquest as observers. Despite the limited
scope of its inquiries, it would appear to UNFICYP
that, while it was unwise for the three Turkish Cypriots involved to enter the militarily restricted area
late at night in the manner in which they did, the
force used by the National Guardsmen in theil
endeavour to hold the men in custody was obviously
excessive, especially as the Turkish Cypriots were
unarmed and surrounded by at least an equal number
of trained and armed sentries, It is also questionable
whether the behaviour of the three men that night
could be considered as constituting a threat to the
security of the camp.” [Ibid., pcrra. 50.1

184. One thing is required to solve the question of
Cyprus: understanding and conciliation on the basis
that Cyprus is and will remain an integral unit,
undivided and unpartitioned; that the people of Cyprus
are and will remain one people composed of two or
more elements, but one people that are not going to
be broken up, nor their country divided in two or more
parts. If that position is understood and accepted, the
question of Cyprus can be solved overnight.
185. The PRESIDENT
(tr~~&rted Ji-0177 Russim):
The list of speakers is exhausted. The representative
of Turkey is asking to speak, apparently in exercise
of his right of reply. I now call upon him.
186. Mr. BRYULKEN
(Turkey): I regret to have to
speak again to make some clarifications. I believe that
my main statement has already shown the basic problems with which we are faced and the difficulties
inherent in the solution of this question; at the same
time, it made clear the goodwill of the Turkish community as well as the determination
of the Turkish
Government to reach an agreed solution safeguarding
the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned.
As Ambassador Rossides considers that some of the
points in my statement need clarification, I am afraid
I have to make some clarifications relating to his points
as well.
187. Regarding the Trikomo incident, I think that
Ambassador Rossides tried to minimize it. In order
to make it clear why I dwelt on the question at some
Iength in my statement, I should like first to read the
statement of Mr. Hassan, who was the object of the
shooting, as it is set forth in the report:

189. Ambassador Rossides said that indemnities were
paid. I do not know whether we should be grateful
that indemnities were paid for the killing of one man
and for the wounding of two innocent unarmed men,
and should express our thanks. I do not know whether
the lives of innocent unarmed men are valued so
cheaply that indemnities can replace them.

“At Trikomo T junction, we decided to stop again
in order to consume some brandy drinks at a nearby
bar. As there were no people there, we changed
mind, and continued our way to Famagusta. When
we had just passed the said bar, there is on the lefthand side of the road a village track road where
my friend, Fevsi, drove the car into this road. We
covered about fifty yards of this village road, and
we stopped our car very near to the seashore. All
of us remained into the car for fresh air.“-It
was
the month of August-“Five
minutes later a Greek
Cypriot National Guard reached my side and he
asked me in Greek language what we were doing
here. I said to him in English that we stopped here

190. Ambassador Rossides mentioned the question
of freedom on the roads. My statement takes care of
that. I mentioned all the reasons why that question
has important implications for the security of the Turkish Cypriots.
191. Ambassador Rossides spoke about mistreatment
of a Greek Cypriot teacher. However, I understand
that the report stated that this incident occurred late
at night and that the unfortunate mistreatment in question was a result of a heated discussion. Therefore

)’ Ibid.

17

there was a question of provocation for the mistreatment. In any event the Greek Cypriot teacher was
not killed-there
was only an embarrassment for a few
minutes.

196. I am also really surprised, bitterly surprised, that
Mr. Rossides said such a thing as that the Turks were
in rebellion. That is news to me and, I am sure, to
the members of this Council, because, when the Turks
were attacked in the days of December 1963, they had ;
these catastrophes to face: forty Turkish villages corn- j:
pletely destroyed, fifty-seven partly ruined and, twentyseven thousand displaced persons. And now we hear
that there is a rebellion on the part of the Turkish
Cypriots! I think that to dwell on this is really to take.
uP the time of the Council unnecessarily. Everybody
knows what the question of Cyprus is and what the
conditions are in which the Turkish Cypriots find themselves, and it is all the more amazing to find the representative of Cyprus speaking in this way when the
two communities are now conducting talks with a view
to achieving an agreed settlement.

192. Ambassador Rossides stated that the question
of arms was a matter for a sovereign State and that
Cyprus was not a vassal State. I do not remember
making any allusion in my statement suggesting that
Cyprus was a vassal State. In raising this problem of
arms and many other pertinent problems related to
the Cyprus question I mentioned only the report of
the Secretary-General
and the agreement reached
between the Greek Cypriot Administration
and the
Secretary-General
and UNFICYP. Therefore 1 cannot
follow his logic that there is any allusion suggesting
that Cyprus is a vassal State. There is an agreement;
that agreement
has not been honoured and the
Secretary-General
stated that that is the case. There
is also an indication in the present report that this arms
question could again entail grave danger.

197. In order to find some possible answer in regard
to my very short reference to enosis-and I have indeed
restrained myself in not quoting all the declarations
by the most responsible leaders in Cyprus as regards
enosis-1 might say this. He mentioned that the commander of the Turkish contingent made a statement
and in that statement he spoke of annexing part of
Cyprus to Turkey. I believe that the speech of the
Turkish colonel was delivered in the Turkish contingent’s military camp and was addressed to his soldiers. There are many statements like that made by
the officers, and there are of course many statements
made by the General of the National Guard to his soldiers. However, I am putting aside the colonels and
the generals. I am going to refer to more responsible
people. I myself will only refer to the statement made
by Mr. Komodromos, the Minister of the Interior and
Defence, not six months ago, not six years ago, but
on 22 November of this year. The Minister speaks
of “one nation” -Cyprus. I quote from a newspaper
report:

193. I shall now refer to the statements regarding
er~osis. Mr. Rossides mentioned that there were discrepancies in the statements of some Turkish former
Ministers and that Turkey, if given a part of Cyprus,
would be ready to come to a settlement. I think that
sort of argument is a fallacy, because to maintain such
an argument means that we are going to forget that
the question of Cyprus has been discussed in the United
Nations and other organizations since 1954. I cannot
follow his logic. The question of erzosis is at the heart
of the problem.
194. Turkey, he said, if I quote him rightly, does
not want the independence of Cyprus. That is news
ta me, and, I am sure, to the Members of this Organization and to all concerned, and I am really amazed at
the pronouncement
of such a statement. The report
of the Secretary-General
contains the statements of
the Turkish Prime Minister and the Turkish Foreign
Minister.
The representative of Greece spoke of the
recent meeting of our Foreign Ministers. In this Council
there have been many instances indicating that the
independence of Cyprus was the basis of the agreement
which the two communities could promote among
themselves
for constitutional matters. Therefore I
really wonder whether such a statement requires an
answer.

“The Minister of the Interior and Defence, Mr.
Komodromos, yesterday congratulated the members
of the Armed Forces on their fitness and said he
was proud of such an army, ready and able to serve
the country loyally and satisfactorily.
“Mr. Komodromos
was addressing National
Guardsmen during firing exercises at their practice
range.

195. Mr. Rossides again reverted to the “logical constitution”.
What is the logical constitution and the illogical constitution?
Whenever Mr. Rossides or the Greek
Cypriot community likes it, it is a logical constitution.
When they do not like it, is is not a logical constitution,
I would only remind him that the President of the Constitutional
Court in ‘Cyprus in 1960, when the Court
was instituted, together with the establishment of the
Republic of Cyprus, pronounced more than once that
the Constitution
was workable and needed only goodwill to make it so. We all remember that because of
such a statement and such ajudgement that high officer
of the independent Republic of Cyprus was hounded
out of the island.

“The Minister called the Cyprus Army a ‘Greek
Army’ in the same sense that fighting was a Greek
virtue and the island was part and parcel of Greece.
“Mr. Komodromos
expressed gratitude for the
contribution of the Greek Army officers in creating
adisciplined army conscious of its legacy and responsibilities.
“He concluded by expressing the wish for an early
realization of national aspirations, and for an early
materialization of ‘one single, united and undivided
Greek nation’ ,”
18

198. I think I shall not revert to other statements
made by even more responsible and more highly placed
leaders in Cyprus.

case more than 5,000 Turkish Cypriot residents are
prevented under official orders from taking up their
former residences .”

199. Mr. Rossides also, I think, mentioned in his
statement that he tried to forget the past and that he
tried to be constructive. I would not challenge his intentions. On the contrary, I am very glad when he tries
to be constructive. It is in that way that agreement
can be achieved. However, I think he described my
statement as being not constructive. I am not going
to fish for compliments from the members of the Security Council, but even if I do not remember all the statements correctly, with all the words, still I remember
that many representatives also spoke very highly of
the Turkish representatives’s statement during this
debate.

201. On the other hand, I shall refer very briefly to
the report of the Secretary-General; I think that his
judgement is very clear. He says-not to the Turkish
Cypriot leadership,
but to the Greek Cypriot
leadership-that
this is a humanitarian problem and
that they should solve it. That is avery clearjudgement.
It is not the judgement of my delegation, but the judgement of the Secretary-General.
202. As I have said, I do not want to take the time
of the Council unnecessarily. I should like to conclude
my remarks by saying that the difference between the
two communities is not a matter of abstractions or
semantics. It is a matter of substance-a
matter of
substance which involves, the survival of the Turkish
Cypriots within an independent, sovereign and unitary
State,, based on local autonomy, not on local govern- ,
ment-I stress, based on local autonomy. Phrases such :
and unitary”,
“democratic
and
as “independent
unitary”
States or Governments,
are misleading,
because they do not convey the sense of the basic
issue, the issue that Cyprus is an independent State
because it is founded on the two communities and is
based on their partnership. The elimination
of the
independence of the one community eliminates the
independence of Cyprus. It is imperative to recall these
vital realities to reach an agreed and peaceful settlement.

200. With respect to the displaced persons, I am sorry
that we have to refer to it again. What we said in
our statement was that the Turkish community stands
ready to reciprocate any oiler which is made with goodwill, which does not try to do away with its constitutional privileges and prerogatives, and which is not
made subject to political ends. In the case of the displaced persons, my answer to his clarification regarding
Mr. Clerides’s written or oral statement is the following, which was issued on 16 November last from
the Turkish Cypriot leadership. It reads as follows:
“The complaint by Greek Cypriots that the Turkish Cypriots had not returned to the villages where
some of the houses had been repaired is an excuse
and tactic by the Greek Cypriots to have this matter
recorded in the Secretary-General’s
next report.

203. The PRESIDENT
(t~znslnted fionz &wsinn):
The representative of Cyprus has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I now call upon him.

“The position on the subject, as UNFICYP
is well
aware, is that Turkish Cypriot leadership has for
the last two years been trying at all levels to have
this matter solved as a whole, as suggested by Mr.
Ortega in his report. As it is well known, this matter
has also been taken up by Mr. Denktash with Mr.
Clerides, both in their meetings and in writing. As
is also well known by UNFICYP,
the Turkish Cypriot side has all along been trying for an early solution
of this matter. The individual cases the Greek Cypriots are often mentioning are not a direct responsibility of the Turkish Cypriot leadership. The return
of the refugees to their villages cannot be, in the
view of the Turkish Cypriot leadership, as is confirmed by Mr. Ortega in his report, solved on an
individual basis because there are complex questions
such as education, religion, economic matters and
co-operative movements which have to b& provided
before all the inhabitants of a village could go back.

204. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, thank
you for calling on me again. I am sorry to have to
take a little more time, but this time I shall be very
brief.
205. The representative of Turkey has read out the
statement of one of the men who was wounded in that
incident. That statement confirms that they were running away when they were shot, Secondly, I agree with
him that the conduct of those national guardsmen was
excessive; but I said so from the very beginning. I
said that it was excessive: that is why they were
punished and sent to prison.
206. With regard to the logical constitution, he asked:
“What is a logical constitution? Anyone’s logic may
form any constitution he pleases. One may say that
this is logical and that the other one is illogical.” I
agree with him. But what I said was that a logical
constitution is one based on the accepted norms. There
are universally accepted norms, democratic norms,
norms for unitary States and for local government or
local autonomy, You cannot go outside those norms
and create a sort of peculiar thing that had never existed
before and that will not be workable; and if it were
not workable it would lead t.o disruption. Then it would
be said: “You see, we have tried everything. It does
not work, so let us think of something else now.” That

“Unless all the social, religious and economic
requirements are catered to, it is both unrealistic
and unfair to expect all the individuals to return.
To use this human element as an excuse to justify
Greek Cypriot unwillingness to settle this outstanding problem does not indicate good faith on the part
of the Greek Cypriot leadership. This is more than
clear when one considers the fact that in a single
19

is what we want to avoid. We want a workable solution
that will preserve the unity, the territorial integrity and
. the independence of Cyprus. That is the position which
my Government holds.

tive of Greece, who read the report seeking to find
and stress its optimistic aspects so as to send to Cyprus
an optimistic message, a message that would open the
door to the conclusion of negotiations. In effect, the
representative of Turkey only spoke of the Trikomo
incident; he spoke of the question of weapons; he only
spoke of enosis. He has done nothing but dig up the
past. And in his second statement he spoke of the
independence of Cyprus as subject to the independence
of one party or the other. My delegation finds that
very difficult to understand. Cyprus is an independent
State. It is a Member of the United Nations. It has
a sovereign Government which the representative of
Turkey refuses to call a government; he consistently
refers to it as an “administration”,
I recall that in 1964
the then representative of the Soviet Union squarely
asked the representative of Turkey whether he challenged the existence of the Government. He repIied
that he did not and that Turkey had an ambassador
in Cyprus. I would therefore suggest that if, as all members of the Security Council seem to have stated, we
want the Cyprus negotiations to succeed, we should
adopt a more moderate and optimistic tone.

207. The representative of Turkey emphasized that
“local autonomy” was the right of thi Turks. From
what does this right derive? They claim all their rights
from the Zurich and London Agreements. They speak
about their rights, but every right they claim is derived
from the Zurich and London Agreements. Yet even
those agreements do not contain any provision about
“local autonomy”. How was it then introdticed in the
talks? It was suggested as a proposal not a right. There
is no right of local autonomy under the Zurich and
London Agreements on which they depend. They can
say, “We want local autonomy and we no longer
depend on the Zurich and London Agreements”, or
“We depenti on the Zurich and London Agreements”-in
which case they cannot claim autonomy.
208. The PRESIDENT
(lra&&d
j?ovn Xhwsinlz):
The representative of Greece has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I now call upon him.
209.

212. The PRESIDENT
(trarzslnted fionz Russia/t):
The representative of Turkey has asked to speak for
a second time in exercise of his right of reply. I now
call upon him.

Mr.

BITSIOS
(Greece) (interpr’etation .fio/?z
Fwrzch): I cannot refrain from noting the marked predilection of the representative of Turkey, when adducing arguments, to pick up the argument of ~/ZOSZ’S,the
union of Cyprus with Greece. May I remind him that
the question of the union is not a question that exclusively concerns his Government or the Government
of Cyprus. There is a third party concerned, and that
is Greece. The representative of Turkey knows full
well that in a desire to contribute to peace and stability
in the region, the Government of Greece made the
great sacrifice of agreeing that the solution with respect
to Cyprus would be an independent State. I have
spoken of sacrifice because if 80 per cent of the population on Cyprus had been of Turkish origin, Turkey
would doubtless not have made the same gesture.

213. Mr. BAYULKEN
brief.

(Turkey):

I shall be very

214. To answer Mr, Rossides on the international
norms of which he spoke, I should like only to remind
him that when, in 1960, all the parties agreed on the
Constitution of Cyprus, following negotiations between
the two communities,
there was no question of the
Consitution not conforming to international
norms.
That is something new, an innovation. But now that
the two communities are working to find an agreed
solution-a
new, mutually acceptable basis for a new
constitutional framework-I
think that it is useless to
insist on what conforms or does not conform with international norms.

210. But, as I have said, the Greek Government
agreed that the negotiations for a new solution would
be based upon the independence of Cyprus. But what
is our colleague from Turkey trying to do? Is he trying
to challenge the good faith of the Greek Government?
I mentioned the communiqui: issued a few days ago
in Brussels, from which it appears that his Foreign
Minister does not challenge the good faith of Greece
regarding that solution. Together with the Foreign
Minister of Greece, he declared the desire to see the
negotiations continued until a solution was arrived ,at.
I am therefore constrained to think, when Mr.
Bayulken, time after time raises the question of enosis,
that he does not send a message of peace to the island
of Cyprus, for I am sure that outside the United Nations
it is in Cyprus that the words pronounced here are
heard,

215. With regard to what the representative of Greece
said concerning my mentioning enosis-that
I might
be questioning the goodwill of his Government-I
think
that it is irrelevant. It has not been my intention to
question his Government’s goodwill; but I would kindly
remind him that optimism based on reality is durable
while optimism based on words might in the end
deceive everyone. On the other hand I should also
like to stress another fact: administrations may Change
but nations and States remain. Therefore the parties
in question should be very careful to reach an agreement that will be real, durable and mutually acceptable.
216. The PRESIDENT
(translnted from hWi~fl):
The representative of Cyprus has asked to speak for
a third time in exercise of his right of reply. I now
call upon him.

2 Il.
I regret to note that the statement made today
by the representative of Turkey was one of the most
pessimistic he has ever given. He read and studied
the report, and in his statement raised only its pessimistic aspects, contrary to the statement of the representa-

217. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): Fortunately,
as
speakers exercise their right of reply for the second
20

and third time they become briefer and briefer, This
statement will be extremely short.

222. Mr. BAYULKEN
(Turkey): I shall be much
more brief, With regard to the statement of Ambassador Rossides, I hope for “mutual acceptance and
agreed solution this time”, and we all hope, very fervently, that when it comes, it will be “logical”
an!
will not again be defined as “illogical”,
as was their
contention concerning the 1960 Constitution.

218. When I referred to logicality and international
norms I was not referring to the past but to the agreement we are now going to have. I said that the agreement must be based upon accepted norms. We must
not have another form of Constitution that is an oddity
and therefore unworkable.

223. The PRESIDENT
(trartslntedfiwn
Russian):
If
the reciprocal exercise of the right of reply by the
parties represented here is now concluded, we will
assume that the discussion of the question under consideration has been completed and we shall proceed
to adjourn the meeting.

219. I think this discussion has been helpful because
it has elicited from my colleague from Turkey certain
statements that are helpful, First we heard from him
officially and in this hall that Turkey does not intend
to have any kind of partition or division in Cyprus
and that it is dedicated to the independence of Cyprus.
We welcome that statement, and we accept it. And
we now expect-and
this is a heavy responsibility-that
Turkey’s policy in Cyprus will be one
tending to conciliation and the creation of a spirit of
co-operation and unity among the people of Cyprus
so that the independent Republic of Cyprus can continue to exist, blossom and progress in peace.

224. Before adjourning the meeting, since all representatives taking part in the session of the General
Assembly are present here, I should like to voice a
wish for the successful completion of the Assembly’s
work as it appears that no further meetings of the Security Council are expected before the end of the session.
225. Secondly, I should like to wish all representatives present here a happy Christmas and New Yea1
holiday. And, in conclusion, I should like to express
the hope that between now and the end of December
and throughout the whole of the coming New Year
there will be peace on earth and that there will be
no need for urgent and special meetings to consider
disputes. On this note, we will conclude today’s
meeting.

220. This discussion has been constructive. I believe
we can part now with the satisfaction that at least we
may have an optimistic view of what is going to happen
in the future.
221. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russim):
The representative of Turkey has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I now call upon him.

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

21

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
tot United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
der Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dons les libraides
et les ogences
ddpositaires
du moode entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s
de votre libroirie
ou odrerser-vous
b:
Notions
Unier, Section der venter,
New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publlcaciones
de los Naciones
Unidos
ertCln
en todor
portes del mundo.
Conrulte
o su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nation<.

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

UNIDAS

en vento en librerior
Y cosos dirtribuidoror
o dirljare
o: Nocioner
Unidos,
Secci6n

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

! 82185 - May

1973 -

2,050
