A/63/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

82

nd plenary meeting
Friday, 8 May 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda item 31 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/63/402/Add.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) which is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Statements
will therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendations
of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that

delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) (A/63/402/Add.1), I should like to advise
representatives that we are going to proceed to take a
decision in the same manner as was done in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), unless notified otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution. The Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/280).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote or
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-33126 (E)

*0933126*

A/63/PV.82

I give the floor to the representative of the Czech
Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your opening
remarks and take this opportunity to reaffirm the
European Union’s strong support to the United Nations
in the field of peacekeeping.
Despite some difficulties observed in United
Nations peacekeeping during the past few years, the
European
Union
considers
United
Nations
peacekeeping to be not only the most visible United
Nations activity, but also an effective factor for
ensuring security, protecting civilians and providing
humanitarian assistance. Nevertheless, nearly a decade
after the Brahimi report, it is time to revisit the Panel’s
recommendations, review their implementation and
look strategically into future United Nations
peacekeeping challenges.
In that regard, I would like to seize this
opportunity to present the European Union member
States’ perspective on the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) outcomes. The
European Union considers the timely adoption of the
C-34 report (A/63/19 (SUPP)) this year to have been a
success. In particular, the European Union is heartened
by the mutual understanding and cooperation that was
achieved amongst delegations. This collaborative spirit
significantly contributed to the overall progress
achieved during discussions on the improvement of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. A streamlined
and meaningful 2009 C-34 report, delivered in due
time, should provide other United Nations forums with
a useful tool for dealing with peacekeeping issues.
The initiative recently launched by France and
the United Kingdom within the Security Council, the
Australian-Uruguayan workshop on the protection of
civilians, Canada’s thematic peacekeeping seminars
and the New Horizons project constitute an invaluable
source of data to enable the C-34 to play its
institutional role as the only United Nations mandated
forum to consider United Nations peacekeeping in all
its aspects. Those discussions should provide a rich
source of background information for the C-34’s own
deliberations on what should be developed to enhance
United Nations peacekeeping operations and on what
should be asked of the Secretariat and the SecretaryGeneral in preparing the annual report.

2

The European Union would like to stress the
necessity to achieve, in due time, a focused,
streamlined and meaningful C-34 report next year. The
European Union will continue its efforts to give
particular attention to the most pressing and
contemporary issues related to current and upcoming
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we recognize
the paramount importance of close cooperation with all
regional groups and other important players.
The European Union sincerely hopes that its view
on the purpose and potential of the C-34 is shared by
all those who consider peacekeeping to be a flagship
United Nations activity.
In closing, I would like to express thanks on
behalf of the European Union to all of the delegations
involved in the C-34 substantive session for their
contributions to our common United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour. I would also like to thank
Mrs. U. Joy Ogwu, Permanent Representative of
Nigeria, for chairing the C-34 substantive session, as
well as Mr. Henri-Paul Normandin, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Canada, for his leadership of the ad
hoc C-34 Working Group.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 31?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of all the reports
of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee).
Agenda item 48 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome
of the 2002 International Conference on Financing
for Development and the preparation of the 2008
Review Conference
Draft decision (A/63/L.71)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to remind members that, at its 74th plenary meeting, on
23 December 2008, the Assembly decided to consider
agenda item 48 directly in plenary meeting. Members
will also recall that, in resolution 63/277, of 7 April
2009, the General Assembly decided to hold a
Conference on the World Financial and Economic

09-33126

A/63/PV.82

Crisis and Its Impact on Development from 1 to 3 June
2009 at United Nations Headquarters.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
decision that has been issued under the symbol
A/63/L.71. The Assembly will now take action on the
draft decision, entitled “Arrangements and organization
of work of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development (New
York, 1-3 June 2009)”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/63/L.71?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Turkey has asked to speak in
explanation of position of the draft decision just
adopted. I should like to remind him that explanations
of position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats. I call on the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): We believe that the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development is a timely
initiative to discuss both the roots of the crisis at the
United Nations level and the response of the United
Nations in terms of the impact of the crisis on
development. We welcome the note (A/63/825)
prepared by the Secretariat on the organization of the
Conference. However, we would like to place on
record a solely organizational concern.
We believe that holding the plenary meetings
concurrently with the round tables would pose a
difficulty in terms of high-level participation. Since it
seems to have been decided already that that is how
things will proceed, we are of the opinion that the
opening plenary meeting should be arranged in such a
way that all high-level participants will have an
opportunity to address the plenary of the Conference
before the beginning of the round tables. We are aware
of the difficulties of imposing time limits on high-level
dignitaries, but we believe that the statements during
the morning plenary on 1 June could be restricted to a
predetermined length so that all heads of State and
Government will be able to address the meeting in its
entirety.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position.

09-33126

(spoke in English)
I am very pleased to brief the members of the
General Assembly today on the preparations for the
United Nations Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development,
which is scheduled for the first three days of June, as
well as to present the first draft of the outcome
document. The eve of the Conference is almost upon
us — 24 days away, to be precise. We have been
preparing for this historic event with remarkable
intensity. I wish to explain briefly what has been
accomplished to date and to appeal for members’
support and involvement in the few short weeks that
we have ahead of us.
Let us be united in our efforts to negotiate a
powerful outcome document for the summit. Let us be
proactive in urging our heads of State and Government
to become personally involved and turn this
opportunity into the transformative moment in the
history of the United Nations that it is meant to be. The
participation of all Member States at the highest level
is indispensable if that transcendental gathering is to
achieve its full potential. I earnestly believe that this is
an opportunity that the world cannot afford not to take
advantage of.
This United Nations Conference — a global
summit of world leaders — is highly unusual for a
number of reasons. It is both timely and historic.
Unlike other United Nations conferences, we are
organizing this gathering in record time, reflecting the
need for a timely response to the financial and
economic crisis that continues to unfold around us. I
understand that this has put a great deal of pressure on
Member States, our United Nations colleagues and
many other partners who are working overtime to
ensure the success of the Conference. But these are not
normal times and the world expects us to respond with
speed and decisiveness.
As members will remember, at the beginning of
this session of the Assembly last September, Member
States emphasized the confluence of crises that now
challenge the world: the perfect storm of climate
change and the food, water and energy crises, as well
as the unfolding economic downturn. Meanwhile,
economic turmoil was darkening the world horizon. By
the time of the Doha Conference, the dimensions of the
economic meltdown had become so alarming that

3

A/63/PV.82

Member States resolved to convene a conference at the
highest level to address the crisis.
That was a historic decision that committed us to
initiating a global conversation on the crisis, mitigating
the impact on the developing countries and addressing
the reform of the international economic and financial
architecture. Since then, we have worked hard to
ensure that the scope of the Conference allows for a
full understanding of the various dimensions of the
crisis and lets us begin a serious discussion about
revamping the international financial and monetary
architecture.
In the search for solutions, many members of the
General Assembly welcomed my decision to establish a
Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International
Monetary and Financial System. Twenty experienced
economists and central bankers from all regions of the
world, under the very able chairmanship of Mr. Joseph
Stiglitz, Nobel Laureate, have gathered five times since
then to recommend very specific ways to address the
immediate and long-term needs of a failing system.
When the Commission’s recommendations were
presented to the General Assembly in a three-day
interactive thematic dialogue at the end of March,
many Member States confirmed the value of the
Commission’s work by stating that they found it useful
as a comprehensive review of the many issues to be
taken up in June and thereafter.
Although extremely important, the Commission’s
recommendations are, of course, not the only input
received. In the past several weeks, we have heard
eloquent testimony and received numerous reports
from Member States, the President of the Economic
and Social Council, other United Nations agencies and
programmes, specialized agencies, civil society
organizations and the private sector.
Organizing and synthesizing these many inputs
has been a major challenge. Capturing the spirit of the
moment is an even greater challenge, but one that we
cannot avoid. The outcome document that leaders will
adopt on 3 June must reflect the aspirations, and not
just the work agenda, of the Member States. In
particular, it must speak to the hundreds of millions
across the globe who have no other forum in which
they can express their unique and often divergent
perspectives. It must reflect the call of many nations
for new paradigms for building a sustainable economic
life that integrates the values and the ethical

4

imperatives that should guide our development. It must
reflect the call for greater justice and inclusiveness in
our global economic life, and it must reflect the
passionate call for promoting the common good over
the obsessive impulse to consume more and more and
to dominate others at any cost.
On Wednesday morning, I received the first
complete version of a draft outcome document from
the facilitators, Ambassador Frank Majoor of the
Netherlands and Ambassador Camillo Gonsalves of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. I want to express my
deep appreciation for the work they have done so far. It
is immediately evident that, while not having
immediate access to all the inputs, they have been
extraordinarily diligent in their efforts to prepare a
document that fairly and accurately reflects the broad
range of views of the membership. Theirs is, therefore,
one of the most important inputs into the draft
document that I am presenting today.
I believe that the Conference needs to be seen not
as an event in itself, but as an inflection point in a
long-standing and continuous movement to strengthen
the role of the United Nations in global governance.
Thus far, in the planning for June, we have agreed to
eliminate the restrictions imposed under previous
initiatives to limit the scope of our deliberations. That
is a significant achievement in itself, but it will mean
almost nothing unless we are able to organize an
effective mechanism for carrying this agenda forward.
The business of the Conference will not end on
3 June, because the commitments made, both here and
elsewhere, will not have been fulfilled on 3 June. It is
therefore vitally important that we define a follow-up
mechanism that allows Member States to participate in
the ongoing work.
A second consideration relates to the level of
participation in the Conference. I am certain that every
Member State believes that the United Nations is and
must be the place where the developing countries can
speak in their own voice. However, too often the
United Nations itself speaks with the voice of the leastcommon-denominator consensus.
Unfortunately, such a voice says little to the
urgent needs of developing nations. If we can begin
only with what is already agreed, it is difficult to see
how the Conference or any process that accepts such
restrictions could ever be appealing to people who
clamour for change, or be conducive to real progress.

09-33126

A/63/PV.82

In recent weeks, I have been travelling
extensively to meet with heads of State and
Government and other high-level officials. I can say in
all honesty that I have tried my best to reflect in the
draft outcome document the concerns and expectations
that I have heard expressed in all these meetings. Yet I
am quite conscious of the fact that the first version of
the document presented to the Member States will be
the one that most world leaders will see. I therefore
think that it is fair to say that the draft outcome
document that I am presenting today will be the basis
on which heads of State and Government will decide
whether to take the June Conference seriously or to
regard it as yet another international charade.
For the many, many nations that have so far been
excluded from the multiple ongoing forums and
processes in which leading countries are crafting and
negotiating their responses to the global crisis,
language that sounds like business as usual can only
confirm their exclusion. If they do not recognize their
concerns and perspectives in this first draft, knowing it
will be subject to many compromises going forward,
there will be little interest in participating in a meeting
that starts from what they quite understandably regard
as a feeble premise.
This is no way, in my judgement, to start a global
conversation. I have accordingly introduced language
that seeks to send a clear signal that the Conference
truly is dedicated to understanding and responding to
the perspective of the many excluded nations. The only
way to do that is to begin with language that truly
reflects their concerns and aspirations. Because I come
from such a nation and because I have dedicated my
entire adult life to overcoming the exclusion of nations
and peoples from their rightful participation in our
common global life, I have felt responsible for doing
what I can to give expression to these views, which, of
course, are also my own views.
I trust that Member States will understand that, in
exercising my judgement and role, I do not undervalue
the very valuable work of all of them, especially the
facilitators. I have taken on board most of the structure
that they have proposed and nearly all their substantive
points. I am personally grateful for the intensive efforts
that they have made.
If I have erred in my judgement in what is
required to make the Conference successful, then I
accept this responsibility. But time and goodwill will

09-33126

determine the ultimate success of our common efforts.
I pray that, for the sake of all the world’s peoples, we
will continue to work hard over the few weeks that
remain to find our way forward.
Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I will speak in my
capacities as both Permanent Representative of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and as one of the
facilitators in brief response, Mr. President, to your
introduction of the draft outcome document that you
have just presented to us.
As I think the Member States know and all agree,
the Conference that you have initiated and that will
take place from 1 to 3 June 2009 is an extraordinarily
important occasion. It is the occasion at which the
United Nations will have the opportunity to speak and
to speak out on the financial crisis, on its impact and
on the financial architecture as a whole.
When you asked us, Sir, to be a facilitator with
respect to that Conference, we were very honoured —
at least I was — and, indeed, we have been working
since then, and I think in a very cooperative manner,
with the Member States towards an inclusive,
transparent and Member States-led process. We
succeeded first, I believe, in getting the procedures
right in terms of resolution 63/277 on the modalities
and, later on, on the draft decision that we have just
adopted. We are very proud of that.
We then entered into the process of developing a
draft outcome document. In that process, we received,
apart from the consultations that were held during a
number of sessions on the main topics of the
Conference, a great number of inputs — obviously, not
only the oral inputs, but also written inputs from
groups of Member States, individual Member States
and relevant meetings that were important in the
drafting process, including high-level conferences at
the ministerial level. I mention, in particular, the
Chairman’s summary of the Economic and Social
Council, which we received on Monday and which was
very helpful, and also, in that context, the relevant
paragraphs of the final document of the Non-Aligned
Movement ministerial meeting in Havana.
We all took those inputs into consideration, and
we are thankful for the input with which Member
States provided us. On that basis, the two
facilitators — I and Ambassador Gonsalves of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, who unfortunately cannot
be here today — started the drafting process together

5

A/63/PV.82

with the representatives of your office, Sir. I am
grateful for that close cooperation between the two
facilitators, and with your representatives, in the
discussions and the drafting process. We are confident
that you were kept abreast of the progress in the
drafting that we undertook last week.
During that process, we kept the membership
informed of the outline that we were working on and
which we were trying to develop, and we believe that
we came up with a very coherent and concise
document, as was requested of us, that is reflective of
all the views that were expressed and could serve as a
good basis for constructive negotiations in the limited
time available. I should note that, in the course of the
process, I think that the Member States also became
increasingly constructive in that respect. We were
ready with that process early on Tuesday evening. I
understand that it reached you on Wednesday morning.
Mr. President, you have now decided to present
your own document. The facilitators were not
consulted on the document that is now before us. I
have yet to see the text, although I see that my
colleagues, after a brief look, note that it has changed
considerably both in its conciseness and in substance. I
think that this is basically a completely different
document from that which we put to you.
That procedure and the substantive approach that
you have now taken force me, at least, to reconsider, in
consultation with my capital, my role in the way
forward in that process. I will inform you, and the
Member States as a whole, of the results of that
reconsideration in due course.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
facilitator, Mr. Majoor, for his remarks. His
contribution has been very important and significant. I
would prefer that comments on the draft outcome
document be made at another time, as it is only now
being distributed. I would therefore prefer that we not
enter into a debate on something that is unknown.
Obviously, however, we will need to do so.
I would like to thank the facilitators for all their
work, and I truly hope that the facilitator of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue working
with us with the same commitment that he has shown
to date.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I am not going to
speak about a text that we have not had a chance to

6

read, because we were given this text only a couple of
minutes ago. I would, however, like to speak on the
process.
The European Union, on whose behalf I speak,
has repeatedly expressed its strong interest in doing its
utmost to ensure that the June Conference is a success.
One precondition for its success is mutual faith,
understanding and a spirit of cooperation, which, sadly,
are necessary if, Mr. President, we are to tackle the
issues that you have rightly described in your opening
remarks.
But let me follow up on what the facilitator said
about the process. In the letter in which you invited us
to this meeting, you mentioned an unauthorized text
being circulated among the membership. I must say
that I have not seen such a text, and we are confused.
We understand that perhaps multiple texts are being
circulated. If there is an explanation, we would very
much appreciate hearing it.
I would also like to remind you, Mr. President, of
your own letter dated 23 March, in which you yourself
informed the United Nations membership that the
initial draft would be jointly agreed by you and the two
facilitators. Now you are explaining to us — and the
facilitators are simply confirming — that this text has
not been agreed and that it has come to this forum not
through the regular intergovernmental process, but by
your own initiative.
With all due respect, Mr. President, I would like
once again to bring to your attention operative
paragraph 9 of resolution 63/277, which requested you,
the President of the General Assembly, to present a
draft text through an open, transparent and inclusive
process led by the Member States. You said that there
are now only 24 days until what you called that historic
event. I would like to reiterate that we truly are ready
to work with you and all Member States to ensure that
the event is a success. However, this process raises our
most serious concern. With all due respect, Sir, we will
have to consult with our capitals to see how we should
respond to this type of process.
Mr. Heidt (United States of America): From the
outset of our work together on the Conference and on a
modalities draft resolution for it, the United States has
been very clear about the importance that we attach to
the Conference as a way to hear the voices of
developing countries on how the financial crisis is
impacting their development plans and to develop a

09-33126

A/63/PV.82

constructive role for the United Nations in the
emerging global response to the crisis. We have been
very consistent on the point that we view it as an
important event.
However, I would like to remind participants that
we have spent more than two months on a modalities
resolution setting out the way in which we would go
about this process together. I will not go into as much
detail as some other speakers have, but we are
obviously focused on the importance of a transparent
process driven by Member States and on the important
role of facilitation in that process. I would join the
preceding speaker in wanting to know about the
important role that your letter of late March played in
breaking a deadlock and moving the process forward
so that we could get into substance. That was all
extraordinarily important.
Unfortunately, Mr. President, the scenario that
you have outlined today seems in every way to go
against the draft resolution that we negotiated, as well
as the terms of your letter from late March, and leaves
us feeling very uneasy about how we can possibly pull
together a constructive process whereby we can reach
an agreement in just over three weeks.
Obviously, today is not the time to get into
substance. We will need to review such a lengthy
document for a week or 10 days, I imagine, to dig
through all those proposals. But I just wanted to
register at the outset our concern at the fact that what
we had hoped would be a transparent and
straightforward process has changed.
Mr.
Matussek
(Germany): Thank
you,
Mr. President, for distributing this document, which we
have just had the chance to briefly review. I think it
would be extremely helpful to the membership if you
could share with us the document thus far drafted by
the facilitators, so that we can avoid confusion and
have a very clear sense of where we stand at the
moment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There is only
one document. I believe that one speaker asked
whether there were various documents. There is only
one document. We have done everything possible to
take full account of the very important contributions of
the facilitators.
Mr. Morrill (Canada): I am speaking on behalf
of the delegations of Canada, Australia and New

09-33126

Zealand — the CANZ delegations. Canada, too, would
like to stress the importance that we attach to this
event. As a result, Mr. President, we must also note our
concern about the process on which you have
embarked. We entered into discussions in good faith,
provided input to the facilitators and were very
impressed with their work and the good faith and
balance with which they expressed themselves.
We now have a paper that, as you say, expresses
your own views, and we are interested in those views.
However, we are concerned lest the work of the
Member States — since this is a process driven by
Member States — be lost. We echo the view of our
German colleagues that it would be very useful for us
to have the input of the facilitators distributed.
As others have said, this document, the process
by which it was created and the lack of transparency in
that process cause us concern. In that light, we will
have to consider the manner in which we will
participate in the Conference. It is very important that
the views of all Member States be considered in our
preparations for the Conference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I can assure
the representative of Canada that that is precisely what
we have done. I did not claim to express my own
opinions, and I am in agreement with those opinions
that we have heard. I can also assure the representative
of Canada that we have committed ourselves to
ensuring that the views of all are taken into account,
including the vast majority whose views have never
before been taken into account.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to forcefully reiterate, Mr. President,
that France attaches great importance to the
Conference to be held in early June on your initiative.
We believe it essential that the United Nations not only
make its voice heard, but also make the proposals,
views and positions of all Member States known so as
to ensure an effective and equitable response to the
financial crisis. As you yourself said, the Conference
may be an opportunity for the world to hear the voices
of all countries, including those that have had less
access to international forums and fewer opportunities
to express their concerns.
However, if the Conference is to fully succeed —
which is, of course, what France hopes — we must
arrive at a consensus on the outcome document. France
believes that the best way to achieve that in the present

7

A/63/PV.82

context is through a transparent and fully
intergovernmental procedure, which began with your
full cooperation with the facilitators, whom we wish to
thank.

are too high to allow for the different Governments that
are going to attend the summit in June to have the
impression that these decisions were not fully
understood or brought to sufficient maturity.

The facilitators worked very intensively and held
many consultations, and the best way of producing a
good basis for discussion is to proceed on the basis of
the work of the facilitators. We hope to proceed in that
way in the coming weeks in order to maximize our
chances of getting a good outcome. From that
perspective, I would like, on the one hand, to agree
with the concern expressed by other speakers who
preceded me, and, on the other, to support the proposal
of the Permanent Representative of Germany that we
should see the document that was prepared by the
facilitators.

The second point is that we wish to reiterate the
call for a text that emanates clearly from the process
that has been carried forward until now with the full
involvement of the facilitators, and for all delegations
to have the opportunity to obtain instructions from
their capitals and to concur in the drafting of this very
important document.

Once again, we stand ready to work as hard as we
possibly can to ensure a successful conference, but I
think we have to remain true to the usual practices of
intergovernmental transparency in our negotiations.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you very much for the efforts that
you and your collaborators are making to move this
difficult process forward. I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of my delegation and my
authorities to the facilitators who have been working in
the same direction in close consultation with all
Member States.
I am taking the floor to support and join in the
position that has been expressed by the Czech
presidency of the European Union, in particular on a
couple of points.
The first point is that the process we are in should
be carried on — and we know that that is your
intention, Mr. President, as has been stated a number of
times this morning — but we must remain committed
to moving this process forward in full transparency and
clarity and through consultations among Member
States. If those consultations were facilitated by
important colleagues and leading personalities, that
would be greatly appreciated. That is, in fact, the basic
purpose of the process — to have everybody involved
and to be involved with a view to reaching a consensus
on a text that could be agreed and supported by
everybody in this Hall.
That is extremely important also because the
stakes involved and the challenges we have ahead of us

8

The President (spoke in Spanish): Clearly, so far,
we have seen a fairly strong consistency of expression
in the statements made, particularly on the part of the
European group.
Mr. Moreno Fernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, may I first of all thank you for
your statement and for introducing to us the document
that has been circulated this morning. I must confess,
however, that I am worried for reasons that are
completely different from the concerns voiced by
preceding speakers.
Indeed, we have heard it said, for example, that
we will now need eight to ten days to analyse this
document. Others have said that they would have to
reconsider their participation in the Conference. At
least in the view of my delegation, those ideas are
totally inappropriate at this juncture.
If we are truly interested in finding a solution to
the crisis and working towards it together, I believe
that we should analyse the origins of the crisis and the
impact of the crisis. We have no option other than to
start working right now and through the days to come
on the document now before us, introduced by the
President.
I cannot offer a value judgement on the
document. I have not read it yet and I cannot say if I
support it or not, but what I can say, Mr. President, is
that I believe that you have discharged your obligation
to offer us a text, and it is now up to us to discharge
our responsibilities as representatives of our
Governments. It is now time for us to start negotiations
and to do so quickly and efficiently.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we thank you for convening this meeting
and for your frank comments. Let me say that we
subscribe to the statement made by the representative

09-33126

A/63/PV.82

of the Czech Republic on behalf of the European
Union.
Spain feels that it is immensely important that the
United Nations work in a united fashion as we face the
international economic and financial crisis, and that we
do so in a way that promotes convergence in our views
and within the broader process that is developing in
different international forums and other organs of the
Organization, such as the Economic and Social
Council, in particular.
As part of that broad process within the United
Nations, we feel that it is extremely important that the
Conference that we have agreed by consensus to hold
in early June, in just a few weeks, be a success. To that
end, we will undoubtedly need to ensure respect for the
principles of inclusion and transparency so that
negotiations
are
conducted
properly
in
an
intergovernmental framework that will allow us to take
everyone’s contributions into account and reach a
result, as I have said, through a consensus of all States
Members of the United Nations.
That is why we have supported the work that has
been done by the facilitators, Ambassador Majoor of
the Netherlands and Ambassador Gonsalves of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. Insofar as possible, as I
have said, given the circumstances that we find
ourselves in, we would like to resume the process that
has already begun.
I will not discuss the substance of the document
at the moment; there will be time for that. I only wish
to note, Sir, as you know well, that we expect to see
you in Madrid for the high-level meetings early next
week. I am certain that you will hear comments on the
substance of the process and of the document presented
to us from voices with more authority than mine.
Mr. Abani (Niger), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I wish to thank the President
of the General Assembly for all his efforts to bring this
important matter before the United Nations. It is a
subject of immense importance for the majority of the
countries of the South, which make up the large
majority of the membership of the Organization. We
thank the President also for permitting and continuing
to permit our voices to be heard and for making it
possible for us to be part of the decision-making
process. I also thank the facilitators appointed by the

09-33126

President for their work. The President recommended
that they take our recommendations on board. As I
understand it, the facilitators have given the President
the recommendations, and I am certain that they are
included in the document presented to the Assembly
today. My delegation has not yet seen the document,
but we will study it closely for Monday in order to
begin working on it first thing Monday morning.
The President returned to the Chair.
My delegation feels that the crisis requires that
we all get together and begin working immediately,
without excuses, on the basis of the document that you,
Mr. President, have presented. I am certain that, during
the process of consultations, all countries will be able
to offer their input and that, as is proper, the
intergovernmental negotiations based upon the
document will begin.
Mr. Solón-Romero (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, my delegation thanks
you, Sir, for the document you have presented to us.
We wish also to congratulate the facilitators on their
work, which made it possible to gather the views of
Member States.
We feel that presenting a document that begins
the process of negotiation is always a complex process,
because it is necessary to synthesize and balance all the
various views expressed in the discussion. In our view,
the document before us is intended to begin a
discussion process. Obviously, it will be added to,
corrected and modified throughout the intergovernmental
negotiation process.
The fundamental issue for my delegation is to get
to the heart of the issue over the next few weeks, and
not to lose precious time on issues that could distract
us from the main goal that all the peoples of the world
want us to achieve: a response and a concrete proposal
to address the serious effects of the global economic
crisis we are experiencing. Against that backdrop, we
believe that it is important to prioritize the study and
development of the proposals made in the base
document presented today — which we will be
studying in great detail.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Thank you, Sir, for
providing the document that we hope will become the
basis for the intergovernmental negotiations that we

9

A/63/PV.82

will soon begin. No delegation, certainly not
Venezuela, is familiar with its contents; but thank you
for informing us that it includes the contributions of
the various institutions that have given assistance and
input in this process, which has already begun with the
aim of defining a common platform.
Like the Cuban delegation, my delegation is
concerned about what appears to be an attempt — or at
least what my delegation interprets in that way — to
downplay what is most important: the convening of the
Conference. Because we are speaking frankly here, we
would like to be frank in our comments.
As we all know, when it was decided that it was
necessary and timely for the United Nations to
consider the global economic and financial crisis, it
was deemed appropriate for all countries in this forum
to ponder the matter and together to provide
alternatives in the face of the terrible crisis facing
capitalism, and in particular financial capitalism. Some
said at the time that this was not a matter for the
United Nations, that it was a matter for the financial
experts and the bankers, and that the United Nations
had little to do with the terrible situation facing the
world. To be sure, we are concerned by some of the
statements we heard this morning; there is an attempt
to give life to such objections to the United Nations
addressing those matters intergovernmentally in order
to deal with the economic and financial crisis, with the
participation of absolutely every country.
We believe the words of the President, who has
told us that his document — whose content, I repeat,
we do not know — includes the inputs of the various
institutions and bodies, including the inputs of the
facilitators. Here, permit me to recall that, according to
what Ambassador Camillo Gonsalves said at the recent
meeting of the Rio Group, the facilitators’ document
includes diverse opinions and inputs, but that
unfortunately — and that is what Ambassador
Gonsalves told us — it could not take into account the
views of the Group of 77 and China. In that respect,
my delegation appreciates the document presented by
the facilitators. We are sure that the document
presented by the President is a synthesis of the various
inputs.
Venezuela wishes to stress the importance of
holding this historic event and of not placing obstacles
in its way, or trying to obstruct its convening, or trying
to make the intergovernmental negotiations more

10

difficult. On the contrary, all countries — and above
all, the developing countries — must be able to
participate in the process, because the issues of the
economic and financial crisis have hitherto been the
purview of the developed countries, and the developing
countries until now have not played the role we should
play in the process to radically change the world
economic and financial structures.
On behalf of Venezuela, I would like to express
our support for the positions expressed here. I do so
knowing that the document presented by Father Miguel
d’Escoto Brockmann, whom we trust and whom we
thank for his transparency, includes all the various
contributions. It is therefore our opinion that this
document should constitute the basis upon which to
undertake our negotiations.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): Mr. President, I thank
you for your statement and commend you for all the
efforts you have made in relation to the United Nations
Conference on the world financial crisis. We all have a
stake in its successful outcome. A lot of preparatory
work has been done with the close interest and support
of our capitals, and let us try to work in an atmosphere
of harmony, mutual understanding and cooperation so
that our efforts will not be in vain.
We believe that prolonging this debate will, in the
circumstances, not help bridge our differences. My
delegation has taken the floor to propose that the
President of the General Assembly meet with the
negotiating blocs and the facilitators in order to resolve
the differences that appear to have emerged this
morning.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
will be very brief. My delegation would just like to
thank you, Mr. President, for all your efforts to make
progress in the preparations for this very important
Conference. It is important not just for developing
countries, but also for all countries of the world, and
particularly for those who are suffering on a daily basis
from the negative effects of this crisis: poor people,
vulnerable people, the unemployed, women and
children living in difficult conditions, not just in
developing countries, as I said, but throughout the
world.
We also thank you very much for presenting the
document before us today, Sir. We will send it
straightaway to our capitals, and we are more than
prepared to move ahead in a constructive

09-33126

A/63/PV.82

intergovernmental negotiation process. We would also
like to thank the facilitators for their broad and
professional work to include the proposals, opinions
and ideas of Member States that, we understand, have
been passed on to you, Sir.
I call on all my colleagues and States Members of
this Organization to keep in mind that we only have 24
days to negotiate this document. We have, I believe, an
ethical responsibility to do so, because, as I said, those
who are really feeling the brunt of this crisis are poor
and vulnerable people throughout the entire world. The
unemployment crisis, for example, is affecting not just
developing countries, but everyone. That is why my
delegation reiterates its appeal that we begin our work
in a responsible, open and constructive manner as soon
as possible.
Once again, I thank you, Sir, for the document
you introduced to us today. As I said, my delegation is
fully prepared to work tirelessly to put the 24 days
before the Conference to optimal use.
Mr. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by joining my voice to those of
Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela. I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the efforts that you have made
in the consultative process from its very inception. I
would also like to thank the two facilitators for their
efforts during this process. My delegation feels that
you, Sir, have effectively accomplished your task in this
preparatory phase of the upcoming conference. We feel
that the ball is now in the court of the Member States.
Consequently, I think it is incumbent upon us to
go forward with negotiations on the document that you,
Sir, have distributed to us today. We feel that the
distribution of another document will just complicate
the entire negotiating procedure. I would like to remind
Member States that we are not here to adopt this
document at this meeting. Therefore, all of the
opinions concerning the document before us, as it is at
the moment, must be expressed during the negotiations
that will take place at the appropriate time. We hope
that those negotiations will begin early next week.
Mr. Di-Aping (Sudan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for presenting us with the first draft of this document
for our consideration. I am going to say a few things.
First of all, let me thank the facilitators — all three of
them, because there is continuity in this process. I have
attended all the consultations and the discussions that
were held by the facilitators and your office, Sir,

09-33126

during the past couple of weeks. Great effort has been
dedicated to that.
However, I do believe that we should not come to
conclusions about this document before we really read
it very carefully and see whether it reflects the
contributions of all Member States and the different
inputs, be they from Mr. Stiglitz, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development or the
Economic and Social Council, inter alia.
What is equally clear here is that we have a
propensity, in this place, to undermine our own efforts
in participating in finding solutions and leading. It is
about time that we rise above our small differences and
concentrate on substance. As such, I do appeal to the
facilitators, one of whom is not here — and I have not
heard his perspective — to not take any of this as a
personal affront. If there are mistakes in the process,
they should be corrected. The document that you have
presented, Mr. President, should be evaluated on its
merits as to whether it is taking us in the right direction
towards addressing a crisis that everyone agrees must
be addressed. I say that because I am also cognizant of
one remarkable peculiarity about the United Nations,
namely, that many missions sometimes voice a
different perspective from that of their leadership.
It is too early for us to make any substantive
comment. I think it is not wise, as the saying goes, to
throw the baby out with the bathwater. I do believe that
we need to really concentrate on the substance and on
what takes us forward. If there are issues that need to
be addressed, they should be addressed. I can
understand the frustration of Ambassador Majoor and
that he feels that he has not been consulted, but, to be
frank, that is not reason enough for people to come to
the conclusion that the document itself has no merit.
I equally think that no nation should have the
right to simply threaten. Of course, one is entitled to
one’s views, but let us sit down and discuss the
substance of the issues and address what it is that went
wrong and how we should correct it, in the interest of
the millions, if not billions, of people who are being
affected by this crisis, whether in the United States,
Europe or developing countries.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Thank you, Mr. President,
for your presentation of the draft document. Let me
also take this opportunity to thank the two facilitators
for the work they have done. My comments will be
very brief.

11

A/63/PV.82

My delegation has not read the document that has
been presented to us. However, I have heard the
comments of some delegations. At this stage, I would
not want us to prejudge the document. We should give
each and every Member State time to read to document
before we come back to it.
That being said, despite the grievances that have
been expressed, we think we can still correct any
mistakes that may have occurred. In my part of the
world, it is when the king is dead and the house is on
fire that we think everything is beyond correction. But
we are not yet at that stage. I would therefore like to
appeal to all parties to look into the document, and
especially to consider the plight of the ordinary people
which the document aims to address. We are aware of
the enormous crisis that this issue represents in virtually
every part of the world. It is in that regard that we
should step back and ensure that the spirit in which the
Organization has worked in the past to produce many
documents through international cooperation prevails.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation for
your sincere efforts so far, Mr. President, as well as for
those of the facilitators to take everyone’s ideas
onboard.
Having the United Nations address the crisis is of
great importance for all of us, not only because of its
severe impacts on the daily lives of our peoples but
also because of the role that the Organization should
play in that regard, on which our people expect it to
deliver.
We are therefore of the same view as you,
Mr. President, that there should be a comprehensive
approach and full participation by all. The text you
have presented today in that regard is a draft for
negotiations that can serve as a basis for discussions in
the coming weeks. Actually, today’s draft is based on
what has been discussed by the facilitators, but it also
includes further inputs from the President’s meetings
with heads of States during his visits to various
countries. It therefore includes a combination of views
that I think should be the basis for negotiations in the
coming weeks.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to acknowledge
and express its gratitude for all the efforts you have
made, Mr. President, to draft and introduce the
document on the organization of the Conference to be

12

held in early June. We thank all those who have
contributed to that document, in particular the
facilitators.
We view the President’s document as being
neither a repudiation of nor a substitution for the
facilitators’ document. We will study the document that
has been provided to us this morning and will
announce our position on its contents.
We agree with the President that developing
countries are those suffering the most from this crisis
and that they will continue to do so. We also agree that
the concerns and hopes of those countries should be
taken into account in any documents emanating from
the Conference.
Having said that, we must nevertheless not forget
two basic points. First, this is an intergovernmental
multilateral body. Secondly, all of us want a consensus
outcome to the June Conference. My delegation has
drawn the conclusion that all of us without exception
are bound to work together to focus on the substantive,
regardless of where the ideas originate. Nothing should
divert us from that goal. As some of my colleagues
have said, I too acknowledge that time is short.
However, experience has shown that, regardless of that
fact, if there is a desire to succeed and a willingness to
accommodate each others’ views, it is possible to
achieve the desired results.
At the most recent meeting in Geneva on the
Durban Review Conference, we had an outstanding
example of the spirit of compromise and consensus, the
result of which was welcomed by everyone — and I
stress by everyone. Let us show the same flexibility,
openness and political willingness here, because in this
crisis, we are all in the same boat and we are all
suffering. Some are suffering more than others, but we
are all suffering and will suffer to some degree from
this crisis. Let us therefore ensure that we have a
consensual, collective reaction to it, and let us not
disappoint the millions — if not billions — of people
who are awaiting a signal from the Assembly on this
very delicate and important subject.
Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for sharing your views on the upcoming
Conference, which will most certainly be a major
event. We take this opportunity to also thank the
facilitators for the work that they have been so ably
doing.

09-33126

A/63/PV.82

My delegation is looking forward to an open and
transparent intergovernmental process, which we very
much hope will bring us to a consensus on the
outcome. However, given the present circumstances
and the nature of today’s discussion, I think that the
representative of Ghana has just made a very valid
proposal that a meeting be held between you, Sir, the
facilitators and the major negotiating groups to agree
on the way forward in terms of procedure. There is not
much time, and let me assure you, Sir, of my
delegation’s constructive spirit in this process.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I think it
is fortuitous that I am speaking after the representative
of Estonia, because I wanted to speak in the same vein
as her.
I believe that the representative of Venezuela
spoke very aptly when he said that the United Nations
has a lot to say on such issues as the economic crisis
that we are in the midst of, and certainly more
generally on economic and financial matters. Such
issues should not be relegated to the private sector or
to other entities, although they also have a relevant role
to play. However, we believe that the United Nations
has a lot to say on these issues, since it has certain
mechanisms, procedures and ways of doing things that
we feel are very transparent and democratic. That
makes a difference.

09-33126

Therefore, my delegation believes that our
current discussion — which is not on the substance or
the content of the document, since none of us has read
it, but is simply procedural — is incredibly valuable
and represents the heart of what the United Nations is.
We believe that the United Nations should work on this
issue as it does on others, helping to build bridges and
promote reconciliation. In this regard, respect for the
mechanisms that we have to work with in an open and
intergovernmental manner is essential and fundamental.
I do not believe that we will achieve a successful
outcome at the June Conference if we begin with
divisions over procedural matters such as we are seeing
now. We would not only not be able to help but would
probably even harm the United Nations in that respect.
Accordingly, I would like to support the statements
made by the representatives of Ghana, Estonia and
other delegations. It is necessary and important that we
correct the procedural issues before we turn to the
actual issues of substance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers on my list. The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 48. I would like to thank all for having
participated so actively in this meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

13
