S/2020/469

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2521 (2020), in
connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports of the Secretary-General on
the Sudan and South Sudan”. The resolution was adopted on 29 May 2020, in
accordance with the voting procedure set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020
from the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), a procedure agreed upon
in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the following documents:
• My letter dated 28 May 2020, addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (see annex 1), putting to a vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/453 (see annex 1 and
enclosure thereto);
• Letters received in reply from members of the Security Council, indicating
their national position on the draft resolution (see annexes 2 to 16);
• Statements subsequently submitted by members of the Security Council,
providing explanations of their votes (see annexes 17 to 23).
The present letter and its annexes will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.

(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-07284 (E) 090620 100620

*2007284*

S/2020/469

Annex 1
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the members of the Security
Council in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to all members of the Council (S/2020/253), I would
like to draw your attention to the following issue.
The members of the Council have discussed the draft resolution submitted by
the United States of America in connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/453). The draft
resolution has been put in blue (see enclosure).
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I hereby put the
abovementioned draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting
period for this draft resolution will begin at 12.30 p.m. on Thursday, 28 May 2020.
The non-extendable 24-hour voting period will expire at 12.30 p.m. on Friday,
29 May 2020.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against or abstention) on the draft
resolution, as well as your possible explanation of vote, by sending a letter signed
by the Permanent Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable
24-hour voting period set out above to the Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division in the United Nations Secretariat (egian@un.org).
It is my intention to circulate a letter listing the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the
vote shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, on the afternoon of Friday,
29 May 2020.

(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

2/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Enclosure

S/2020/453

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
28 May 2020
Original: English

United States of America: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous resolutions, statements of its President, and press
statements on the situation in South Sudan,
Welcoming encouraging developments in South Sudan’s peace process,
including the beginning of the formation of a Revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity (RTGNU), recognizing that this represents a significant step
towards sustainable peace by the parties to the Revitalized Agreement, and further
welcoming the spirit of compromise and political will demonstrated by the parties in
order to create the conditions necessary to advance the peace process,
Expressing appreciation for the leadership of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) in advancing the peace process in South Sudan, underlining
that the 2018 “Revitalised Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan” (the Revitalised Agreement) is an important step forward in the
peace process that provides a window of opportunity to achieve sustainable peace
and stability in South Sudan, commending the ongoing mediation by the Community
of Sant’Egidio to foster political dialogue between signatories and non-signatories
of the Revitalised Agreement, and calling on South Sudanese parties to demonstrate
the political will to peacefully resolve the conflict,
Recognizing the reduction in political violence since the signing of the
Revitalised Agreement and that the permanent ceasefire was upheld in most parts
of the country, and further recognizing the efforts of the RTGNU in addressing the
COVID-19 pandemic,
Reiterating its concern regarding the political, security, economic, and
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, and emphasizing that there can be no military
solution to the conflict,
Strongly condemning past and ongoing human rights violations and abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law, further condemning harassment
and targeting of civil society, humanitarian personnel and journalists, emphasizing
that those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and violations
and abuses of human rights must be held accountable, and that the RTGNU bears the
primary responsibility to protect its population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing, and crimes against humanity, and in this regard, urging the RTGNU to
expeditiously sign the Memorandum of Understanding with the African Union for
the creation of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan,
20-072843/30

S/2020/469

Expressing deep concern at reports of misappropriation of funds that
undermine the stability and security of South Sudan, and that these activities
can have a devastating impact on society and individuals, weaken democratic
institutions, undermine the rule of law, perpetuate violent conflicts, facilitate illegal
activities, divert humanitarian assistance or complicate its delivery, and undermine
economic markets,
Taking note of the Final 2020 report (S/2020/342) of the United Nations Panel
of Experts,
Determining that the situation in South Sudan continues to constitute a threat
to international peace and security in the region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Expresses deep concern at continued fighting in South Sudan and
condemns violations of the Revitalised Agreement and the Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access (ACOH);
2. Urges South Sudan’s leaders to finalize establishment of the RTGNU and
fully implement all provisions of the Revitalised Agreement and allow, in accordance
with relevant provisions of international law and in line with United Nations guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance, including humanity, impartiality, neutrality,
and independence, full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to help ensure
timely delivery of humanitarian assistance to all those in need;
Arms Embargo and Inspections
3. Decides to renew until 31 May 2021 the measures on arms imposed by
paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018), and reaffirms the provisions of paragraph 5
of resolution 2428 (2018);
4. Decides to review the measures renewed in paragraph 3 in light of
progress achieved implementing all provisions of the Revitalized Agreement, and
adherence to the ACOH and ceasefire provisions of the Revitalized Agreement,
further decides to carry out a midterm review of the measures renewed in paragraph
3 no later than 15 December 2020, and expresses its readiness to consider adjusting
measures renewed in paragraph 3, including through modifying, suspending, lifting
or strengthening measures to respond to the situation;
5. Requests in this regard the Secretariat to provide to the Security Council,
by 31 October 2020, a report assessing the role of the arms embargo in facilitating
implementation of the Revitalised Agreement and articulating options for the
elaboration of benchmarks, in coordination with the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism (CTSAMVM), R
JMEC, and in consultation with the RTGNU, to assess the arms embargo measures
according to progress on implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, including
adherence to the ACOH and ceasefire provisions of the Revitalized Agreement,
and expresses its intention to review the options provided to the Council by
15 December 2020;
6. Stresses the importance that notifications or requests for exemptions
pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2428 (2018) should contain all relevant
information, including the purpose of the use, the end user, the technical specifications
and quantity of the equipment to be shipped and, when applicable, the supplier, the
proposed date of delivery, mode of transportation and itinerary of shipments;

4/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

7. Underscores that arms shipments in violation of this resolution risk fueling
conflict and contributing to further instability, and strongly urges all Member States
to take urgent action to identify and prevent such shipments within their territory;
8. Calls upon all Member States, in particular States neighbouring South
Sudan, to inspect, in accordance with their national authorities and legislation
and consistent with international law, in particular the law of the sea and relevant
international civil aviation agreements, all cargo to South Sudan, in their territory,
including seaports and airports, if the State concerned has information that provides
reasonable grounds to believe the cargo contains items the supply, sale, or transfer
of which is prohibited by paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018) for the purpose of
ensuring strict implementation of these provisions;
9. Decides to authorize all Member States to, and that all Member States
shall, upon discovery of items the supply, sale, or transfer of which is prohibited by
paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018), seize and dispose (such as through destruction,
rendering inoperable, storage or transferring to a State other than the originating or
destination States for disposal) of such items, and decides further that all Member
States shall cooperate in such efforts;
10. Requires any Member State when it undertakes an inspection pursuant
to paragraph 8 of this resolution, to submit promptly an initial written report to the
Committee containing, in particular, explanation of the grounds for the inspections,
the results of such inspections, and whether or not cooperation was provided, and,
if prohibited items for supply, sale, or transfer are found, further requires such
Member States to submit to the Committee within 30 days a subsequent written
report containing relevant details on the inspection, seizure, and disposal, and
relevant details of the transfer, including a description of the items, their origin and
intended destination, if this information is not in the initial report;
Targeted Sanctions
11. Decides to renew until 31 May 2021 the travel and financial measures
imposed by paragraphs 9 and 12 of resolution 2206 (2015), and reaffirms the provisions
of paragraphs 10, 11, 13, 14 and 15 of resolution 2206 (2015), and paragraphs 13, 14,
15 and 16 of resolution 2428 (2018);
12. Decides to review the measures renewed in paragraph 11 above in light of
progress achieved implementing all provisions of the R-ARCSS and developments
related to human rights violations and abuses, decides to carry out a midterm review
of the measures renewed in paragraph 11 no later than 15 December 2020, and
expresses its readiness to consider adjusting measures in paragraph 11, including
through modifying, suspending, lifting or strengthening measures to respond to
the situation;
13. Underscores its willingness to impose targeted sanctions in order to
support the search for an inclusive and sustainable peace in South Sudan;
14. Reaffirms that the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution 2206 (2015)
apply to individuals, and that the provisions of paragraph 12 of resolution 2206 (2015)
apply to individuals and entities, as designated for such measures by the Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 16 of resolution 2206 (2015) (“the Committee”), as
responsible for or complicit in, or having engaged in, directly or indirectly, actions
or policies that threaten the peace, security or stability of South Sudan, and further
reaffirms that the provisions of paragraphs 9 and 12 of resolution 2206 (2015) apply
to individuals, as designated for such measures by the Committee, who are leaders
or members of any entity, including any South Sudanese government, opposition,

20-072845/30

S/2020/469

militia, or other group, that has, or whose members have, engaged in any of the
activities described in this paragraph and paragraph 15;
15. Underscores that such actions or policies as described in paragraph 14
above may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Actions or policies that have the purpose or effect of expanding or
extending the conflict in South Sudan or obstructing reconciliation or peace talks or
processes, including breaches of the Revitalized Agreement or ACOH;
(b) Actions or policies that threaten transitional agreements or undermine the
political process in South Sudan, including Chapter 4 of the Revitalised Agreement;
(c) Planning, directing, or committing acts that violate applicable international
human rights law or international humanitarian law, or acts that constitute human
rights abuses, in South Sudan;
(d) The targeting of civilians, including women and children, through the
planning, directing, or commission of acts of violence (including killing, maiming,
torture, or rape), abduction, enforced disappearance, forced displacement, or attacks
on schools, hospitals, religious sites, or locations where civilians are seeking
refuge, or through other conduct that would constitute a serious abuse of human
rights, a violation of international human rights law or a violation of international
humanitarian law;
(e) Planning, directing, or committing acts involving sexual and gender-based
violence in South Sudan;
(f) The use or recruitment of children by armed groups or armed forces in the
context of the armed conflict in South Sudan;
(g) The obstruction of the activities of international peacekeeping, diplomatic,
or humanitarian missions in South Sudan, including the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism or of the delivery
or distribution of, or access to, humanitarian assistance;
(h) Attacks against United Nations missions, international security presences,
or other peacekeeping operations, or humanitarian personnel;
(i) Acting for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, an individual or entity
designated by the Committee; or
(j) Engagement by armed groups or criminal networks in activities that
destabilize South Sudan through the illicit exploitation or trade of natural resources;
16. Expresses concerns at reports of misappropriation and diversion of public
resources which pose a risk to the peace, security, and stability of South Sudan,
expresses serious concern at reports of financial impropriety, lack of transparency,
oversight and financial governance, which pose a risk to the peace, stability, and
security of South Sudan, and are out of compliance with Chapter IV of the Revitalised
Agreement, and in this context, underscores that individuals engaged in actions or
policies that have the purpose or effect of expanding or extending the conflict in
South Sudan may be listed for travel and financial measures;
Sanctions Committee/Panel of Experts
17. Emphasizes the importance of holding regular consultations with
concerned Member States, international and regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as may be
necessary, in particular neighbouring and regional States, in order to ensure the full
implementation of the measures in this resolution, and in that regard encourages the
6/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Committee to consider, where and when appropriate, visits to selected countries by
the Chair and/or Committee members;
18. Decides to extend until 1 July 2021 the mandate of the Panel of Experts
as set out in paragraph 19 of resolution 2428 (2018), and decides that the Panel of
Experts should provide to the Council, after discussion with the Committee, an
interim report by 1 December 2020, a final report by 1 May 2021, and except in
months when these reports are due, updates each month;
19. Requests the Panel of experts to include the necessary gender expertise,
in line with paragraph 6 of resolution 2242 (2015), and encourages the Panel to
integrate gender as a cross-cutting issue across its investigations and reporting;
20. Calls upon all parties and all Member States, especially those neighboring
South Sudan, as well as international, regional and subregional organizations to
ensure cooperation with the Panel of Experts, including by providing any information
on illicit transfers of wealth from South Sudan into financial, property and business
networks and further urges all Member States involved to ensure the safety of the
members of the Panel of Experts and unhindered access, in particular to persons,
documents and sites in order for the Panel of Experts to execute its mandate;
21. Requests the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative for Sexual Violence in Conflict
to share relevant information with the Committee in accordance with paragraph
7 of resolution 1960 (2010) and paragraph 9 of resolution 1998 (2011), and invites
the High Commissioner for Human Rights to share relevant information with the
Committee, as appropriate;
22. Recalls the mandate of UNMISS as outlined in resolution 2514 (2020),
in particular paragraph 8 (d) regarding monitoring, investigating, verifying and
reporting on abuses and violations of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law;
23. Encourages timely information exchange between UNMISS and the Panel
of Experts, and requests UNMISS to assist the Committee and the Panel of Experts,
within its mandate and capabilities;
24. Invites the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC) to
share relevant information with the Council, as appropriate, on its assessment of
the parties’ implementation of the Revitalised Agreement, adherence to the ACOH,
and the facilitation of unhindered and secure humanitarian access, also expresses
its intent to continue to impose any sanctions that may be appropriate to respond to
the situation;
25. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

20-072847/30

S/2020/469

Annex 2
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the President of the Security Council’s letter of 28 May relating to
the draft resolution on South Sudan sanctions (S/2020/453).
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of resolutions under
the current extraordinary circumstance caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
I am pleased to indicate that Belgium votes in favour of the draft resolution. At this
stage, my delegation does not intend to deliver an explanation of vote.
I would be grateful if you could acknowledge receipt of this letter and
communicate Belgium’s vote to the President of the Security Council at the expiry
of the 24-hour voting period.

(Signed) Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations

8/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 3
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you and your team for the strong support in facilitating
the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China abstains in the voting on the draft
resolution submitted by the United States regarding sanctions against South Sudan
(S/2020/453). Attached herewith is our explanation of vote.
Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.

(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of China
to the United Nations

20-072849/30

S/2020/469

Annex 4
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Special Envoy for Security Council
Affairs of the Dominican Republic addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 28 May 2020 regarding Security Council draft
resolution S/2020/453 in connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
Upon instructions from my Government, the delegation of the Dominican
Republic votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.

(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador
Special Envoy for Security Council Affairs of the Dominican Republic

10/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 5
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the United Nations Charter, that my delegation votes in favour of the Security
Council draft resolution on the agenda item entitled “Reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/453).

(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia

20-0728411/30

S/2020/469

Annex 6
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: French]
In reference to the letter dated 28 May from the President of the Security
Council, requesting Council members to vote on the draft resolution to renew the
sanctions against South Sudan, as submitted by the United States of America and put
in blue in document S/2020/453, France votes in favour.

(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

12/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 7
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
It is my honour to write to you in response to the letter dated 28 May 2020
from the President of the Security Council, initiating a written voting procedure in
line with the agreement reached between members of the Security Council.
The vote of the Federal Republic of Germany on the draft resolution submitted
by the United States of America in connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports
of the Secretary­General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, as contained in document
S/2020/453, is as follows.
The Federal Republic
above-mentioned resolution.

of

Germany

votes

in

favour

of

the

(Signed) Juergen Schulz
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany
to the United Nations

20-0728413/30

S/2020/469

Annex 8
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in reference to the letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Estonia to the United Nations, in his capacity as
the President of the Security Council, regarding the draft resolution for the renewal
of the South Sudan sanctions (S/2020/453).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of the draft resolution.

(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations

14/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 9
Note verbale dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent Mission of
the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
The Permanent Mission of the Niger refers to the letter dated 27 March 2020
from the President of the Security Council for the month of March (China), outlining
the agreed provisional procedure for the adoption of draft resolutions during the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
On the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America for the
renewal of the sanctions regime against South Sudan, as contained in document
S/2020/453, the Republic of the Niger votes in favour.

20-0728415/30

S/2020/469

Annex 10
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 28 May 2020 on
the beginning of the voting procedure in respect of the draft resolution relating to
the agenda item entitled “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South
Sudan” (S/2020/453).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of Security Council
resolutions in place during the duration of the restrictions on movement in New York
due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, outlined in a letter dated 27 March 2020
from the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), I have the honour to inform
you that the Russian Federation abstains in the voting on the draft resolution. Please
find attached an explanation of vote in that regard.

(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

16/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 11
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution submitted by the United States
of America in connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/453).
In that respect, I wish to inform you that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.

(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to the United Nations

20-0728417/30

S/2020/469

Annex 12
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 28 May 2020 regarding the draft resolution submitted
by the United States of America in connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan’’, as contained in document
S/2020/453.
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa abstains in the voting on the
above-mentioned draft resolution.

(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Republic of South Africa

18/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 13
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of Estonia, in his capacity as President of the Security Council,
regarding the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America on the renewal
of the sanctions regime against South Sudan, as contained in document S/2020/453, I
would like to inform you that Tunisia votes in favour of the draft resolution.

(Signed) Kais Kabtani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

20-0728419/30

S/2020/469

Annex 14
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council of
28 May 2020, the United Kingdom votes in favour of the draft resolution relating to
the agenda item entitled “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South
Sudan” (S/2020/453).

(Signed) Jonathan Allen
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations

20/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 15
Letter dated 28 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America in
connection with the agenda item entitled “Reports of the Secretary-General on the
Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/453), the United States of America votes in favour.

(Signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations

20-0728421/30

S/2020/469

Annex 16
Letter dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter of the President of the Security Council dated 28 May
2020 relating to the draft resolution in connection with the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, submitted by the United
States of America, as contained in document S/2020/453,
In accordance with the understanding and procedure for the consideration of
draft resolutions, agreed upon by the members of the Security Council, during the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as reflected in the
letter from the President of the Security Council dated 7 May 2020 on the working
methods of the Security Council for the month of May 2020 (S/2020/372),
I would like to hereby inform you, Sir, that Viet Nam has decided to vote
in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution and does not intend to make a
statement at this stage.

(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations

22/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
With the support of the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, countries of the region and the international community, the political
process towards peace in South Sudan has made significant progress recently, and
the security situation in the country has also greatly improved. As the primary body
for maintaining international peace and security, the Security Council should send
positive messages, set a clear timetable for lifting the sanction measures against South
Sudan and encourage all parties in South Sudan to pursue their active engagement in
the political process in order to maintain the current positive momentum.
In May last year, China abstained in the voting on resolution 2471 (2019) as we
did not support the arms embargo against South Sudan (see S/PV.8536). This position
has not changed. China calls for respect for South Sudan’s national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. The adjustments of sanction measures should
fully take into account the positive progress in South Sudan. Therefore, China has
abstained in the voting on resolution 2521 (2020).
China hopes that the Security Council will make timely and effective
adjustments to relevant measures against South Sudan in the light of changes on the
ground in the country, help all parties in South Sudan to advance the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and
promote governance and security capacity-building in South Sudan.

20-0728423/30

S/2020/469

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
I would like to thank all delegations for their constructive engagement during
the negotiation process on resolution S/2020/453, extending the sanctions regime for
South Sudan.
The Niger voted in favour of the resolution, while being mindful of the
principled position of the African Union on its rejection of the imposition of sanctions
on any African country.
Our vote was also guided, on the one hand, by the flexibility shown by
members in accommodating the majority of our requirements in the resolution, and,
on the other hand, by the provisions of paragraph 4 for the possibility of reviews in a
bid to lifting the sanction measures early, which is the ultimate goal of the Council.
We commend the authorities in South Sudan for their willingness and
efforts, so far, in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, as is proven
by the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. We
encourage the parties to work in confirming this positive trend we all salute.
Once again, my delegation reiterates its full support to the peace process in
South Sudan, and hopes to see the peace gains further consolidated for an early
lifting of the sanctions in their entirety.

24/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations
The Russian delegation was not in a position to support resolution 2521 (2020),
on the extension of the sanctions measures imposed on South Sudan.
The proposed text does not reflect the reality on the ground. Speaking about
the current situation in South Sudan, it has a sustainable trend towards stabilization.
The country has recently entered the transitional period. The Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity was formed.
The parties to the conflict reiterated their adherence to the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians, and Humanitarian Access.
We commend the fact that since the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan was signed, there has been a considerable drop
in violence. More refugees and internally displaced persons are returning to
places of their permanent residence. Confidence-building measures continue to
be implemented.
Unfortunately, the resolution does not reflect all these developments. We do
not share the opinion that the mentioned progress was reached through the increased
sanctions pressure. The regional mediators, not sanctions, played the key role here.
At some point the arms embargo did not let the countries of the region support the
peace process with their own security initiatives.
It is very disappointing that amid calls from Juba and Addis for lifting, or at
least easing, the arms embargo, the penholders were able just to offer to review it by
the end of the year. We would like to emphasize that a review of Security Council
sanctions is not a concession, but an integral part of the restrictions imposed by
the Council. Relevant provisions are included in resolutions on most of the current
Security Council sanctions regimes. The fact that they were not incorporated earlier
into resolutions on South Sudan is an abnormal situation, and that was due to the
reluctance of the penholders to include them in the text.
It is also not appropriate to condition the review on the dynamics of the human
rights situation in the country.
Equally worrisome are the attempts to portray the issues of the economic
management in the country as a risk to the peace, stability and security of South
Sudan and as a basis for the listing. We cannot support such passages in the text.
We hope that, during the upcoming review of the sanctions regime imposed
on South Sudan, the penholders will listen more carefully to the legitimate appeals
of all Council members and the South Sudanese themselves.

20-0728425/30

S/2020/469

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the United States of America for its
efforts in preparing resolution 2521 (2020). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines voted
in favour of the resolution.
My delegation welcomes the decision by the South Sudanese leaders to form
the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. The spirit of compromise
exhibited by the South Sudanese leaders is commendable. Undoubtedly, a difficult
road lies ahead, with impediments that may appear insurmountable. Nevertheless,
we remain optimistic that South Sudan is on the path to peace and prosperity.
The leaders of South Sudan are demonstrating a level of seriousness and
political will to advance the peace process, which was not exhibited during previous
peace initiatives. This heightened commitment towards peace is reflected in South
Sudan’s admirable and resolute approach of hosting peace talks in Juba between the
Sudan leaders.
At this critical juncture in South Sudan’s history, the renewal of sanctions,
without any cogent effort towards eventually lifting them, could have grave
ramifications for the delicate peace process. Not only do we recognize this, but
regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, which are duty-bound to ensure that
peace reigns throughout Africa, are echoing the same sentiments. My delegation
believes it is appropriate that the Council consider the calls from the regional
organizations that are closest to the problem and have taken up the challenge of
silencing the guns in Africa.
My delegation remains steadfast in its principled position that sanctions
regimes should be continually reviewed and amended; and, once the purposes for
which they were created are fulfilled, they should be effectively terminated. In this
respect, we stress that the current sanctions regime on South Sudan does not align
with the existing political and security situation in the country.
We acknowledge, however, that the resolution at hand endeavours to initiate the
process of evaluating the sanctions imposed on South Sudan, while acknowledging
the ongoing positive developments in the country. My delegation therefore looks
forward to the sanctions review process later this year, with the hope that these
measures will be relaxed.
In view of the foregoing, we voted in favour of resolution 2521 (2020), as it
sets in motion the sanctions review process, while sending a positive message to the
South Sudanese leaders that the international community continues to support the
country in its nation-building efforts. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains in
solidarity with the people of South Sudan and is reminded that peace never comes
with ease. It comes through hard labour and toil. As the youngest nation among us,
we must continue to accompany South Sudan as they usher in this new dawn.

26/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
South Africa is encouraged by the positive developments that have taken
place in the South Sudan’s peace process, including the formation of the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity. We further welcome the spirit of
compromise and political will demonstrated by the South Sudanese leaders to create
the conditions necessary to advance the peace process. This is demonstrated by the
decrease in conflict-related violence, and the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees to their territories. We hope that the establishment of the mechanisms
and committees provided for in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan to complement the prevailing positive development will be
completed soon.
The Security Council has recognized these important developments in the
peace process and the Council has urged the international community to continue
to assist South Sudan in its endeavour to achieve sustainable and long-lasting peace.
It is only through the patience and support of the international community
that we are witnessing a change in South Sudan. Let us continue supporting the
aspirations of the world’s youngest State by, among other things, availing resources
and relevant expertise in support of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
especially security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, as well as in establishing the rule of law institutions.
South Africa acknowledges the role that Charter-mandated measures such as
sanctions can play, both in working towards the reduction of armed conflict between
parties and, secondly, in supporting the conditions for a peace process. We have
consistently maintained that sanctions should always serve as a means and not an
end and be based on the context and situation as it unfolds on the ground.
South Sudanese leaders have demonstrated the political will, determination
and maturity to place the interests of the people of South Sudan first by agreeing
to peace. They have made a commitment to building their State and requested the
Security Council to remove any punitive measures that may be a hindrance towards
their goal.
Consistent with our position expressed in the Council in 2019 on the same
issue (see S/PV.8536), we abstained today on the renewal of sanctions on South
Sudan, as we remain convinced that the situation in South Sudan does not necessitate
the application of sanctions.
This is in line with the assessment by the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the subregional body. The African
Union Peace and Security Council, in its 917th meeting, on 9 April,
“urge[d] the concerned members of the international community, who imposed
sanctions and other forms of punitive measures on South Sudan to immediately
and unconditionally lift them, in order to facilitate the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement and create conducive conditions for socio-economic
recovery and development in the country”.
Moreover, in light of these recent developments, South Sudan continues to
require our partnership and support in its nation-building, institution-building and
peacebuilding efforts. In this context, the Council’s consideration of reviewing
the imposition of sanctions, with a view to eventually lifting them as the situation
improves, is a welcome development.
20-0728427/30

S/2020/469

To conclude, we reiterate our commitment and support to the peace process
in South Sudan and want to urge all of us to accompany the people of South Sudan
on their journey to national unity, sustainable peace, security and development in
their State.

28/30

20-07284

S/2020/469

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the United Nations
The United States thanks members of the Security Council for their constructive
engagement on resolution 2521 (2020) to renew the United Nations sanctions regime
for South Sudan, to include an arms embargo and targeted measures, and the mandate
of the Panel of Experts.
This resolution recognizes positive steps taken by South Sudan’s leaders to
advance the peace process. It states clearly that the Security Council will review
sanctions measures based on progress achieved by South Sudan on implementing its
peace agreement. The United States believes this resolution will encourage South
Sudan’s leaders to continue prioritizing peace over conflict and to make decisions in
the best interest of their people, who have suffered so much from this conflict.
Challenges and risks remain on South Sudan’s path to peace and the situation
on the ground is volatile, with key elements of the peace agreement still awaiting
implementation. Lifting sanctions measures at this sensitive turning point would
have removed an important incentive for the formerly warring parties to refrain from
leading the country back into widespread conflict.
The United States credits progress in South Sudan’s peace process to
the dedicated diplomacy of the region. The role of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other regional players has been
and will remain essential. Nevertheless, we believe the United Nations sanctions
measures renewed today create space for peace to thrive in South Sudan by reducing
the flow of weapons to one of Africa’s deadliest conflicts and encouraging the
critical reforms outlined in the peace agreement.
We urge South Sudan’s leaders to remain focused on addressing the urgent
humanitarian needs of their people, respecting human rights, and ensuring
accountability, including for sexual and gender-based violence. Too many people,
especially women and children, have lived in fear through this conflict. This
resolution works to safeguard their rights, as we retain the ability to designate
individuals and entities for human rights violations and abuses, and to deter efforts
of spoilers to the peace process.
The United States stands ready to work closely with South Sudan’s new
Transitional Government as it continues to implement its peace agreement. We
reiterate that the United States is prepared to advocate for further adjustments to
this sanctions regime in response to tangible progress in the peace process.
The United States remains committed to supporting peace and security in
South Sudan. There is no bigger supporter of the South Sudanese people than the
United States.

20-0728429/30

S/2020/469

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
As the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015),
Viet Nam has closely cooperated with South Sudan, members of the Committee,
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Panel
of Experts, with the goal of facilitating the effective implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions and contributing to peace, stability and development
in South Sudan.
Viet Nam welcomes the recent positive developments in the political, security
and economic situation in South Sudan, especially since the establishment of the
Transitional Government in February 2020. We are encouraged to see that the ceasefire
has been maintained in most parts of the country. We also commend the commitment
of the South Sudanese parties to resolving the remaining issues, especially the efforts
of the Government in addressing the coronavirus disease pandemic. At the same time,
we are aware of the complexities of the situation, particularly the need to address
intercommunal violence issues and to make more concrete progress on the security
arrangements. However, we believe that the progress that the relevant parties have
made is encouraging and should be acknowledged by the international community.
Viet Nam reiterates its position that sanctions should only be a tool to promote
sustainable peace, security and development, and shall not affect the development of
a country, the livelihood of its people or the effective functioning of its Government.
Sanctions should be lifted once the situation permits.
At the same time, we acknowledge that the resolution recognizes the
achievements made by the South Sudanese parties, having incorporated inputs to that
effect by Viet Nam and other members. It also sets out a clear and specific roadmap
for the review of the sanctions, particularly the arms embargo. These provide good
ground for the future work of the Council in the right direction.
Therefore, after careful consideration, Viet Nam has decided to vote in favour
of resolution 2521 (2020). We sincerely hope that the adoption of the resolution will
contribute to long-term peace and stability in South Sudan. We are also pleased
with the spirit of compromise during the negotiation process, which we believe will
promote cooperation between the members in the implementation of the resolution.
Viet Nam will continue to work closely with relevant Member States, the
United Nations, IGAD and the African Union, and calls on other Council members
to do the same in advancing the implementation of the agreements among the South
Sudanese parties, with the aim of facilitating the review and the subsequent lifting
of the sanctions.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates our consistent position in support of the
unity, peace, stability and sovereignty of South Sudan and contributing to peace and
stability in the region.

30/30

20-07284
