NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 24 MARCH 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1407) . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . , , . . . , . . . . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) . . , . , . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1407

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 24 March 1968, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Ousmane Soce DIOP (Senegal).
tiesent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (SIAgendall407)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
fu) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(bj Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Pernianent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Is) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
(6) Letter ‘dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8486)
t‘

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accord.
ante with the decision taken at the Security Council’s
1403rd meeting, I propose to invite the representatives of
the two countries which have requested this Council
meeting, Jordan and Israel, to take places at the Council
table for the duration of the discussion on this item. I also
propose to invite the representatives of the United Arab
Republic, Iraq, Morocco, Syria and Saudi Arabia to take
the places reserved for them at the sides of the Council
Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M, H. El-Farra
[Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic),
Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. A. T Benhima
(Morocco), Mr, G. J Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia] took the places reserved for them.

/

2. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): The
Security Council will now resume its consideration of the

question before it. I have no speakers on my list who wish
to address the Council before we examine the draft
resolution which I shall submit shortly,
3, At our last meeting, I informed members that some
progress had been made in the negotiations. I must
apologize for the delay in convening today’s meeting, but
we were continuing our negotiations which, I am happy to
say, have led to the formulation of a text which will be read
out in a few moments. It will be observed that in the
preamble note is taken of the contents of the letters from
both Jordan and Israel,
4. Before I ask the Council to vote on this draft resolution
which, I believe, will meet with unanimous approval, I shall
ask the Secretariat to read out the text.
A member of the Secretariat read out the text of the
draft resolution, asfollows:
“The Security Council,
‘Having heurd the statements of the representatives of
Jordan and Israel,
“Having noted the contents of the letters of the
Permanent Representatives of Jordan and Israel in documents S/8470, S/8475, S/8478, S/8483, S/8484 and
S/8486,
“Having noted further the supplementary information
provided by the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization as contained in documents S/7930/Add.64 and Add.65,
‘Recalling resolution 2.36 (1967) by which the Security
Council condemned any and all violations of the ceasefire,
“Observing that the military action by the armed forces
of Israel on the territory of Jordan was of a large-scale
and carefully planned nature,
“Considering that all violent incidents and other violations of the cease&e should be prevented and not
overlooking past incidents of this nature,
‘Recalling further resolution 237 (1967) which called
upon the Government of Israel to ensure the safety,
welfare and security of the inhabitants of the areas where
military operations have taken place,

“1. Deplores the loss of life and heavy damage to
property;

ago in Security Council resolution 56 (1948) of 19 August
1948. That resolution declared:

“2. Condemns the military action launched by Israel
in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and
the cease-fire resolutions;

“Each party has the obligation to use all means at its
disposal to prevent action violating the truce by individuals or groups who are subject to its authority or who
are in territory under its control;“-and-

“3. Deplores all violent incidents in violation of the
cease-fire and declares that such actions of military
reprisal and other grave violations of the cease-firecannot
be tolerated and that the Security Council would have to
consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in
the Charter to ensure against repetition of such acts;

I

“No party is permitted to violate the truce on the
ground that it is undertaking reprisals or retaliations
against the other party.”

/‘9. We deem these principles to be applicable to the
cease-fire resolutions of June 1967 which both Israel and
Jordan have pledged to observe. Certainly if there is any
“4. Calls upon Israel to desist from acts or activities in
lesson to be learned from the experience of years past, as
contravention of resolution 237 (1967);
well as the experience of recent days, the lesson is starkly
simple: violence breeds violence. That is why we could not
“5. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situaclose our eyes to the fact that both types of violence have
tion under review and to report to the Security Council as
taken place, that both types must be the object of our
appropriate,”
concern, and that both types must be brought to an end if
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): With the
we are to move forward towards peace.
consent of Council members, I shall now put the draft
10. It is because the resolution just adoptsd by the
resolution to the vote.
Council takes into account all types of violence in violation
A vote was taken by show of hands.
of the cease-fire that my delegation was able to support it.
The task of peace-making in the Middle East is already
enormously complicated by the psychological and emoThe draft resolution was adopted unanimously. ’
tional wounds of past conflicts and disputes. If those
wounds are ever to be healed, if the peace-making process
6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I shall now
call on those representatives who have indicated their desire
set in motion’by the Council in November 1967 is to have
an even chance of succeeding, the duty of the Council and
to explain their vote after the voting. The first speaker on
my list is the representative of the United States of
of all concerned is to eliminate resort to all types of
violence by scrupulous compliance with the cease-fire
America.
resolutions and arrangements. It is with this consideration
v 7. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In my
in mind-that a peaceful future cannot be built on a present
statement of 21 March I sought to make as clear as possible
characterized by acts of violence-that my delegation has
the position of my Government in the Council’s considera- joined in voting for this resolution,
tion of the contents of the letters of Jordan and Israel
which comprise our agenda. We were and remain gravely
Il. While the resolution makes no express referral to Mr.
concerned by the disturbing events which led to this
Jarring’s mission, surely he should be heartened and
Council meeting. We were and remain opposed to violence
encouraged to persevere by the statements of individual
from any quarter-military
counter-actions such as that
members of the Council. My country, for its part, will not
taken by Israel on 21 March in violation of the cease-fire only continue to wish him well; we will also continue, in
resolutions, as well as the preceding acts of terrorism and
our contacts with all the parties, to act in accordance with
violence, also in violation of the cease-fire resolutions, I
the pledge I made before this Council when the resolution
stated to the Council on 21 March, and I repeat today:
of 22 November was adopted-“a pledge to this Council
and to the parties concerned that the diplomatic and
“We oppose military actions in violation of the cease- political influence of the United States Government will be
fire resolutions of the Council; such actions create further
exerted in support of the efforts of the United Nations
complications in an already complicated situation, We
special representative to achieve a fair, equitable and
oppose acts of terrorism, which are in violation of the
dignified settlement so that all in the area can live in peace,
cease-fire resolutions of the Council, and we are not blind
security and tranquillity” [1382nd meeting, para. 1021.
to the additional problems they create. We believe,
further, that military counter-actions, such as that which
12. And it is our hope, with the events of the recent past
has just taken place on a scale cut of proportion to the
as grim and tragic reminders, that the parties themselves
acts of violence that preceded it, are greatly to be
will be inspired to extend to Mr, Jarring their fullest
deplored.” [1402nd meeting, para. 5.1
co-operation so that he may all the more quickly fulfil his
difficult mandate-that
of establislliirg and maintaining
8. We have long believed, asI also stated to the Council on
contacts with the States concerned-in the words of
21 March, that the rule which should guide all the parties in
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967: “in order to
these situations was first and wisely expressed many years promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful
and accepted settlement in accordance with the provisions
1 Seeresolution 248 (1968).
and principles in this resolution”.

rL
4

f 3. Mr.

MALIK

ftranslared

from Russian):

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The Security Council has just
adopted a resolution (248 (1968/j condemning Israel’s new
piraticaI attack on Jordan, carried out with the use of
massive ground ‘and air forces.

21. The Soviet delegation has already pointed out that the
United States representative is trying to place the aggressor
and the victim on the same footing or, as the English say, to
put them in the same boat. He is attempting to achieve this
by his interpretation of the resolution that has been
adopted. Israel can take such an interpretation as an
opportunity to act arbitrarily, by referring to so-called
terrorist acts by the inhabitants of Arab territories now
occupied by the aggressor.

14. In its decision the Security Council has described
those aggressive actions on the part of Israel as a flagrant
violation
of the United Nations Chatter and of the
resolution on a cease-fire and cessation of military actioe in
the Middle East. It warns the aggressor against similar acts
of aggression and stresses in its decision that such acts of
military reprisal on the part of Israel cannot be tolerated.

22. But the experience and history of war and the
occupation of foreign territories, and particularly the
experience of my own country, the Soviet Union, when the
most densely populated and economically advanced part of
the country wasoccupied by the Hitlerite aggressors, gives
us grounds for assuming that the aggressormay concoct any
story, any pretext for new piratical acts of aggression.
Therefore, I should very much like the United States
representative to understand that such pretexts and justifications by the aggressor for his so-called retaliatory
measures are, apparently, incomprehensible to him because
his country is fortunate in that it has never experienced
occupation by an aggressor; the people of his country have
never suffered under the heel of an occupier or aggressor.
So it is very easy for him to take this attitude to territory
occupied by the enemy and to the feelings of the people
who are subjected to the occupying forces.

15. The resolution also stresses that in the case of a
repetition of such acts the Council will have to consider
such measures as are provided for under the Charter to
ensure against a repetition of such acts. There are such
provisions in the United Nations Charter, and the Soviet
delegation has mentioned them.
16. The resolution just adopted is a serious warning to the
Israel extremists, who are continuing their adventuristic and
irresponsible policy, defying the United Nations Charter
and the authority of the Security Council, exacerbating the
situation in the Middle Eas-t and sabotaging the resolution
of 22 November 1967 adopted by the Security Council. It
is on record that when three questions were asked by the
Soviet delegation at the 1405th meeting, namely: (a) does
Israel recognize that resolution? (b) does* it agree to its
implementation?
and (c) does it agree to the withdrawal of
its troops from the occupied Arab territories-which is the
major question in this resolution, no reply was forthcoming.

23. We have experienced attempts by Israel arbitrarily to
interpret the previous resolution of the Security Council.
This was mentioned in our statement, and it is also
mentioned in the statement of the Soviet Government of
22 March 1968 which I read out here for the benefit of the
members of the Security Council [1405th meeting,
para. 121. Referring to the previous resolution of 22
November 1967 /242 (196711, it stated: the Security
Council resolution on the Middle East is not a recommendation or an opinion which Governments are free to follow or
to ignore. However, Israel is beginning arbitrarily to
interpret that resolution in its own way, to claim that it is
not a resolution but merely an agenda for negotiations, and
that it is not binding upon it.

17. By the position it has taken, Israel is impeding Mr.
Jarring in the fulfilment of his mission.

b
.,

\/
I

18. The Soviet delegation has voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council, which it
regards as a definite and firm action designed to bridle the
aggressor. The Arab States directly concerned that have
fallen victim to the Israel aggression were able in these
specific conditions to agree to such a resolution by virtue of
the fact that it contains a serious condemjnation of this new
act of Israel aggression and a serious warning for the future.
.
19. However, the decision taken by the Council is the very
minimum of what the Security Council should have done.
AI1 of us around this table and in this room know why the
Council was not able to take a more radical decision and
why we needed so much time-four interminable days-to
work out ‘a draft resolution. Here in the Council and
outside the Council Israel continues to receive protection
and support and attempts are made to justify and excuse
the aggression and the aggressor.

24. No one has given Israel the right to interpret Security
Council resolutions in its own way. There is a danger that
your statement today, Mr. Goldberg, may give Israel cause
to interpret this resolution too in its own way, and under
the pretext of so-called retaliatory measures it may once
again commit acts of aggression against the Arab countries.
We are faced with such a danger and I shall be happy if this
does not happen. I think the Security Council will also be
happy if it does not happen.

25. This is the situation with regard to the question of
interpretation.
26. The Security Council can hardly force the Arab
population who are under the heel of the occupier to kneel
down, fold their arms meekly before the occupier, and
embrace him. Can any Arab State and its Government bear
responsibility for the atrocities being committed by the
invader in the occupied territory? This aspect is not
touched on here. Therefore, anyone who has experienced
occupation or who has experienced violence against the

20. The statement of the United States representative
after the vote on the draft resolution, in which he
attempted to give a one-sided interpretation of the decision
taken by the Council, is new and striking confirmation of
the general line of .United States policy in connexion with
Israel’s aggression.
3

population of his country on the part of the aggressor,
invader or occupier, will realize that the aggressor cannot
expect to be loved by the population of the country he
occupies and cannot rely on that. Both for the aggressor
and the occupier, the best thing would be to take the line
of compliance with the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967 and to withdraw its troops to the positions
of 5 June 1967. Then there would be neither occupied
territories nor any foreign population oppressed in those
territories, and there would be no conflicts. That would be
the most sensible solution for the aggressor.

violence and I gave a general outline of the action that
should be taken immediately by the Security Council with
a view to avoiding any recurrence and re-establishing the
status quo which, being itself the result of war, remained
precarious and provisional.’ But at least in the present
circumstances, I said, the peace-making mission could
continue, with the patience and perseverance of the special
representative of the Secretary-General, whose mission has
the full support of my delegation.
33. The resolution we have just adopted is in line with the
views I expressed, and is therefore acceptable to my
delegation. For this reason we cast our vote in favour, to
enable it to be adopted unanimously.

27. The resolution just adopted by the Security Council
does not need any special commentaries. It does not and
cannot contain any prohibition against hating one’s enemy,
those who have occupied one’s country, nor any demand
that one should love the enemy, aggressor or occupier of
one’s country.

34. In making this very brief explanation of vote, I feel
compelled, on behalf of my Government, to expressthe
hope that a happier future in just and stable peace lies
ahead for the sorely-tried region of the Middle East. We are
anxious to do all we can to achieve such a just and stable
peace.

28. Moreover, an understandable misgiving also arises on a
more general plane. Is this not an attempt to ensure that
the people of occupied territories should act in such a way
in other cases,and not only in this instance? Unfortunately
we are witnessing occupation by foreign troops and
oppression of the population in occupied territories
elsewhere-in Viet-Nam, for example. Is there any wish or
intention on the part of anyone to expand this thesis to
include that, too?

35. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I said when I
welcomed the Soviet Ambassador a few days ago that we in
this Council have fatigue and frustration as our constant
companions. Those companions have walked with us
through recent days and nights. I said, too, that our own
reward is that we never abandon the search for common
ground of agreement. We have not abandoned that searchin
the past week.

29. In this context, attempts to read into resolution
248 (1968) adopted today by the Security Council a
meaning which suits the aggressor would contradict that
very resolution. It would be a kind of rearguard action for
those who suffered defeat for four long days and were
compelled to retreat from their previous, more rigid
intentions.

36. Even in the fatigue and frustration since last Thursday
morning, I rejoice that there has been kept alive amongst us
the desire for agreement and the readiness to consult and
the courage to compromise. I stated the position and policy
of my Government when I spoke last Thursday (1403rd
meeting] and I have no need to repeat it now. But now that
we have consulted and agreed and voted together, there are
three things I should emphasize. I shall do so as shortly as
possible.

30. The resolution adopted by the Security Council speaks
for itself. It contains a serious condemnation of Israel’s new
act of aggression and gives us basis for hoping that it will
both serve as a lesson to the aggressorand benefit the Arab
countries-and that besides teaching the aggressor a lesson,
it will serveas a severewarning to him.

37. First, the wide area of agreement between us was
throughout our consultations greater than the gap of
disagreement. The fact that we worked so hard to narrow
and finally to close that gap should not lead us to forget’
that much of the resolution was never in dispute.
Ambassador Pachachi, who always speaks to us so clearly
and thoughtfully, in measured eloquence, but also with
great force and conviction, pointed the way for us whenhe
said last Friday:

31. The Soviet Union, as is stressedin the statement of the
Soviet Government of 22 March 1968 emphatically affirms
its determination to press, together with other peace-loving
States, for an end to Israel aggression and the elimination of
all its consequences, for the return to their lawful owners of
the territories captured from Arab States as a result of the
aggression of 1967, and for the achievement of the
necessary political settlement in the Middle East on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of every State in that area.

“Therefore, the action to be taken by the Council
should be based on the following: It should be an
expression of its opposition to bloodshed and slaughter;it
should be a warning for the future against the perpetration of such acts; it should be an expression of concern
for the principles of this Organization and its own
resolutions; it should be a warning that such acts will only
result in the weakening of the peacemaking processof the
United Nations.” [1405th meeting, para. 57.1

32. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
At the 1403rd meeting, held on Thursday
evening, 21 March, I expressed my delegation’s concern at
the grave events that had taken place that day on Jordanian
territory, east of the River Jordan. I said that I deplored the
violation of the cease-fire, as I had previously deplored
We welcome that wise and strong lead.
other violent incidents and violations of the cease-fire that
had occurred in the area of the Israel-Jordan sector. I said J(’ 38. The second contention, which I particularly wish to
that my delegation could not condone or justify such
emphasize, arises from the fact- that in the resolution We
Spanish):

4

have just passed we refer back to resolution 236 (1967), in
which the Security Council condemned any and all violations of the cease-fire. What took place last week was not
an isolated incident. It was the culmination of a train of
events which goes back a long way. To attempt to deal with
last week’s events in isolation we thought would be to fail
to recognize the realities of the situation as a whole. Many
of us felt it essential to make it clear that no violence will
be condoned; all violence must be stopped if there is to be
hope for the future.

harm delay has done already, Only the devil would
advocate delay now. Delay has been and is on the side of
conflict. Delay has been and is on the side of the suffering
of the innocent. Delay has been and is on the side of
violence and bloodshed. Delay is on the side of condemning
another generation in the Middle East to hopeless hate. All
of us, as we come to the end of our debate, must surely be
anxiously aware that there is no time to be lost. Now is the
time and great is the urgency to turn from what divides us
to what unites us in practical advance,

39. Our purpose has been and surely must remain to
escape from the vicious circle of violence, a vicious circle to
which all violence contributes. It is only by an escape from
that vicious circle that we can have hope for the future.

46. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): I should like to
place on record the following explanation of vote.

Q 40, In turning to the future, let me repeat the third
argument, which seems to me to transcend in importance
everything else. No one in this debate has disagreed with
the resolution of 22 November 1967. Everyone accepts it.
Valuable statements have been made. A few days ago the
Prime Minister of Jordan gave the assurance that the
Jordanian Government respected and accepted the resolution,unanimously adopted by the United Nations Security
Council, that they bound themselves to implement it, and
that they considered this resolution as a sound formula for
a settlement of the current crisis.

para. 551.

41. The Prime Minister of Jordan concluded his statement
by saying that the United Nations envoy, Mr. Jarring, had
been charged with a mission and that the Jordanian
Government wished him success in the discharge of this
mission in order to serve stability and the cause of justice
and peace. Those were the words of the Government of
Jordan.

48. It is my delegation’s contention that the expression
“violent incidents”, which appears in operative paragraph 3
of the draft resolution just adopted, covers those armed
attacks and all acts of violence, including those referred to
the Secretary-General’s report of 21 March
$‘3O,Add.
641.

42. And here in this Council there have been important
statements, and if I were to select one I think that I might
choose the statement made by the Soviet Ambassador who
told us in clear, simple, forthright language earlier in this
debate: I‘, , . The Soviet Union does not vote for resolutions it does not recognize. The Soviet Union voted for the
resolution concerned.” (1405th meeting, para. 126.1 He
went on to say: “The Soviet Union voted for all parts of
that resolution; it therefore recognizes all the parts.“[Ibid.,

49. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I should like, Sir, very
briefly to explain the vote of the Canadian delegation on
the resolution which, under your patient and wise Ieadership, has been adopted unanimously.

paru. 128./

43. That is the kind of direct and categoric statement we
like to hear from the Soviet Ambassador. Having heard his
speech this evening, I would respectfully say that he is at
his best when he is being positive.

-

47. My delegation supported the resolution just adopted
because the text takes into account the two main points
which were stressed in the statement that I made here on
21 March. In that statement I emphasized the necessity for
condemning in a very clear-cut way the large-scale military
operation undertaken by Israel on the east bank of the
Jordan River. I also pointed out that my Government
strongly deplored all violations of the cease-fire includingand I quote from my statement: “the series of armed
attacks launched from Jordanian territory through and
beyond the cease-fire line, on the west bank of the Jordan
River, now occupied by Israel forces” (1403rd meeting,

44. We have a sound framework for future settlement. We
have a representative of the Secretary-General universally
trusted and respected. We have on all sides, I am sure, a
longing for the end of violence and suffering. We leave the
past. Let us apply one test from now on. That test should
be the test of whether what we do and what we say will
enable us to escape from all the frustrations and bloodshed
of the past and to contribute in everything we do and say
to a cause we can be proud of, with justice for the refugees
and a stable peace for everyone at long last.
45. I read in today’s papers discussions whether time is on
one side or the other, Time is on no one’s side. How much

50. When I spoke in the Council on 21 March I made clear
that the large-scale military action recently undertaken by
Israel in Jordan had brought about a highly dangerous
situation in the Middle East. This action, which has now
been forthrightedly condemned by the Security Council,
was preceded by a mounting number of incidents of
infiltration or sabotage in areas under Israel control. My
delegation recognizes that the resolution just adopted
concentrates its attention on the major military action by
Israel which clearly could not be condoned by the Council,
In voting in favour of this resolution, however, my
delegation wishes to make it clear that it attaches importance to the fact that the Security Council does not
condone violent incidents, whatever their source. The
Canadian delegation sincerely hopes that the passageof this
resolution will help to ensure that the cease-fire will be
scrupulously observed by all concerned, for if it is not
observed the people of the area will be drawn into a vicious
circle of escalating violence.
51. I must say too that I would have liked to see the
resolution contain an appropriate reference both to UNTSO
and to Mr. Jarring’s highly important mission. Now that a
decision has been taken on the immediate issue raised in the

mously. But in deference to the views of the four Western
and two Latin American States members of the Security
Council, the three sponsors submitted their draft in milder
terms than the commitment embodied in the language of
resolution 228 (1966) required. The commitment was to
take further and more effective steps as envisaged in the
Charter to ensure against the repetition of actions of
military reprisal.

Council the Canadian delegation would urge all those
concerned to give Mr. Jarring’s mission the full co-operation
and support which it deservesand very much needs if it is
to be a success,for this surely represents our best and most
urgent hope for peace in the Middle East.
J52. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): At our meeting of 21 March I
explained my Government’s concern over recent develop
ments between Israel and Jordan. In that connexion 1
stated:

57. Furthermore, after submitting their draft resolution,
and despite the great urgency of the issue, India, Senegal
and Pakistan still refrained from introducing it in the
Security Council yesterday and asking for an immediate
vote. They refrained because they believed that further
consultations should take place in a final effort to reach a
compromise text that would command a unanimous vote,
It is a matter of satisfaction to us that the Council has now
been able to act with unanimity.

we must deplore all violations of the cease-fire
established and maintained in accordance with several
resolutions of the Security Council.
“

.

.

.

“We must oppose violence and the resort to force and
insist upon complete compliance with the cease-fire
resolutions.” /1403rd meeting, paras. 49-50. /
I then went on to state that violations of these resolutions,
in our opinion, poisoned the atmosphere and carried with
them the risk of continued and increased conflict and could
not but impede progress towards the objectives of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). That resolution was
adopted unanimously by the Council, and it seems to me
that the debate in the Council preceding today’s vote has
borne out that there is still agreement on the ultimate
objective of our efforts. Therefore, it is a source of great
satisfaction to us that the resolution adopted today could
also be supported by the entire membership of the Council
because even if the subject matter of that resolution is in
itself of a limited scope, it has a direct bearing on the
broader political problems which have beset the Middle
East for decades.

58. It is with sorrow that my delegation has voted for the
resolution just adopted by the Council [248 (196811. We
have condemned Israel for its military attack along a front
of nearly 100 miles, mounted in division strength, with
aircraft, tanks, artillery and all kinds of modern weapons,
against a defenceless State whose only armour is the
courage and steadfastness of its people. While condemnation may to some extent satisfy the universal conscience,it
cannot bring back to life the hundreds of people who have
been killed on the side not only of Jordan but also of Israel,
The resolution does not ask for reparations from Israel for
the untold damage and destruction to property and means
of livelihood that Israel has inflicted upon a poor country,
59. The New York Times of 23 March 1968 carries the
following eye-witness report by one of its special correspondents of the damage:

53. In our opinion, only a scrupulous and complete
‘adherence to the cease-fire by all concerned can ensure an
atmosphere which will be conducive to the furtherance of
the diplomatic process in which Mr. Jarring is engaged on
behalf of the Security Council and the Secretary-General,
with a view to establishing a just and lasting peace in the
area. It is therefore our hope, indeed, our demand, that all
concerned abstain from all violence.

“The column’s route”-that
is, the Israel military
column’s route-“was marked on either side of the main
north-south road parallel to the river by houses reduced
to rubble. Not a single building on the road remained
intact for more than half a mile”.
60. My delegation takes note that the draft resolution that
has just been adopted unanimously by the Council calls
upon Israel to desist from such acts in contravention of
Security Council resolution 237 (1967). We expect that,
now at least, Israel will refrain from such acts of destruction,

54. The resolution adopted by the Security Council today
reflects our main considerations. While dealing with particular emphasis with the military action of Israel on 21 March,
the resolution at the same time also deals clearly with all
violent incidents in violation of the cease-fire. My deiegation therefore voted in favour of that resolution.

61. Operative paragraph 3 of the resolution just adopted
“Deplores all violent incidents in violation of the ceasefire”. In the view of my delegation, the inclusion of this
paragraph does not in any way imply that the sporadic acts
of terrorism alleged by Israel are to be equated with the
large-scale military attack by Israel on 21 March. Operative
paragraph 3 does not in any way qualify the condemnation
in operative paragraph 2. The Security Council cannot
tolerate military reprisals, much less a massive armed attack
by a Member State on another Member State on the pretext
of retaliation against alleged acts of terrorism or sabotage.
To do so not only would be destructive of international law
and the United Nations Charter, but would also open the
door wide to even graver aggressions in the Middle East.

55. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Although the three sponsors of
the draft resolution contained in document S/8498 of 23
March agreed not to press their text to a vote, there are
some facts in this connexion which I should like to put on
the record. That is necessary in view of the circumstances
surrounding the adoption of the final agreed text.
2
56. The three delegations-that is, India, Senegal and
Pakistan-submitted
their draft because three days of
intensive consultations between them and their African
colleagues on the one side and some Western and Latin
American members of the Council on the other had failed
to produce an agreed text that could be adopted unani6

right to self-defence and survival is a sacred right of which
no people can be deprived. The natural tendency of peoples
to resist foreign occupation is, and always will be, strong
enough to defy all armies of aggression.

62. The Government of Jordan has stated that it is in no
position, in spite of its best efforts, to control the activities
of resistance movements. We cannot permit an interpretation of operative paragraph 3 that would, in the event of
any future incident, enable Israel to claim the freedom to
launch any military attacks against Jordan or any of its
other neighbours. It is always notoriously easy, as is borne
out by the history of two World Wars in this century and
by that of colonial wars, to stage incidents and to use them
.as pretexts for launching wars of aggression. We cannot be a
party to binding Jordan to unjust conditions which it is not
in a position to fulfil, and, in the event of non-fulfilment,
to expose it to the mortal danger of a massive armed attack.

70. The main task the United Nations has set itself is to
assist peoples to achieve freedom and independence; hence,
it would have been inconceivable for its highest organ to
condemn in any way peoples which have the audacity to
stand up to an invader. Such an action would have directly
encouraged oppressive forces everywhere to crush the
world’s peoples; it would have been an invitation to Ian
Smith and South Africa to overrun Zambia, the Congo
(Kinshasa) and the Republic of Tanzania with their armed
hordes; it would have amounted to a sanction of the
aggression still going on in Asia. In other words, the peace
of the world, already so greatly disturbed, would have been
further weakened.

63. Pakistan must therefore reject any such interpretation,
for it not only would destroy the very foundations of
international relations and the United Nations order, but
would condemn small and weak States to live in fear and
trembling before their stronger neighbours.

71. For our part, we cannot, while remaining true to
ourselves, condemn the means employed by an oppressed
people to reaffirm its existence. The situation was clear
enough. The whole world knows who are the enemies of
freedom and independence; the whole world now knows
who it is that condones aggression. Indeed, peoples living
under foreign domination can now rely only on their own
will to set themselves free, whatever the cost.

64. Mr.

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): My delegation had no intention of speaking, now
that the Council’s discussion of Israel’s aggression of 21
March 1968 has culminated in a unanimous vote. However,
in view of the remarks we have heard tonight, I deem it a
duty to make the following statement.
6.5. If we attempt to sum up the situation to which the
Council has been devoting its attention for the past few
days, we must note that the de facto authorities in Tel Aviv
committed a deliberate and premeditated act of massive
armed aggression against the free territory of the Kingdom
of Jordan. No one denies that this was a clear case of
aggression which is condemned both by the Charter and by
law. That fact has never been denied; indeed, we have seen
that the spokesman of Zionist diplomacy went so far as to
give the Council a report-on the acts of military aggression
perpetrated by the authorities he represents.

72. Reason has triumphed in the end; such ideas have been
unacceptable to members of the Council. Even before the
emergency meeting was convened, Jordan had warned the
Security Council of the concentrations of troops and
preparations for aggression, and the Council acted on
Jordan’s complaint by giving it full consideration and by
drawing the necessary conclusions. The complaint resulted
in the unequivocal condemnation of the Zionist aggression
against Jordan. The international community at one and
the same time condemned both the aggression and the
occupation. Jordan’s cause and the cause of the peoples in
the occupied areas were given a favourable hearing. The
decision stands as a warning to the Zionist authorities
against any repetition of reprisals or of similar violations.

66. These two striking and incontrovertible facts are
central to the serious situation that the Security Council is
considering.
67. Bearing these facts in mind, the delegations on the
Council, in their continuing concern for fairness and
impartiality, have sought to describe the situation in the
text before us and to draw the appropriate conclusions,
condemning the aggression committed and seeking to
prevent any repetition of such acts, which constitute a
flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions.

73. If such acts occur again, it will be the Council’s duty,
in accordance with its decision, to take the effective
measures provided for in the Charter so as to put an end to
the continuing aggressive behaviour of the Zionist authorities.
74, We are pleased to note that the international
community has taken a clear stand against the aggressor. We
are not surprised that there have been certain interpretations intended to justify the reprisals and to deny the
peoples’ legitimate right to resist occupation. Obviously,
with the rest of the international community, we reject
such an interpretation, which would camouflage the problems engendered by aggression and occupation.

68. Being firmly convinced that there is a desire for a
dialogue and that such a dialogue would be useful, and
being anxious to arrive at some agreement which would
safeguard the integrity and authority of the Security
Council, Algeria responded promptly to the appeal that was
made and agreed to engage in detailed discussions with all
genuine members of the Council.

75. It is the duty of each one of us, and especially of the
Great Powers, to demand the withdrawal of the occupying
forces because-and this too is self-evident-it is occupation
that brings resistance into being. If we are to pave the way
for a solution, we should rather denounce the dynamitings,
the large-scale repression and-mass assassination, and the

69. Disregarding the discussions m this Council and
anxious to avoid condemning a clear case of aggression,
some have felt obliged to inject an idea which may in future
be dangerous to all nations and which denies the fundamental right of a people to resist enemy occupation, The
7

occupied areas are all clear violations of the cease-fire;and
these are the acts which culminate in violent incidents.

whole policy of evicting people from their homeland. In
some of the statements we have heard this evening stress
was laid on certain interpretations; it should be noted,
however, that the latter are completely at variance with the
terms and the spirit of the resolution we have just adopted.

81. At the same time, the Hungarian delegation wishesto
state very clearly that, on the basis of the Charter and
general international law, the civilian populations in the
occupied areas have every right to fight against the
oppressors, to fight for freedom and independence, It is
legitimate self-defence against the aggressors, against the
occupiers.

76. Attempts have been made, to interpret the text just
adopted by the Council in a way to which it simply does
not lend itself. Algeria, for its part, voted for the resolution
and for nothing else. Such attempts to translate the
resolution we have just adopted into unofficial language
have even run counter to logic, For our part, we shall
continue to respect by our actions the words which so
gloriously apply to those who are fighting for national
freedom in Palestine: to fight against tyrants is to obey
God’s law. These are the words of a great American and
were spoken, as my neighbours to the right must know, by
President Jefferson. As far as we are concerned, in
remaining faithful to ourselves, we shall remain faithful to
that adage.

82. The resolution demands that Israel should ceaseall
these illegal actions in contravention of the Charter, and
observe the principles of peace, national sovereignty, and
the right of self-defence, and human rights in general.
83. During our debate, in all the numerous and lengthy
statements by the Israel representative, we did not hear any
mention of the basic principles of the Charter of our
Organization, nor did we hear any statement that Israel is
ready to abide by the resolutions of the Security Council,

77. Before concluding, I should like to thank the delegations of India, Pakistan and Senegal for their untiring
efforts, which have greatly helped us to reach a unanimous
vote today. In so doing, I am sure that I speak for many
delegations both inside and outside this Council.

84. The Security Council is the main body of our
Organization responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security. On the basis of that task, our
resolution reiterates the demand for the observance of the
cease-fire in the Middle East. In the view of my delegation,
the members of the Security Council-in fact, all Members
of the Organization and especially those permanent
members of the Security Council having close relations with
Israel-should make every effort to induce that Government
to desist from further acts of violence and to abandon its
expansionist policy. It is their duty to force Israel, if
necessary, to implement Security Council resolutions
236 (1967) 237 (1967) and 242 (1967) the basic demand
of which resolutions is the withdrawal of all forces from all
the occupied areas behind the lines of 4 June 1967.

78. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Hungarian delegation voted in favour of the resolution that has just been
adopted and which wasthe result of a long debate and even
longer consultations during which members of the Council
and other Members of our Organization have given testimony concerning the events in the Middle East. The facts
have been established objectively and, on the basis of those
facts it became perfectly clear that Israel committed a
premeditated, cruel aggression against Jordan-in the words
of Prime Minister Eshkol, “a punitive action”. This act of
aggression was a clear contradiction of the principles of the
Charter; therefore, the resolution unequivocally condemned
it. At the same time, it was a violation of several resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on the cease-fire in the
Middle East.

85. Israel, as a result of this resolution and the previous
ones, should fully respect the sovereignty of Jordan and the
other Arab countries and should respect the legitimate
rights of the Arab peoples.

79. In the view of the Hungarian delegation, the resolution
is not complete, and we fully agree with the statement of
the representative of Pakistan that due reparation should
have been considered and included in the resolution to
indemnify the victim of the aggression, namely, Jordan, and
the families of those who were killed and wounded in their
own country by the aggressor. We still feel that, despite the
fact that our resolution does not contain such a stipulation,
that obligation in reality exists and Israel is responsible for
the consequences of its action.

86. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): Any
country which, like my own, underwent during the last
World War the terrible experience of military occupation of
part or all of its territory, with all that this involves in the
way of suffering and inevitable reaction, knows that a clear
distinction must be drawn between military operations
carried out with deliberate intent and carefully prepared by
a Government, and acts which are perpetrated by inclividuals or groups of individuals prompted by obvious
feelings.

80. The resolution just adopted deplores, in its operative
paragraph 3, violent incidents and violations of the ceasefire. In the opinion of the Hungarian delegation, the
reprisals that are practised by Israel civilian and military
authorities in the occupied areas, the numerous armed
violations of the cease-fire, the persecution of the civilian
population, the destruction of their homes, the destruction
of communities and cultural institutions. the destruction of
human life, the colonization of occupied areas and the
infiltration of settlers across the armistice lines into the

87. While asking that the cease-fire should be strictly and
generaliy respected, my delegation wished to make this
point and to say that it would obviously be unacceptable to
try to place the two sides on the same footing or even to
establish any parallel between them. We consider that the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council leaves no
doubt on that score; that is why we voted for it.
88. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call cn
the representative of Iraq.
8

89. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): The representative of the
United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, has done me the great
honour of quoting some parts of one of my statements
before this Council. However, the account he has given of
my views was not complete. In that same statement I said:

Security Council resolution 73 (1949) of 11 August 1949
approving the Armistice Agreements. Therefore, it is not
possible to invoke resolution 56 (1948), and if it is to be
invoked, at all, it has to be done within the framework
exclusively of the Armistice Agreements.

“Any resolution which . . . tries to confuse the issue by
introducing the question of the so-called terrorists can
only encourage the aggressorsto undertake similar actions
in the future and undermine the authority of this
Organization
and the resolutions of the Security
Council.” 11405th meeting, para, 57, J

95. Are we therefore to gather from this that the United
States feels that the Armistice Agreements are still in force
and therefore supports the view of the majority of the
members of the Council and the United Nations that the
unilateral denunciation of the Armistice Agreements cannot
be valid and cannot be accepted? If that is the case, is it
not the duty of the United States to use its influence, as the
representative of the United States informed us many times
in this Council, on Israel to respect scrupulously and abide
by the Armistice Agreements? And the first step to be
taken in this scrupulous respect is the immediate, unconditional and total evacuation of the territories occupied in
June 1967.

90. Moreover, a more complete account and picture of my
views might be found in the first statement I made before
the Council when I said that the Council is called upon to
make it clear:
61- . . that actions of this kind cannot be tolerated by
the international community, but, must be roundly and
clearly condemned as acts of aggression? Therefore, we
support the view of representatives who spoke before me
that the Council must invoke Chapter VII of the Charter
and take enforcement and punitive measures against Israel
including the imposition of sanctions.” (1402nd meeting,
para. 103.1

91. Those are the complete views of the delegation of Iraq
on this question.
92. It is for this reason that we did not find the resolution
adopted by the Council to have gone far enough, since
similar resolutions in the past have not deterred Israel from
undertaking aggressive actions against Jordan and other
Arab countries. But it is our hope that the strength and
unanimity of the views expressed by the members of the
Council this time may have some deterrent effect.
93. Yet, we must admit that the resolution contains
certain positive elements. It is quite clear that it is
addressed to Israel and the actions undertaken by Israel on
21 March. There is an observation that the military action
taken by the armed forces of Israel on the territory of
Jordan was of a large-scale and carefully planned nature.
There is a clear condemnation of that military action as a
violation of the United Nations Charter and the cease-fire.
There is a paragraph which calls upon Israel to desist from
acts or activities in contravention of resolution 237 (1967).
The effort made in this Council somehow to equate that act
of aggression with the legitimate activities of self-defence
undertaken by the patriots and the people of Palestine
against the usurpers and occupiers of their homeland has
been fully and brilliantly answered by the representatives of
Pakistan and -Nigeria.
94. I should just iike to make one comment. The
representative of the United States again mentioned resolution 56 (1948) adopted by the Council on 19 August 1948,
and said that the provisions of that resolution are applicable
in this case. But it is well known to the Council that that
resolution was adopted pursuant to resolution 54 (1948)
adopted on 15 July 1948 under Chapter VII of the Charter.
That resolution of 15 July 1948 was superseded by the
General Armistice Agreements, as is clearly stated in

96. Besides the legal aspects concerned and besides the
fact that this resolution cannot in any way be applicable to
the individual activities of the freedom fighters, the right of
these fighters to defend their homes and to rise against the
aggressors and usurpers and occupiers of their homeland is
not only based on the United Nations Charter, but is based
on a timeless and much higher moral law: the law of
self-defence, the right of every people to defend their
homes and to resist the aggressorsand occupiers of their
country. This the patriots will continue to do so long as
Israel occupies the lands of their ancestors.
97. The reluctance, in fact the refusal, of the representative of Israel-in spite of the question addressed to him
whether his Government accepts and is ready to implement
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council adopted on
22 November 1967-to give an answer can only mean that
they do not intend to abide by that resolution. Therefore,
there is an added reason, justification and cause for the
freedom fighters to continue their struggle until their land
is liberated from the aggressors.
98. The representative of Israel, in alrswer to the representative of the Soviet Union, referred the Council to a
document in which the Foreign Minister of Israel in a
three-page statement referred almost exclusively to the
position allegedly taken by the United Arab Republic. But
only three lines in that document were devoted to the
question of Israel: the old position of direct negotiations
which, as I have said before, was expressly excluded from
the resolution of 22 November 1967-excluded not by
accident but deliberately excluded in the long weeks and
months of discussions and deliberations that preceded the
adoption of the resolution. Therefore, we can take that not
only as a refusal of the resolution but as a disgraceful
attempt to mislead the Councii as to the true intentions of
Israel.
99. Finally, I should like to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for
allowing me to take part in these debates, and to express
the gratitude and thanks of our people to all those members
which have supported the right of the people of Palestine to
fight and regain their homeland, to all those members

acts and, moreover, with future acts. The Council saw no
necessity to address itself directly or indirectly to the
Government of Jordan, still less to the people of Jordan, in
keeping with the tradition whereby the United Nations
never addressesitself to peoples as such.

whose position was resolutely and unambiguously against
the aggression perpetrated by the Israel occupiers.
100. The PRESIDENT (translated from fiench):
call on the representative of Morocco.

I now

108. Consequently, as we see it, the provisions of this
resolution consist of a reminder of certain acts committed
by Israel, an actual condemnation of Israel and a specific
request to Israel to desist from such acts in the future.

101. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated from Rench):
The Council will recall that, immediately after the voting
on resolution 242 of 22 November 1967, some delegations
asked to speak in order to give an interpretation of the text
which had just been voted upon. Today we are faced with a
situation which is identical not only as regards the formal
sequence of events in the Council but also as regards the
reasons which presumably have induced certain delegations
to resort to the same procedure again this time.

109. Those delegations which have attempted to invoke
what might be called the “silences” of the resolution in
order to place the two parties concerned-the victim and
the party responsible for the incidents-on an equal footing
have simply been using the text in a way which may have
some value as far as public opinion in their countries is
concerned or for the fulfilment of their professional duty in
the Council, but the public law which governs the procedure of this Council and is reflected in its decisions makes
no provision for interpretations of that kind. On the basis
of this text, which the Council has adopted unanimously, it
should be quite clear that there is no direct or indirect
allusion to the Government of Jordan, still less to the
Jordanian people.

102. We also recall that in the course of the contacts and
negotiations culminating in the resolution of 22 November
tremendous obstacles had to be overcome before a text
could be worked out that would reflect a political situation
both the immediate facts and the long-range consequences
of which could give rise to certain difficulties.
103. Today, however, the events which have been put
before the Council for consideration are characterized by a
flagrant violation of the Council’s cease-fire order. Therefore, I do not think that we have been faced this time with
the same difficulties in interpreting the facts that we had to
overcome as in the case of the resolution of 22 November
or that we have had the same misgivings as to the
implications of the situation for the future. The text which
the Council has adopted today is quite clear, it requires no
interpretations based on what the resolution does not say
or disregarding what it says.

110. Eminent speakers who have preceded me have said
that occupation engendered resistance. The Israel Government and those who closed their eyes to its June aggression
could hardly have any illusions as to the inevitable result of
such activities, i.e. the emergence of a liberation novement,
which, indeed, has been continuing without a let-up for the
past twenty years and is now moving in a direction which is
in keeping with the new developments in the area,
Therefore, it cannot be expected that a people who have
been the victims of an aggression and who did not sense
justice from the international community at the time of
that aggression will heed an appeal addressed to them
today, considering the failure to condemn at the time the
aggression which led to the occupation, We cannot expect
that this appeal-which is perhaps being made today with
genuine sincerity-will be heard by those who are daily
shedding their blood and who, bound hand and foot, are
being handed over to the invader.

104. I am thinking here of an observation that was
addressed to Mr. Eban by one of the members of the
Council when, in connexion with certain paragraphs of the
resolution of 22 November, Mr. Eban had been trying to
broaden the meaning of the resolution by summarizing, not
the resolution itself, but the discussions preceding its
adoption.
105. I have before me the resolution which the Council
has adopted today. It seems to me, first of all, that the text
itself reveals a strict logic and leaves no room for any
personal interpretation.

111. Mention has also been made of the resolution of
1948, and my colleague from Iraq has dealt with it
appropriately. I do not by any means wish to challenge the
qualifications of a jurist of the head of the United States
delegation. If I am not mistaken, he quoted from the
resolution of 1948 /56 (1948/J, and on the basis of that
quotation he made certain comparisons with the present
text, and certain deductions. I believe that in rhetoric this is
called sophistry, While it may have its place in literature, it
is not so acceptable in law. Thus the countries which are
now. invoking that 1948 resolution forget that it was
adopted at the time in a specific context and fail to realize
that it cannot be applied today, in the form in which it was
drafted, to an entirely different political situation,

106. Apart from the mention of Jordan in the first line of
the preamble, the text refers to Israel four times. First the
Security Council recalls the military action by the armed
forces of Israel on the territory of Jordan. It describes that
action as being of a large-scale and carefully planned nature.
Next the Council recalls resolution 237 (1967) in which it
called upon the Government of Israel to ensure the safety,
welfare and security of the inhabitants, Thirdly, the
Council condemns the military action launched by Israel in
flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter; and last
but not least, the Council calls upon Israel to desist from
acts or activities in contravention of resolution 237 (1967).

112. We have also been told today that we should seein
this resolution an encouragement to Mr. Jarring’s mission.
YOU will recall that we placed all our hopes in this Jarring
mission when it was challenged during the November 1967

107. I think that there is a certain structure, a certain
balance, in the drafting of resolutions. This text refers to
Israel by name four times in connexion with specific past
10

i

debate. Consequently, we are a priori
in favour of that
mission. I think it can be said that since Mr. Jarring went to
the Middle East the Arab countries have spared no effort to
facilitate his task, having regard at the same time to the
need to safeguard dignity. If this mission has been rendered
more difficult-I do not mean that it has been rendered
impossible, but it has in fact been made very difficult-that
is due to the successiveviolations of resolution 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967 as a result of which the representative of the Secretary-General today finds himself in a new
situation.

expect that Council members representing such countries
would vote for a resolution condemning or deploring acts
of resistance. There are even, I believe, some distinguished
representatives .here whose present careers are the culmination of journeys which had their starting-point in patriotic
action, and many countries today accord to those who were
members of the “resistance” and “comrades in the liberation” the most signal honours that a man can be given.
117. I do not think that, after having totally disregarded
the international law which should have protected the Arab
population under occupation, we can now ignore these
moral values which are inherent in the very dignity of
peoples and which imply for every citizen whose territory is
occupied not only the right but also the duty to use all the
means at his disposal to make life difficult for the
occupier-let us boldly use that expression-until such time
as the occupier understands that he can no longer remain in
the territory with impunity.

113. In the statements made today, attempts have been
made to include the Jarring mission in the text on which
the Council has voted. Yet that mission is an entirely
separate matter. The Council did not appoint Mr. Jarring to
go and ask the peoples under Israel occupation, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, to keep their hands firmly tied
until such time as Israel deigns to facilitate Mr. Jarring’s
mission. Mr. Jarring will find the most effective support in
the Arab capitals, but he cannot expect us to agree, as some
statements today seem to suggest, that his mission could
involve any appeal concerning acts of liberation. We want
to ensure that the statements which have been made in
order to put consciences at rest or to relieve existing
pressures are not invoked against the Council-because it
did not refer to the matter-or, more particularly, against
the party which Mr. Jarring is addressing on the Arab side.
That is totally unacceptable. Such are the observations I
wished to put forward concerning the logical interpretation
to be placed on the resolution adopted by the Council,

118. I have perhaps taken the liberty of directly questioning the actions of certain countries and of referring to
the heads of some delegations by name. I have been a
member of this Council, and my colleagues know that I am
not accustomed to resorting to personal exchanges. But, in
view of the importance and the consequences of this
resolution, we must not allow any misunderstandings to
remain which might add to the ambiguities that some have
deliberately tried to introduce into the wording of texts
with a view to exploiting them-of this we are unfortunately certain-in due course, when incidents arise. The
occupation will not be ended overnight, and life under
occupation inevitably engenders resistance.

114. Perhaps the Council will allow me to make another
observation. I shall try not to dwell for very long on this
point, but, at the time when the Council is ending its
debate, I feel that a reference to it is important. Several
attempts have been made to place these two kinds of
incidents on an equal footing; this occurred three times in
the statement of the United States delegation. Yet we
cannot put these two kinds of incidents on the same
footing. There has been a violation of the cease-fire by the
occupier, and international law includes provisions which
impose certain specific obligations on the part of the
occupier. International law includes no provisions imposing
obligations on those whose territory is occupied. I certainly
do not wish to rake up historical memories which may be
painful for one country or another. However, benefiting
from Lord Caradon’s long experience as Governor of
Cyprus, I should very much like to ask him whether, at that
time, there could have been any international appeal
requesting the population of Cyprus to stop intervening and
if the authorities of the time had secretly agreed to prevent
the Cypriots from one day fighting against the occupier.

119. The PIZBSIDENT (translated f?om French): I now
call on the representative of Israel.
120. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Our debate has now come to a
close and the Security Council has adopted a resoIution
which refers to both the Israel and Jordanian complaints on
the agenda. The Security Council had before it two
complaints. Some statements made in the course of debate
and the draft resolution distributed in document S/8498
suggestedthat the Council deal only with one of them. Two
States came to the Council for redress. Some suggested that
the Council should wilfully disregard one of those States.
Two States appeared before the Security Council. Jordan
told the Council that it will persist in warfare, that it will
take no action to prevent violations of the cease-fire by
raids, terror and sabotage, that it does not intend to do
anything to prevent the situation from deteriorating even
further.

115. I have no knowledge at all of what measures were
taken by the United Kingdom Government responsible for
the Palestine Mandate when the Hagannah and the Stern
Gang went into action and assassinated indiscriminately
both the Arab inhabitants and certain United Kingdom
officials accused of favouring the Arabs.

121. What was the response given by the proponents of
the Arab cause to this Jordanian attitude? They would
have given Jordan a green light to pursue its policy of active
belligerency. They would have given sanction to the war
machine of terrorism to mount its offensive against Israel.
They would have promised Jordan and the terrorist
organizations to which it grants sanctuary immunity from
Israel’s defence measures and from international censure.

116. I think that I see at this Council table the representatives of countries which have all experienced occupation at
some time in their ancient or modern history; no one could

122. On the other hand, there is Israel, subjected to war
for twenty years, asking nothing of its neighbours but to be
11

defined that kind of action as constituting “an unmistakable violation of the cease-fire resolutions” (1403rd
meeting, para. 5.5/ and as worsening the situation in the
Middle East. The representative of Canada spoke of “a
mounting number of incidents, of infiltration and sabotage” /ibid., para, 381 which preceded the military action
of Israel in Jordan and underlined that “the Security
Council, summoned to deal with the present situation,
cannot condone these acts of violence” [ibid., para. 40/.
That point of view was also expressed by Lord Caradon
when he said: “We deplore the acts of violence which
preceded today’s attack” (ibid., para. 8/, and by the
representative of Denmark when he stated: “we must
deplore all violations of the cease-fire” [ibid., puru, 491,
The position of the United States was no less explicit on
this issue. Ambassador Goldberg declared: “We oppose acts
of terrorism, which are in violation of the cease-fire
resolutions of the Council, and we are not blind to the
additional problems they create” /14&M
meeting,

left in peace. We have had our dead and wounded. Our
houses are being dynamited, our roads are being mined, our
children are not safe in their movements.
123. What did Jordan and its supporters propose? That all
this should be of no concern to the Council, that the
Council should be interested in one thing only: that Israel
should not react, that Israel should not defend itself, that
Israel should remain inert and wait passively for the
slaughter.
124. Any resolution on the Middle East which would not
have censured terrorist activities would have been most
unfortunate. I said yesterday and I repeat today: Do not
belittle the dangers and the threats and assaults the people
of Israel are facing. Do not disregard the warfare that is
being carried on against us openly, defiantly, persistently.
Do not ignore the armed attacks, the incursions, the mining
of roads, the killing of innocent civilians. Understand that
the people of Israel love its land, its hearth, its brothers and
sisters like any other people in the world. Every stone in
our land is a witness to thousands of years of Jewish
tenacity, devotion and sacrifice. Every blade of grass is
permeated with Jewish blood, of those who fought the
Romans, the Crusaders, the Ottomans, the British and the
Arabs. We shall not yield, we shall defend our rights with all
the strength within us.

para. 51.

130. Today we have heard further statements by members
of the Security Council making it clear that terrorism
cannot be condoned and must be censured and stopped.
131. A note that jars with the general condemnation of
terrorism was introduced here by the representatives of
Pakistan, Algeria and the Soviet Union. That is not
surprising, Pakistan has never wavered in its identification
with the Arab denial of Israel’s basic rights. Algeria, a State
that participated in the June 1967 hostilities, rejected the
Security Council’s call for a cease-fire and openly proclaims
that it will persevere in its illicit war against Israel. Nor is it
surprising that the Soviet Union joined Pakistan and Algeria
in that position. The role of the Soviet Union in the Middle
East has been and remains a sinister one. It has for years
now supported unreservedly the forces of Arab war,
aggression and hatred in the area. It has supplied and
continues to supply unlimited quantities of arms to Arab
Governments which openly wage war against a State
Member’ of the United Nations and proclaim their aim to
destroy it, We do not know of any effort made in the past
by the Government of the USSR to bring about a peaceful
agreement between Israel and the Arab States. Though the
Soviet Union voted for Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which called for a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East, the world still awaits a
statement from the representative of the Soviet Union and
his Government that they support the promotion of
agreement between Israel and the Arab States and the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the area.

125. Jordan’s reaction to this debate and its conclusion
may well determine whether we will have to do it’again on
the battlefield or at the peace table.
126. We cannot, of course, accept the condemnation of
the military action which the Israel Defence Forces were
compelled to undertake against terrorist bases on Jordanian
territory. We are most unhappy to have to take such
actions. They involve loss of life on both sides and we wish
we could avoid them. However, when they prove necessary,
in self-defence, we cannot accept censure of them, especially not from an organ operating within the terms of the
United Nations Charter, which enshrines the right of every
State to self-defence.
127. The words of the resolution which refer to the
problem of warfare by terror and sabotage are not of our
choosing. Yet we take note of the fact that the resolution
deals not only with the military. action taken by Israel
against terrorist bases on Jordanian territory but also with
violent incidents and other violations of the cease-fire, and
does not overlook past incidents,
128. My delegation has noted with appreciation the fact
that those members of the Council which do not identify
themselves with the point of view held by the forces of war
in the Middle East have recognized the dangerous and
pernicious character of the armed attacks, raids and acts of
sabotage which necessitated Israel’s action against the
terrorist bases.

132. We must all look to the future. When we do, the true
picture of the fundamental elements in the situation comes
into focus. The Middle East is still in the throes of war. It is
a war which has been waged relentlessly since 1948 by the
Arab States against Israel. It is a war pursued in utter
defiance of the United Nations and of world opinion, It is a
war which has deprived Israel of the basic right of a State:
the right to live at peace with its neighbours. It is a war
which has left the area without recognized boundaries and
without security. This has been a long, drawn-out war, a
sanguinary war, a tragic war. There is only one way to end
it: by establishing peace. There is no compromise between
war and peace. It is either war or peace.

129. In the course of the debate in the past three days, the
representative of Ethiopia advocated the avoidance of
hostile acts on all sides. The representative of Brazil spoke
of “the series of armed attacks launched from Jordanian
territory through and beyond the cease-fire line”; he
12

--

133. Israel is ready for peace and hopes that the Arab
States will in the end accept the reaching of an agreement
on it, So long as they do not, so long as the war continues,
we can at least try to maintain the cease-fire. Israel will
abide by its obligations under the cease-fire. However, the
cease-firecan exist only on the basis of full reciprocity. It is
this that we expect from the Arab States. If they fail to
fulfil the cease-fire, if they violate it in any way whateverby attack of their forces, military or paramilitary, by raids
perpetrated by irregulars or marauders, by terror or
sabotage-they must understand that Israel, like any other
State in its position, will maintain its right and duty to take
all necessary measures for the security of the territory and
the population under its responsibility.
134. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
call on the representative of Jordan,

further and more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter
to ensure against repetition of such acts by Israel, and
called upon Israel to desist from acts or activities in
contravention of resolution 237 (1967). That resolution
was adopted by the Security Council unanimously, with no
abstentions. It called upon Israel to ensure the safety,
welfare and security of the inhabitants of the areas where
military operations had taken place, and to facilitate the
return of those inhabitants who had fled the areas since the
outbreak of hostilities. Incorporating mention of that
resolution in an operative paragraph of the resolution
adopted this evening had a definite purpose and was the
decision of the Security Council.
140. The background is well known. We have 450,000
people expelled by Israel as a result of the aggression of
5 June 1967. We have leaders of the west bank, expelled
arbitrarily by the Israel authorities, We have the Nazi-like
deeds, the Nazi-like practices; we have Hitlerite statements,
some of them just made by Mr. Tekoah.

I now

135. Mr, ELFARRA (Jordan): At the very outset I
should like to pay a tribute to you, Mr. President, for
having convened promptly the first meeting of the Council
on this item and for your consideration in ensuring that the
item, so important to Jordan, would be discussed without
any interruption other than for fruitful and constructive
consultations.

141. The idea behind resolution
incorporation here is very obvious.

237 (1967)

and its

142. We submit that the nature and scale of the attack
against Jordan and Jordanian citizens should have moved
the Council to apply the provisions of Chapter VII calling
for sanctions. This is all the more so since this is not the
first time you, the Council, have condemned Israel, nor is it
the first time you have censured Israel, You have done this
seven times now. Seven times you have blamed, condemned, censured, emphasized and what not. But the
Israelis have so far shown the same arrogance, the same
defiance, the same challenge, the same undermining of the
authority of the Council.

136. We also pay a tribute to all the delegations round this
table which voted for the decision unanimously adopted
this evening. We pay a special tribute to the delegations of
India, Pakistan and Senegal for their most constructive and
helpful contribution.
137. We are glad to see that the resolution which, under
your wise leadership, Mr. President, was adopted unanimously by the Security Council this evening establishes no
link between the wanton Israel aggression and the allegations and charges made by Israel. That is encouraging, since
the Israel representative tried time and again during the
Council’s deliberations to present pretexts and justifications
for Israel’s premeditated plans against Arab lands and the
Arab people. The Council has in effect rejected all Israel’s
claims and allegations concerning so-called individual incidents of terrorism. On that question the resolution is very
clear; the text of the decision taken by the Council is very
dear. When a document is clear, there is no need for
interpretation. One need only look within the four corners
of the instrument. One need not seek other material to
interpret or explain a document that is clear. The decision
is clear on its face, That is why my delegation supported it.
We would have objected to any formula which could have
led to misinterpretation in the future. or to vagueness that
could have been exploited. For we have been the victims of
too many vague instruments.

143. You will remember that the first decision was taken
against Israel on 18 May 1951 [resolution 93(1951)],
when Israel violated the cease-fire and the General
Armistice Agreement between Israel and Syria.
144. The second condemnation was on the well-known
massacre of Qibya. You adopted a decision on 24
November 19.53 /resolution 101 (1953)], saying that the
Qibya attack was inconsistent with Israel’s obligations
under the General Armistice Agreement between Israel and
Jordan and the Charter. That language sounds familiar; we
keep hearing it whenever we come to the Council. In that
case of Qibya you, the Council, censured Israel.
145. The third condemnation was on 29 March 1955. The
Council condemned the attack that was made by Israel
regular army forces against the Gaza Strip on 28 February
1955 (resolution 106 (1955)/. Here again you condemned
Israel, using the same language, the same terms.

138. In resolution 228 (1966) the Security Council
emphasized “to Israel that actions of military reprisal
cannot be tolerated”, In this case the Council has gone a
step further but, in our opinion, not far enough. Ambassador Malik, our distinguished colleague, quite rightly called
the resolution the very minimum that the Security Council
could have adopted.

146. The fourth condemnation was made by the Council
on 19 January 1956. May I mention in this connexion, too,
that the United States and the United Kingdom sponsored
all these resolutions, without exception, As I said, on 19
January 1956, this Council condemned the attack of the
Israel regular army on Syria as
“a flagrant violation
resolution 54 (1948)

139. The Security Council, by its decision this evening,
warned Israel that it would have to consider adopting
1

of the cease-fire provisions of its
of the terms of the General

is what the Council heard yesterday, and again this
afternoon from Mr. Tekoah.

Armistice Agreement between Israel and Syria, and of
Israel’s obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations” [resolution 111 (19X), para. 31.

150. But along with this is heard the song of peace. We
hear that they are not for war; but they are occupying
almost half of Jordan through war. We hear that they are
not for expelling; yet they are expelling 450,000 persons in
violation of Security Council resolution 237 (1967). They
are for threats. For them, the Security Council is nothing
but a mental exercise. The Israelis are not here to abide by
your will, but to indulge in mental exercise. I do not
consider this a debating club. I do not believe that it is
anything but a serious organ, the highest organ of the
United Nations, the organ for peace.

The Council then warned that it would “have to consider
what further measures under the Charter are required to
maintain or restore the peace” [ibid., para. 51. Thus, in
1956, you referred to the measures incorporated in Chapter
VII. You specifically mentioned “measures”, in 1956; this
was before the invasion of Sinai, this was in January 1956.
You mentioned specifically the term “measures”, and
“measures” is found only in Chapter VII.
147. The fifth condemnation was in 1962. The Israel
regular army forces were waging a series of violent mortar
attacks against certain villages in Syria. The Security
Council, on 9 April 1962, unanimously adopted a resolution (171 (1962)] in which the military action of Israel was
condemned; and not only this, but Israel again waswarned
that the Council would have to consider further measuresagain you emphasized the term “measures’‘-under the
Charter to maintain or restore the peace. That wasin 1962.

151. It appears, however, despite all the condemnations,
despite the seven decisions which have been taken, that the
Council still feels that it should be patient with Israel, that
its patience is not yet exhausted, in spite of open defiance.
Hence, the Council has decided to offer Israel one final
chance. We are given to understand that this will be a final
warning. As Mr. Malik said this afternoon, it is a serious
warning for the future. The Council is giving a serious
warning for the future. We do hope that it will be the final
warning because arrogance should have a limit; aggression
should have a limit; the continued occupation of territories
belonging to Jordan, Syria, the United Arab Republic and
the Palestinian people should have a limit. Otherwise, the
prestige of the Security Council would also have a limit.
The threat is not only to Jordan; it is to the Council and to
every one of you in the Council. It is good to be patient,
but human endurance has a limit. I do hope that this is the
final warning and that Chapter VII will be invoked.

148. What was the sixth condemnation? The sixth violation, the sixth aggression is well known to all of YOU. You
have discussed it while you were conferring on this item;
you referred to it in your consultations, I am sure. This was
th.e massacre of 13 November 1966. I came before this
Council and presented the facts of that aggression. And
what did the Council do? In its resolution 228 (1966) of
25 November 1966, the Council, first, deplored the loss of
life-as it did today; second, censured Israel for the
large-scale military action-which was almost the same as
we did this afternoon; and third, emphasized to Israel that
actions of military reprisal could not be tolerated and that
if they were repeated, the Security Council would have to
consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in the
Charter to ensure against the repetition of such acts-and
now we have a decision which speaks about the Security
Council’s having to consider further and more effective
steps as envisaged in the Charter.

152. I say this because I received a cable a few hours ago.
While this important and urgent item was being debatedwhile this aggression committed
and admitted by
Mr. Tekoah’s people was being discussed-at 2.10 this
afternoon, this very day, 24 March, Israel forces shelled
Jordanian positions for two hours. Villages also were
shelled on the north of the east bank near Shunah, using
106-mm guns. A civilian and one child were injured.

149. The behaviour of Israel as condemned by the
Security Council-a condemnation now in the official
records of the Council-leaves no room for doubt that Israel
has never intended and certainly does not intend now to see
tranquillity established in the area. This is our conviction,
and it is reinforced day after day. The statement which we
have just heard, the threats which we have just heard, the
Hitlerite warning which we have just heard, leave no doubt,
but rather re-emphasize our conviction that the Israelis are
there to expand, to commit aggression, to say: “We shall
not yield.” Those were his words. The Israelis are here to
say: “We shall look to the future and forget about the
present.” It is the present which molds the future. Without
the present, the future is a vague term. When you occupy
the land in violation of every human right and of every
principle of the Charter, when you refuse to abide by the
resolutions, when you come openly, as you did yesterday,
and say that you only accept the goal of the resolution, not
the resolution, not its implementation, but that you accept
whatever you wish to accept; that you have,a Iv,et,oon every
single paragraph in the resolution and that veto is not given
by the Council but you are imposing it on the Council-this

153. You can read the writing on the wall. Before even
adopting this resolution, the Council heard the statement of
Mr. Tekoah and sensed the spirit of that statement. It heard
the threats, the warnings, to the Council, and then to
Jordan. While the Council was deliberating or consulting in
these rooms the Israelis were attacking Jordanian
positions-Shunah
in the north-injuring
a child and
another civilian.
154. And now I shall stop, and I leave it to the Council to
ponder as to who is the aggressor and who is for peace.
155. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): I Cal1on
the representative of Pakistan in the exercise of his right of
reply.
156. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I was rather surprised that the
representative of Israel referred to the draft resolution.
contained in document S/8498, when India, Pakistan and
Senegal had made every effort to arrive at unanimity and
had refrained from introducing that draft resolution in
order to enable the Council to act with unanimity.
14

157. The reason that resolution was introduced is that in
operative paragraph 3 of Security Council resolution
228 (1966) the Council:

annexation of foreign Arab territories, the Soviet Union
and other countries friendly to the Arab States, who
advocate a stable peace and a durable peace settlement in
the Middle East, will help the victims of aggression, for in
so doing they are fulfilling their international duty in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the
interests of the maintenance ‘of peace. No one should
entertain the slightest doubt on that score.

“Emphasizes to Israel that actions of military reprisal
cannot be tolerated and that, if they are repeated, the
Security Council will have to consider further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against the repetition of such acts”.

16.5. Today’s statement by the representative of Israel
confirms the misgivings expressed in the Soviet delegation’s
statement at the beginning of the meeting to the effect that
the interpretation given by the United States representative
and the subsequent reply to my statement by the representative of the United Kingdom seemed to give the Israel
aggressor some basis for making such unrestrained remarks
in the Security Council in disregard of the resolution that
had just been adopted.

158. I have already stated that in deference to the views of
the four Western and two Latin American States members
of the Security Council the draft resolution in document
S/8498 was submitted in milder terms than the commitment embodied in the language of resolution 228 (1966).
159. The representative of Israel, in referring to Pakistan,
said that Pakistan had never wavered in its denial of Israel’s
basic rights. In reply, let me just say this: Pakistan’s record
is clear; Pakistan has nothing but good will for the Jewish
people; but Pakistan finds it against its conscience to deny
the basic rights of the people of Palestine. Pakistan upholds
the right of self-determination and the human rights of all
peoples, including the people of Palestine.

166. Lord Caradon should note that everywhere, among
all peoples, experience is considered a very important thing
that should be taken into account. I think that he is a living
confirmation of this. Experience shows that he should no
longer be engaging in those activities in which he has been
engaging for a long time. And in the light of experience I
too would like to point out to the Security Council:
experience teaches the Council that Israel is already
disregarding a resolution-Security
Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. This is precisely why the
Soviet delegation found it necessary to make a statementso that Israel would have no doubts on that score.

160. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union who wishes to
exercise his right of reply.
161.

Mr. MALIK

(translated

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

porn Russian): I shall not answer the slanderous

statement of the Israel representative, but I cannot overlook his attempts to distort the position of the Soviet
Government.

167. The Security Council condemned Israel’s new act of
aggression against Jordan, and no verbal subterfuges,
justifications or excuses can wipe away that stain of
disgrace. Therefore, if someone wants to interpret the
resolution in such a way as to leave Israel some loop-hole
for new acts of aggression, how are we to consider such an
approach, such a position? I think we can only regard such
an approach, such a position, as direct encouragement of
Israel to undertake new acts of aggression against Arab
countries under any pretext.

162. The position of the Soviet Government was clearly
and explicitly set forth in the statement of 22 March 1968
which, on that date, I brought to the notice of members of
the Security Council at its 1405th meeting. That statement
pointed out that the Soviet Union resolutely declares its
determination
to strive, together with the other peaceloving States, to put an end to Israel aggression and to
eliminate its consequences, The Soviet Union, together with
all other peace-loving States, reaffirms its determination to
press for the return of the territories seized from the Arab
States as a result of the aggression of 1967. The Soviet
Union, together with all peace-loving States, wil1 strive for
the achievement of the necessary political settlement in the
Middle East, based on respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States.

168. A distinguished jurist has just quoted here a 1948
resolution of the Security Council. I shall not touch on its
substance, the extent to which it is or is not applicable, but
I do draw attention to the fact that the United States
representative quoted a passage from that resolution to the
effect that no violence should be done to individuals under
the control of the authorities concerned. The United States
representative wishes to apply that provision indiscriminately to the present situation, in which the occupied
territory is controlled not by the authorities of Jordan or
any other Arab State, but by the Israel authorities and
Israel is trying to use any discontent shown by the
oppressed and terrorized inhabitants of that territory as a
pretext for new acts of aggression and for a massive attack
on an Arab country. Who can justify such an action?
Certainly not the Security Council, and this is reflected in
the resolution which we have just adopted.

163. The Soviet position is clear and definite, and no
slanderous inventions on the part of the Israel representative can distort the substance of the matter.
164. As far as the Israel Government is concerned, it must
strictly comply with the provisions of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967 and must first of all
withdraw its troops from all occupied Arab territories. It
must know that its challenge to the interests of international peace and security and its sabotaging of a political
settlement in the Middle East cannot remain unpunished.
So long as the leaders of Israel, enjoying as they do support
from outside, maintain their positions with regard to the

169. This is the situation as it exists, and therefore the
Security Council must warn-and it does so in the
resolution-against
any repetition, on any trumped-up
15

pretext, of similar acts of aggression. It must warn Israel
against disregarding this resolution as it disregarded the
previous one,

176. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian): I am flattered that Mr. Goldberg

reads my statements so attentively and that, for the
purpose of better understanding, he has even begun to learn
Russian. I wish him every success.I am ready to give him an
answer to or explanation on any question, including what
the word ((npasaa%)), means in Russian, after he has
answered my three questions, which he remembers very
well. I do not wish to repeat them, in order not to detain
the Security Council.

170. This is the substance of the Soviet delegation’s
position.
171. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the United States who wishes to speak
in the exercise of his right of reply.

177. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of the United States who wishes to
exercise his right of reply.

172. Mr, GOLDBERG (United States of America): I shall
exercise my right of reply very briefly. I do not want to
prolong this debate as the hour is late, but it is really to try
to set the record straight. In our discussions here it has, as I
said in my original intervention, been a source of great
comfort that so many speakers, including the representative
of the Soviet Union, have voiced support for Mr. Jarring’s
mission, In our discussion on Friday we had an exchange on
that subject-the representative of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Malik and I. I derived considerable encouragement from
that discussion because in our exchange I thought I heard
the representative of the Soviet Union say that the Soviet
Union had accepted the resolution of 22 November-and in
all its parts. I have since received the transcript of the
provisional verbatim record, and perhaps this is just a
mistake; if it is a mistake I would hope that it would be
corrected, because I think we are dealing with something
very important. My own delegation, as I tried to make
clear, accepted the resolution of 22 November on 22
November, we accept it now, we have given it support all
the time in all its parts, and, I repeated today, we pledge
our full support for it,

178. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): If it is
not impolite, I will say that that is the traditional way of
drawing a red herring across a subject. As far as we are
concerned, we accept the resolution, we support it in full
measure, we will do everything we can to support
Mr. Jarring’s mission, and we would hope the Soviet Union
would do likewise. We do not accept the Soviet interpreta.
tion of the resolution. We made that crystal clear in our
intervention at the time the resolution was adopted, and in
the interventions in this debate. I should like to recall some
history in this connexion.
179. The resolution adopted on 22 November-Mr. Malik
was not here, but I am sure he is well familiar with the
record-drew a major part of its inspiration . . .
180. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union on a point of order,
181. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated jkom Russian): I was not referring to the United

173. Regrettably, I am not familiar with Russian, but I
have before me the Russian and English texts of the
discussion where our exchange took place. The English
text, which I have before me, shows Mr. Malik as saying:
“The Soviet Union voted for all parts of that resolution; it
therefore recognizes all the parts.” (See the 1405th
meeting, para. 128.1 I had thought that the representative
of the Soviet Union, even in the English text, had said
“accepted all the parts”. I would hope that that would be
corrected. I am advised by my language experts that in the
Russian text “it therefore recognizes all the parts” is
omitted. I would hope that this is an omission. I am
reluctant to try my Russian which is very inadequate, but if
you will not criticize my attempt I will try to read the
words that are omitted: QOSTOMY
OH npH3Hae-r Bee
gacTn e ~0)) .(it therefore recognizes all the parts).

States position with regard to this resolution. My questions
concerned the following. I shall mention them, since the
United States representative seems to have forgotten. I
asked him to indicate, in the course of the discussion here,
where and when a statement had been made by the
Government of Israel to the effect that it accepts this
resolution-recognizes it, to use the Russian word that you
used just now-and agrees to its implementation. Where has
the Government of Israel stated that it agrees to withdraw
its troops to the 5 June line? Those are my three questions,
and I wasnot asking about the attitude of the United States
to this resolution. Why am I mentioning this? Today I . . .
182. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the United States on a point of order.
183. Mr. GOLDBERG
(United States of America):
Mr. President, this is not a point of order being raised by
the representative of the Soviet Union. It is a rude
interruption of my comments. It is not the custom in tlie
Security Council, as he well knows, to interrupt a presentation. A point of order is a parliamentary question of order.
I do not recognize the right of the Soviet representative to
rell me how to speak. I shall not interfere at any point with
his presentation and I do not recognize his competence to
interfere with mine. I shall answer questions in my own
way, and I shall not answer them in his way. His way
happens to be a very simple application of the old lawyer’s

174. I do not know whether the representative of the
Soviet Union has had an opportunity to seethe provisional
verbatim record. I would hope that that would be corrected
so as to conform to what I understood him to say, because
I think this is very important. More than that, I would hope
that he would join in the statement I made today pledging
complete support for this resolution.
17.5. The PRESIDENT (transzatedfrom French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union to speak in the
exercise of his right of reply.
16

I
/

j

concept. You ask the question: When did you stop beating
your wife? I do not answer questions of that kind.

190. We did not consider a Jew as a Jew. We had no
discrimination between Jew, Christian and Moslem. What
brought that violence? The incursion of those eastern
European groups who used a noble religion, Judaism, as a
motivation for a political end, and I dare say now, for an
economic end. For I have received literature from none
other than Zionists. About a week or ten days ago, I found
on my desk four supplements of The Miami Herald, all on
Israel, There was a quarter of a page devoted to how one
could order a pamphlet-of eighty-eight pages I believefrom a publisher in Chicago, explaining what the future of
Israel shall be.

184, I have said that I speak for my Government. My
Government accepts the resolution in all its parts. I would
like to see the Soviet representative correct the record to
show that there has not been eliminated from the Russian
text of the 1405th meeting the words “in all its parts”.
That is the question I raised. I have given the answer that I
am prepared to give and I shall not make an answer tailored
to the Soviet representative’s prescription.
f8.5. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): The
representative of Saudi Arabia having asked to speak, I now
call on him.

191. That advertisement was in one of the four supplements. Saudi Arabia had one supplement in TheNew York
Times. Greece had a supplement, Pakistan had a supplement. Once in a while all nations, in order to advertise their
countries, have a supplement. But they had four supplements in The Miami Herald. I return to that advertisement.
It had three vignettes.

186. Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I have lived long
enough to foresee that the legal quibblings which we have
witnessed in this Council, will, more than at any time in the
past, lead to a confusion in the interpretation of the text. I
regret to say that the resolution just adopted will not bring
peace to the Holy Land, due to the diametrically opposed
interpretations given to it in the Council. I am afraid that
the interpretations
of the resolution will intensify the
conflict in the future and pave the way for broadening the
scope of that conflict.

192. The first one was “Israel Yesterday”. That showed
not the demarcation lines of the partition, but the lines that
were set by Israel-without showing any action on the part
of the Security Council-and that contain territories
beyond the partition lines. Then there wasone which said:
“Israel of Today”, showing the occupied territories in black
ink, merged with the de facto Israel of 1948. Then there
was “Israel of the Future”. Believe it or not, my dear
Ambassador Goldberg-I will send you that advertisement;
it is in an American newspaper-it extends from Sinai to the
Taurus mountain; even the sanjak of Alexandretta is part of
it. A good part of Syria is merged with it. Jordan? I do not
know what they have done with it. They have left almost
nothing of Jordan, It is the Transjordan of the 1920s. They
have taken out also a good part of Jordan.

187. The interpretation given by the representative of the
United States, not by implication but directly, equates the
freedom fighters, the so-called terrorists-called “terrorists”
by the Israel representative-with the flagrant aggression of
Israel on Jordan. Inasmuch as I happen to be a Monarchist,
I seem to veer towards the interpretation of the Soviet
Union, not because it harmonizes with the interpretation
given by my Arab colleagues but simply because it stands to
reason that a freedom fighter need not be labelled a
terrorist. This is a question of semantics.

193. I have been shown maps printed and issued in Israel
including even Medina, Saudi Arabia; I do not know
whether Medina was mentioned in the Bible, but it.seems
they went beyond the nomenclature of the Bible. What are
you laughing about? This is serious. There is going to be
war, and war which I deplore. That is the violence which
has bred violence to which my good friend Ambassador
Goldberg referred. I agreed with him that it is a chain
reaction of violence: one day I strike you, the next day you
strike me; it becomes interminable.

188. I heard my colleague, Ambassador Goldberg, mention the other day that violence breeds violence. How true,
how true. But I do not know where Ambassador Goldberg,
and many other Americans for that matter, were in 1920.
This was an isolationist country in those days, more or less.
It was more so in 1914 when President Wilson washesitant
as to whether to enter the First World War or not. But
when during the British Mandate the Zionists were allowed
to immigrate
into Palestine, then there was violence
between the indigenous population, whom we knew as
Palestinians, and this extraneous group of eastern Europeans, who thought that because of religious sentiments
which motivated their movement they had a right to
Palestine.

194. But time and again here in this Council-and the
whole resolution revolves around this question as being a
question between Israel and the Arab Governments or the
Arab countries- I have had to state that there is a people
called the Palestinian people which numbers about
2 million. Do you blame them if they are patriots? They
have lost their land, they have lost their houses, they have
lost their patrimony. As I said, some of them may have
been Jews.

189. The violence started in the twenties. The indigenous
people of Palestine were a peaceful people. We never heard
of troubles, even under Ottoman rule, between the Moslems
and the Christians, on the one hand, and the Moslems and
the Jews on the other hand. They were living like brothers.
The Holy Land was really holy-considered holy by the
Jews, by the Moslems and by the Christians. The violence
started with that incursion of Zionists into Palestine. Leave
aside the words “the Arab homeland”. I myself had my
best friends at the American University of Beirut. They
were Jews,

19.5. We have no quarrel with the Jew as such. We have a
quarrel with an eastern European group of usurpers who
happen to be Jews. They could have been Christians, they
could have been Moslems, they could have been pagans.
The question is not in the religion.
17

196. Just because a resolution was adopted by the General
Assembly in 1947 to establish aState called Israel [lSl (II)/
on the grounds that certain Biblical passages could be
interpreted as giving a people a geographical location-here
also we have different interpretations. You are talking of
interpretations of this resolution. My interpretation of the
Bible-and I am a student of the Bible-is that Zion is Zion
of the spirit. The Bible is my Bible too. It is not only the
Jewish Bible. The same Bible is my Bible personally. I
interpret, and many like me interpret, Zion as Zion of the
spirit, not the territorial interpretation.
197. Do you mean to say that those Zionists converted to
Judaism, as I said, in the seventh or eighth century-consult
the Jewish encyclopaedia-are more Jews than our brothers
the Jews of the Orient? They never claimed that this was
going to be only an enclave for the Jews, that Palestine was
to be an enclave for the Jews. Those are the real Jews, the
genuine Jews, the Jews of the area. There is no such thing
as blood being the same, but, so to speak, their blood and
ours are the same; they are the Semites. They never claimed
that the Holy Land is theirs. That is a European claim, it is
a colonial claim. Who do they think they are fooling? Are
all those Eastern Europeans devout? Even the Christians
here say, “God is dead”. Of course they mean the
traditional God. They are like other people, they are like
Moslems who nowadays have become secular. They are like
Christians who become secular, but the reason is political
and economic.
198. You have only to read Nahum Goldman’s declaration
made about twenty or twenty-five years ago. He said,
“Palestine is the cross-roads of three continents, and we
should take it because anyone who takes it controls those
three continents.” I wish I had brought it this morning. I
wanted to put it into my pocket, but I forgot it. I hope that
you will not think that I am just claiming something. Those
are the words of Nahum Goldman, an American Zionist,
199. We have no grudge against Jews having come to live
in Palestine. Just becausethe United Nations-we have seen
what the United Nations has done, and with all due respect
I am still dedicated to the United Nations, hoping against
hope that it will still work.

fared well in Arab lands when the Arabs were in their glory.
Even when the Arabs were trodden down they never
molested the Jews. It is you Western people now-perhaps
out of a guilty conscience, I do not know-who are trying
to say, let us boost Israel. At whose expense? At your
expense? At somebody else’s expense? What right have
you to establish an enclave there? It is just for your
economic rights. You do not fool us, it is a wedge.
202. Where is Mr. Balfour’s empire now? -fifty years,
1917 to 1967. He told Sir Ronald Storrs. We know
Sir Ronald Storrs. It has not been long since he died. He
mentioned this to a friend of mine. He was in the Arab
Office in Cairo. He told him, “What are you doing Sir?
This can be interpreted in different ways, this declaration”-later
called the Balfour Declaration. He said every
word of this, as I am not paraphrasing: “This wasstudied in
the interests of the British Empire.” Now our friends the
Americans-what have we the Arabs done to the Americans,
or to the Jews for that matter? They come and bolster
Israel. If they were bolstering the Jews as much as they did
when they were under the Nazis, we would also be
foremost with them because we do not want to see either
Jew or Gentile subjected to the inhumanity of man. But
this is a political and economic question and I have a right
to talk about it because it has lived with me for forty-eight
years, since 1920. Most of you here talk academically, just
as sometimes people are not concerned about a certain
country but still have humanitarian feelings about it,
Suppose I hear that there has been a flood in China which
caused the drowning of 2,000 people. I have never been to
China. From humanitarian feelings I would feel sorry, but
the next day I would eat as if nothing had happened. We
say in Arabic that a live coal burns only the place where
you put it. You have not suffered. This bridge which is
Palestine, Lebanon, Syria has witnessed many conquerers in
6,000 years of history. But where are they today? They
came and are gone. But the indigenous people of the area-1
am not calling them Arabs-remained. They suffered, they
produced prophets. Those same prophets are our prophets,
the prophets of the Holy Land from Abraham down. They
are our own prophets too. They are not the prophets of
those converted Jews from Eastern Europe. They are
claiming them. Good Lord, they are plus royaliste que le
roi.

200. And interpretations are dangerous because the interpretation of Ambassador Goldberg carries more weight than
a hundred interpretations like mine. Why? Because he has
power behind him. We have no power. What is the use of
our interpretation? A good thing perhaps-I am not sure of
it-is that it will be neutralized by the interpretation of
Ambassador Malik because God help us if Ambassador
Malik and Ambassador Goldberg begin to speak Russian to
each other. I am glad that somebody has an interpretation
that differs from the interpretation
of Ambassador
Goldberg. They even began to speak Russian and to
understand each other in Russian. But in the last analysis
each one’s conscience will dictate to him what is right as a
person, if not as the representative of a strong Power. After
all, that is the most precious thing we have, that voice of
conscience.

203. I am afraid-with all respect to you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council-that
this interpretation,
diametrically opposed, as I said, will give rise in the future
to mischief because it will open the field to power politics.
The United States will interpret it one way, the Soviet
Union the other way-and we are the people in between.
That reminds me of another Arabic proverb, which says:
The ocean had a quarrel with the wind, but the poor sailor
paid the price. Well, we.are the sailor. We are the sailor in
that area.
204. We are talking as people who have suffered. You are
talking here academically, putting certain constructions on
words. But what about the Palestinian people? The
Palestinian people, not the Arab people, Do they not
count? Perhaps that is what you think, but they think that
they do count. They are taking the law into their own
hands. They have found that the Arab countries cannot

201. I do not speak from hatred. The Arabs do not hate
the Jews, and we will repeat this a thousand times. Jews
18

2
iii
i3

lr
a
1t1
w

it1
11
:2
ii
t1
T

11:
1’
1’
ri
t:r
111
ti
t;
13:
au
FY
2

t1
IJ
di
LlI
t1

IJ
.@I
Y’
01

nr
E?
ac
th
Je
Je
ar
2(
SC

te
cc

hel~ them. And do you think that any Arab country would
dare queI1 them? Remember the assassins-the hashshdshfn,
and the Old Man of the Mountain. Many times, because I
am dedicated to peace, I have counselled patience to them.
But
what right have I to #counsel patience when I cannot
Produce
any practical results. Neither can the Arab countries
produce any such results because they are being torn
aPart
by power politics. The Palestinian people have begun
to
take up arms. Do you think anyone will be able to
Suppress them? They will kill them like birds. They are
aspersed
throughout the Arab countries. They would kill
fhe Arabs even before they killed the Jews-or the Zionists;
1 do not want to use the term “Jews” lest you think there is
anY animosity between the Arabs and the Jews.

religion happens to be Judaism. We have no quarrel with
Judaism.
209. Again I say, Leave us alone. But you do not leave us
alone. What have we done to you? Whether we are Arabs
or non-Arabs, the people of the area, we have invited you
to come and exploit our resources, to be partners economically with us. But why do you not let us evolve our own
traditions, our own customs, our own way of life? Do we
interfere with your way of life? Are we imposing ourselves
on you? Yet you band together here in two camps against
us. What have we done? I am not talking of Saudi Arabia; I
am talking of the Palestinians, whom we have in large
numbers in Saudi Arabia. They are scattered in camps,
2 million of them, all over the Arab countries. Do you
think they are going to be docile? Do you .think you can
restrain them? I feel duty bound to say that they will not
be restrained, I am sorry to say that. The Israelis will tell
me that they did not take my home. They will tell you they
did not take your home and your lands. “They took our
home and our land”-they told me that in Beirut, they told
me that in Damascus, they told me that everywhere I found
Palestinians. And here you sit discussing this question, this
dispute between my good friend Mr. El-Farra and the
representative Mr. Tekoah.

205.
This is where the mischief lies in this dangerous
bterpretation,
this resolution. It will give the Israel
authorities
the “right of hot pursuit”. Even if the distance
is 20x) miles, they can send a plane and say, “Well, there is
an El-Fatah group there”, or “There is a liberation group
there, and we have a right to put an end to them”. Do you
see now where the mischief lies in this academic document,
this resolution which you have studied and conferred about
here for days now?
206.
ties

As for the condemnation, what do the Israel authoricare about condemnations? Six condemnations, and I
think
this is the seventh, and with what result? Nothing.
They just laugh up their sleeves. And they are right to laugh
UP
their sleeves. “0 Pharaoh, who made you such a
Pharaoh?
” “ I found no one to repel me.” This is their
position.
Neither the United States nor the Soviet Union,
perhaps,
wants to have a confrontation. Maybe they are
right;
maybe there will not be a third world war. But maybe
too
one day there will be. This is what is worrying me as a
United
Nations man. There may one day be a confrontation-miscalculation,
one great Power trying to take advantage
of another in an area which is not its own. That is the
problem.
Then where do we land? We-the small Powers
and
the great Powers too-will end up in smoke. Then what
will all these deliberations and legalistic quibblings avail us?

210. You cannot erase the Palestinian people, you cannot
eradicate them. You have to admit that they are there and
will always be there. If they had come to the Holy Land as
Jews, they would perhaps have benefited a hundied-fold
from all the Arabs. If they had come as Jews, not as Israel
citizens, the economic doors would have been open to
them.
211. Now there is always conflict; and I am sorry to say it
will continue. I have no rancour, no hatred against you as
people. I feel sorry for you because I know what happened
to the Crusaders in the long run, what happened to all the
invaders after that. The indigenous people of Palestine are
attached to their soil, and you should have been attached to
the spirit of Zion and not to any construction put on the
word, as if it were only a material thing, as if it were only
earth. Zion is of the spirit. And when Zionism becomes
Zion of the spirit, then and only then will peace be
established in the HoJy Land.

207.
there

Even the galleries now are half empty. The people
know that we talk and talk. The hopes that the
United
Nations raised on the horizon in 1945 and 1947 are
dimming
day by day. Those hopes will be extinguished
unless
we turn over a new leaf in this Organization and heed
the
voice of wisdom, the voice of those people who, like
U Thant and the Pope, exercise no temporal power. We still
go by the standard that if you do not have power behind
you,
you have a weak mind. And here I’ would point out,
once again quoting the Bible, that the prophet Jeremiah did
not
have power. He counselled wisdom to the king in the
Palestine
of those days, but the king would not heed his
&&ice.
Jeremiah’s was the voice of wisdom. And where did
the Jews end up? In Babylonia, because they did not heed
J&etiah’s
counsel. We ‘all know the Lamentations of
Jeremiah;
they are all in the Bible. They make good reading
and they are good advice even to our generation.

212. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel.
213. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I ask your indulgence,
Mr. President, to make a brief observation on the report
brought to the Council’s attention by the representative of
Jordan concerning a border incident which occurred earlier
today.
214. The representative of Jordan referred to an incident
that took place, according to him, at 2.15 hours this
afternoon. He did not, however, tell the Council what had
happened in the preceding five minutes. Today, at 2.10
hours-not 2.15, but five minutes before the hour mentioned by the representative of Jordan-artillery and rifle
fire was opened from Jordanian military positions situated
on the east bank.of the Jordan River against Israel forces in
the Beit She’an area on the west bank of the river. At the

208.
We, the weak, we have minds, we have brains. We
seek to gain no advantage. We happen to be weak, but we
tell you: Leave us alone. Let us work out our destiny. You
cOme
and you plant among us an alien people. Their
19

same time, Jordanian forces opened fire from recoilless
guns on a civilian tractor working in the fields east of Neve
Ur. I have before me a report of Agence France Presse
which reads as follows:

sary principle for the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Near East” [1382nd meeting, para. 1191.

215. From the statement made by the representative of
Jordan I gather that Jordan expected Israel forces not to
return fire, I regret this misunderstanding. Such misunderstandings may be the causes of dangerous consequences.
The Israel forces, of course, returned fire in self-defence;
and the only way to avoid Israel fire against Jordanian
military positions is to make certain that Jordanian
positions do not attack Israel forces or Israel civilians.

221. It is precisely on that basis that I have shown interest
in Israel’s position as regards recognition of the resolution,
its implementation and the adoption of measures for the
withdrawal of forces from the occupied territories to the
5 June line. This question is particularly urgent because
today the United Kingdom representative referred to an
official statement by the Government of Jordan that it
recognized the resolution and agreed to its implementation.
Before that there was an official statement by the Government of the United Arab Republic. But no such official
statement has been made by Israel, or by those who help
and support it. That is essentially the difficulty in solving
the question of the Middle East and reaching a political
settlement.
-

216. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union to speak in the
exercise of his right of reply.

222. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of the United States to speak in the
exercise of his right of reply.

217. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Obviously there is some misunderstanding here. Mr, Goldberg is trying to interpret the
question which I asked him as a desire for him to answerin
the way I wish him to. I had no such intention whatsoever.

223. Mr, GOLDBERG (United States of America): I
appreciate the response of the representative of the Soviet
Union, I shall always be glad to answer a question put to
me about the position of the United States; indeed I have
done so and my reply appears in ,the record today as well as
in the record of our previous exchange.

“Jordanian forces sparked off a two-hour exchange
across the Jordan today when they fired attroops and a
tractor driver on the Israel bank.”

218. When he began to reply concerning the United States
position on the resolution of 22 November I had the most
sincere desire to help him, to dispel any misunderstanding,
as the questions which I had asked earlier were not about
the position of the United States. To my mind, the matter
is quite clear.

224. With respect to the question which I put to the
representative of the Soviet Union, it has still not been
answered. In the English text of his statement, the words
“ . . . it therefore recognizes all the parts” appear. In that
part of his intervention those words are omitted from the
Russian text of the provisional verbatim record. I think that
the record ought to be corrected. It was an important
statement which we welcomed, and I should hope that
steps would be taken by the Soviet delegation to have the
record corrected, In any event, we shall address a letter to
the Secretariat requesting that the Russian text should
conform to the English text. This is a very important aspect
of our debate. I said that I had tried to give a specific
statement about our position. It was a very clear position
and it has been clear throughout. We made it clear at the
time when the resolution was adopted. We are faithful to
that resolution in all its parts. We accept it. We shall
support it. That is the position of my Government. We shall
not support an individual interpretation. We shall support
the resolution, and I made clear in my intervention at the
time, and since, what our interpretation of the resolution
was.

219. I shall now reply to the question he put to me.
According to the Russian text of the provisional verbatim
record of the Council’s meeting of 22 March 1968, I stated:
‘I . . . the Soviet Union does not vote for resolutions
which it does not accept and does not recognize. The
Soviet Union voted for this resolution” [see the 1405th
meeting, para. 1261.
In reply to a further question, I said: “The Soviet Union
voted for all parts of that resolution,” (Ibid., para. 128.1
What further reply or clarification does Mr, Goldberg
require? I have not yet had time to read the English text,
but the Russian text says, and I repeat: “the Soviet Union
does not vote for those resolutions which it does not accept
and does not recognize. The Soviet Union voted for this
resolution”. And in explanation we added “. . . for all parts
of that resolution”. I believe that that reply was perfectly
clear.

225. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union to speak in the
exercise of his right of reply.

220. But since Mr. Goldberg has reminded us of the
history of the discussion, I have every reason to.remind him
also-even though I was not present, I am familiar with the
discussion on this question-that my colleague and friend
Mr. Kuznetsov stated at the time the vote wastaken on that
resolution:

226. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I think we can ask the Secretariat and the translators to compare the Russian and
English texts and make the necessary corrections. There is
no problem.

“the ‘withdrawal of Israel armed forces from$tel;ritories
occupied in the recent conflict’ becomes the first neces-

227. The PRESIDENT (translated from Bench): I call on
the representative of Jordan to speak in the exercise of his
right of reply.
20

228. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. Tekoah just said that I
had referred to the time of the Israel attack as being
2.15 p.m. He took five minutes off, saying that at 2.10 we
had attacked first. It so happens that I was reading from a
cable; I sa,id that this thing had happened at 2.10; I said it
twice: at 2.10 the Israelis shelled Jordanian positions. I do
not think Mr. Tekoah did not hear me; I said that twice:
229. But this has become a habit. The other day, he said
that I had mentioned the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, I
never mentioned them. Now he is referring to a certain
hour which I never mentioned. And we have all the
witnesses here who heard me mention the hour twice. But
to subtract five minutes and say “you attacked first” is an
example of something which I think we have experienced
before.

233. If the Israelis are really sincere about knowing the
facts, let us reactivate the Mixed Armistice Commission; let
the only machinery in the area recognized by the Security
Council function. Let them go to the spot and investigate;
let the observers be on the 5 June line; let the Israelis get
out of the territories they occupied by force. Let them
show by their behaviour that they are really for peace, but
not sing the song of peace to accommodate certain
elements.
234. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
now on the representative of Israel to speak in the exercise
of his right of reply.
235. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I apologize to the members of
the Council for asking to speak again. Concerning the
problem of the hour at which the incident allegedly started,
I leave it to the tape of the proceedings to show whether
the representative of Jordan mentioned 2.10 or 2.15. I
should like once again, however, to refer to the communique published by the AgenceFrance Pressetoday:

230. In this connexion, let me pose a question: Why is it,
if they are really worrying about violations, that they do
not reactivate the machinery in the area, the Mixed
Armistice Commission? Let the Mixed Armistice Commission investigate this incident or that; have both parties
meet under the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission; then determine the facts and see who is the one
who committed the aggression.

“Jordanian forces sparked off a two-hour exchange
across the Jordan today when they fired at troops and
attacked a driver on the Israel bank.”

231. Let me now refer to the complaint about the bus.
You have heard a great deal about the bus-two killed and
other students injured. But if we go back a little further we
will find that the very same story of the bus, in the very
same area, was fabricated against Jordan-in the very same
area, near Eilat. It came before the Mixed Armistice
Commission; they heard both parties; they established the
facts. Then what happened? I have here a book by the late
Commander Hut&son,
who presided over the Mixed
Armistice Commission between Jordan and Israel when it
investigated Israel’s charge. Here is what he said:

236. The Jordanian representative read out some extracts
from a well-known book by a gentleman who served at one
time as Chairman of the Israel-Jordan Mixed Armistice
Commission but who also served as the director of the
pro-Arab organization “The Friends of the Middle East”.
He did that apparently in an attempt to question our
reporting with particular reference to the incident a few
days ago in which we had thirty casualties as a result of a
school bus being attacked north of Eilat.

“All members of the UNTSO, as well as others who
were privileged to read the complete investigation report,
agreed that the evidence did not tie Jordan to the
incident”.

237. This incident is referred to in this morning’s issue of
The New York Times, which published an interview with

King Hussein. King Hussein, when asked about the attack
last Monday on the school bus near Eilat resulting in thirty
casualties, as I said, declared:

The very same incident of 17 March 1954 was presented to
the machinery in the area and they reached this decision.
The late Commander Hutchison continued:

“We found there had been no crossings into Israel
territory from Jordan in that region.”

“Many Israelis who long for peace with the Arabs and
are not inclined to blame all of their troubles on Jordan
expressed the belief that the vote had been correct. Some
of these people expressed themselves publicly, but they
were not able to penetrate the wall of hatred the Israeli
Press and radio were building up against the MAC (MLxed
Armistice Commission].

say 2.15 ; I said 2.10, and he is admitting that the firing
took place at 2.10. That corroborates my statement.

However, on 22 March-just a few days ago-Radio
Baghdad broadcast a communique of the Palestine Liberation Front established in Jordan, operating from Jordanian
territory, claiming credit for the attack on the bus.
238. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): I call on
the representative of the United Kingdom to speak in the
exercise of his right of reply.

jp2

232. Later on the Mixed Armistice Commission could no
longer function because it could not meet the designs, the
aims, the goals, the future expansion of Israel. So now there
is no machinery in the area, and the way is open to
Mr. Tekoah to come here and present any complaint. If I
say 2.10, he takes five minutes off and says 2.05. I did not

239. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I should not
wish our proceedings this evening to be ended without my
saying two things. First of all, when I spoke earlier, I was
quoting from what had been said by the representative of
Iraq, Mr. Adnan Pachachi. If I failed to give a full picture
what he had said to us previously, I should like to offer him
my very sincere apology.

2 E. H. Hutchison, Violent Truce (New York, The Devin-Adair
Company, 1956), p. 54.

21

anything but fabrication in the Israel charges, how would
hearsay evidence seem?

240. The second thing I would wish to say is in relation to
the speech made by the representative of the Soviet Union.
I am not sure that I exactly understood him, but I gathered
that he suggested that something I had said might possibly
be used as a justification or as an excuse for conflict or
violence. All I would wish to say is that that is exactly the
opposite of the truth as far as the position of my
Government is concerned.

245. Thirdly, let me say that this Commander stated in his
book that when he went to the area he was pro-Israel. We
did not convert him. He was converted by the truth, by
what he experienced. He is not the only one. There is van
Horn who wrote a book about Israel diplomacy-I will not
mention this other work out of respect for the Security
Council. General Benneke was also a man who worked hard
to serve peace; he was dedicated to peace. He wrote a book
about this behaviour; this behaviour is well known, and the
book is there for everyone to read. These are distinguished
United Nations figures and we should like to see their
reputation and dignity protected in this Council.

241. The PRESIDENT (translated from IGwzch): I call on
the representative of Jordan to speak in the exercise of his
right of reply.
242. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I shall be very brief. I do
not want to tax the patience of this distinguished organ of
the United Nations.

246. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no more speakers on my list. With the consent of the
Council, therefore, I shall adjourn this meeting.

243. First I simply should like to say that the French news
agency is a respectable agency; but the question is not what
it published, but the source. I wonder whether this source
was the spot where they were observing the shooting of the
Israelis or the others. Or was the source given? And if the
source is given, and one looks at the source, one seeswhere
the report was received from; then that gives more
information about the validity and credibility of the report.

247. Before doing so, I should like to inform members
that as a result of the usual consultations it has been agreed
that the Security Council’s next meeting will take place
next Tuesday at 3 p.m., when we shall continue our
consideration of the question of Southern Rhodesia; it is
understood that Monday will be given over to informal
talks and discussions on that subject.

244. Secondly, this agency is not a United Nations organ.
If the United Nations machinery was unable to find

The meetingrose at 10.15 p.m.

22
Litho

in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35148-May

1971~2,100
