S/PV.8410

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8410th meeting

Monday, 26 November 2018, 11.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-39769 (E)
*1839769*

Ukraine

S/PV.8410

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.

the decision remains subject to ratification by the
Verkhovna Rada, which is meeting today.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Less than a month ago, when I last
briefed the Security Council on the situation in Ukraine
(see S/PV.8386), I brought to the Council’s attention the
reports of increased tensions in the Sea of Azov and
underlined the need to avoid any risk of escalation,
provocation or miscalculation. Regrettably, a serious
security incident took place yesterday near Crimea,
close to the Sea of Azov. I wish to underline that the
United Nations currently cannot independently verify
the circumstances surrounding the incident. However,
reports indicate that an incident involving three
Ukrainian vessels and at least one Russian vessel took
place on 25 November near the Kerch Strait when the
former attempted to enter the Sea Azov. Although the
exact number remains unclear, several Ukrainian sailors
were reportedly injured in the event. Ukraine claims
that it had previously notified the Russian Federation
of its intent to sail those vessels to the Ukrainian
port of Mariupol in the Sea of Azov, which requires
entry through the narrow Kerch Strait. Meanwhile,
the Russian Federation claims that Ukraine provoked
the incident and that Russia acted in accordance with
international law. According to media reports, the
Ukrainian ships and their personnel are currently being
held by the Russian authorities. Ukraine’s National
Security and Defence Council has since recommended
the declaration of martial law. We understand that
2/14

26/11/2018

The waters of the Sea of Azov were claimed as
being historically internal waters of both Ukraine
and the Russian Federation where vessels of the
two countries have enjoyed freedom of navigation.
However, tensions have risen in and around those
waters since the annexation of Crimea in 2014, which
has been the subject of several General Assembly
resolutions. In September 2016, arbitral proceedings
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) were instituted by Ukraine against the
Russian Federation with regard to
“a dispute concerning coastal State rights in
the Black Sea, Sea of Azov, and Kerch Strait”.
The Russian Federation argues that the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait are not subject to the UNCLOS
arbitral tribunal.
The United Nations is deeply concerned about
this escalation of tensions, which is taking place in
the broader context of the conflict in eastern Ukraine
and the annexation of Crimea. During our previous
briefing to the Council we urged all parties to avoid any
unilateral steps that could deepen the divide or depart
from of the spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements. In
that context, I wish to reiterate that the United Nations
fully supports the lead role of the Normandy Four, the
Trilateral Contact Group, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and other key actors to find
a peaceful settlement. I also wish to reiterate our call for
renewed and constructive action by all those concerned
to overcome the apparent impasse in diplomatic
negotiations. The United Nations underlines the need to
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.
Regrettably, yesterday’s incident only threatens to
cause the situation in and around Ukraine to deteriorate
further. We strongly urge both the Russian Federation
and Ukraine to refrain from any ratcheting up of actions
or rhetoric. We remind both of the need to contain this
incident so as to prevent a serious escalation that may
have unforeseen consequences. At this juncture, the
immediate de-escalation of tensions in the Sea of Azov
and the Black Sea is required. It is critical that earnest
attempts be made to find a peaceful settlement to the
situation, based on the diplomatic and legal means
18-39769

26/11/2018

Ukraine

available and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This
morning I spoke with President Trump and Secretary
Pompeo, and my statement reflects the concerns at the
highest level of the American Government.
For the past four years, the international community
has spoken with a strong, clear and largely united voice
denouncing Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The
United States, the European Union, its member States
and many other countries have imposed sanctions
against Russia for its unacceptable conduct in Crimea
and eastern Ukraine. Sunday’s outrageous violation
of sovereign Ukrainian territory is part of a pattern
of Russian behaviour that includes the purported
annexation of Crimea and abuses against countless
Ukrainians in Crimea, as well as stoking a conflict
that has taken the lives of more than 10,000 people in
eastern Ukraine and shows no sign of decreasing.
What we witnessed this past weekend is yet another
reckless Russian escalation. Let us be clear about what
is known. Ukrainian ships set sail from one Ukrainian
port to another Ukrainian port. They attempted to do
so by the only possible way to go — through the Kerch
Strait. Both Russia and Ukraine use the Strait routinely,
but this time Russia decided to prevent the passage of the
Ukrainian ships, rammed them and then opened fire on
them. That is no way for a law-abiding, civilized nation
to act. Impeding Ukraine’s lawful transit through the
Kerch Strait is a violation under international law. It is
an arrogant act that the international community must
condemn and will never accept. In May, the United
States condemned Russia’s construction and opening of
the Kerch Strait Bridge between Russia and occupied
Crimea. In August, the United States condemned
Russia’s harassment of international shipping in the Sea
of Azov and the Kerch Strait.
The United States will continue to stand with the
people of Ukraine against the Russian aggression. It is
our expectation that our European partners will lead
that effort through the Normandy Four format, which
we support. We call on Russia to respect its international
obligations and not obstruct or harass Ukraine’s transit

S/PV. 8410

in the Kerch Strait and to de-escalate the tensions that
it has created. As President Trump has said many times,
the United States would welcome a normal relationship
with Russia, but outlaw actions like this one continue to
make that impossible. The United States will maintain
its Crimea-related sanctions against Russia. Further
Russian escalation of this kind will only make matters
worse. It will further undermine Russia’s standing in
the world. It will further sour Russia’s relations with
the United States and many other countries. It will
further increase tensions with Ukraine. In the name
of international peace and security, Russia must
immediately cease its unlawful conduct and respect the
navigational rights and freedoms of all States.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I just start
by saying that I was disappointed by the Russian
representative’s explanation of vote in the previous
meeting (see S/PV.8409). As he himself stated, he
did not actually make an explanation of vote, but a
substantive statement. In doing so Russia showed
contempt for the Security Council and its members by
not accepting a procedural vote by the Council. Russia
has regularly discussed Ukraine here under a different
agenda item. In this instance Russia deliberately chose
a provocative title for the meeting, which it knew that
it would lose. I ask myself why. I assume that Russia
knows how weak its position of substance is, and
thereby hopes to turn attention on process and play the
part of the victim. It will not work because yesterday,
by Moscow’s own admission, Russian vessels opened
fire on and seized three Ukrainian vessels approaching
the Sea of Azov. We are deeply concerned about the six
injured Ukrainians and the 23 others who have been
detained by the Russian Federation. We call for their
immediate release.
We condemn Russia’s deplorable use of military
force. This further demonstrates Russia’s ongoing
contempt for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and its contempt for the global rules-based
international system, which the Organization serves to
uphold. It follows Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea
in 2014 and its construction of the Kerch Strait Bridge in
May, which constitutes a further violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Yesterday’s action
follows months of Russian harassment of international
shipping in the Sea of Azov, presumably aimed
at destabilizing the Ukrainian economy. Russia’s
actions are not in conformity with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 2003 Russia-

18-397693/14

S/PV.8410

Ukraine

Ukraine bilateral agreement that provides for the
freedom of passage for each State’s vessels in the Sea
of Azov, including military ships. Russia’s actions
must stop immediately. International shipping must be
allowed free passage in the Sea of Azov. All parties
must exercise restraint.
We have seen this game before. Russia wants to
consolidate its illegal annexation of Crimea and annex
the Sea of Azov. Russia seems to hope the international
community will simply acquiesce and accept this as a
new reality. Well, we will not. The United Kingdom’s
position is clear. We do not and will not recognize the
illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia.
The General Assembly made its position clear in
resolution 68/262, of 27 March 2014, and we continue
to fully support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and territorial waters, which is why on 31 July the
European Union sanctioned six new entities in
connection with Russia opening the Kerch Bridge. We
continue to work closely with international partners to
ensure the sanctions remain in place as long as Russia’s
control of the peninsula continues.
Russia’s illegal annexation constituted a deliberate
violation of a number of international agreements and
commitments, including Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act, the Budapest
Memorandum and the 1997 Russia-Ukraine Treaty
of Friendship. But that is just a start. Russia’s actions
are also causing human suffering. Appalling human
rights abuses in the Crimean peninsula continue with
the widespread persecution of such minority groups as
the Crimean Tatars. The Crimean Tatars face regular
harassment and risk arrest, detentions and threats of
seizure of their property. They have had their rights of
worship, assembly and expression restricted.
The Crimean Tatars are not the only people
suffering at the hands of Russia. Anyone who expresses
even mild discontent or voices their opposition to the
illegal annexation of Crimea risks being charged with
extremism and given a lengthy prison sentence, which
has forced many into exile. Russia continues to ignore
calls by the General Assembly for the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Crimea.
We remain clear in our support of the rulesbased international system, which Russia continues
to flout. Russia must not be allowed to rewrite history
by establishing new realities on the ground. But this
4/14

26/11/2018

is sadly not the first time Russia has indulged in such
reckless and provocative acts this year. Russia was
responsible for a chemical-weapon attack on British
soil, and its agents were caught red-handed in The
Hague. Russia has steadily increased tension in the Sea
of Azov and has now, by its own admission, fired on
Ukrainian ships, injuring sailors on board. Those are
not the actions of a responsible country dedicated to the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
upholding the United Nations Charter.
As my Prime Minister recently made clear,
like others in this Chamber today, we remain open
to a different relationship with Russia, one where
Russia desists from these attacks that undermine
international treaties and international security and
refrains from actions that undermine the territorial
integrity of its neighbours, and instead acts together
with the international community to fulfil the common
responsibilities we share as permanent members of
the Security Council. We hope that the Russian State
chooses to take this path. However, Russia’s actions
over the weekend do not give much ground for hope.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): In
view of the commitment of the French and German
authorities to resolving the crisis in Ukraine within the
framework of the Normandy format, this statement is
made on behalf of France and Germany.
The maritime incidents that occurred yesterday are
serious and cause us great concern. As we have just
heard, the Kerch Strait, the Black Sea and the Sea of
Azov were the scene of violent manoeuvres yesterday
that have considerably increased tensions and the risk
of escalation, thereby highlighting the instability of the
region. Russian forces reported that they had collided
with and then seized with force three Ukrainian
warships that were attempting to cross the Strait. Six
Ukrainian sailors were wounded. We are aware of
nothing that could justify that use of force.
As indicated this morning by our authorities, as
well as the Permanent Representatives of the European
members of the Security Council visiting Beijing, we
express our deep concern at the actions of the past 24
hours and call on the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint. France and Germany call in particular on
Russia to restore and respect, in accordance with
international law of the sea, the freedom of passage in
the Kerch Strait, as well as the right of access to the Sea
of Azov, which is currently temporarily blocked, and to
18-39769

26/11/2018

Ukraine

act immediately to de-escalate tensions. We also call
on Russia to release the detained Ukrainian seamen as
soon as possible and return the seized vessels.
I wish to assure Ukraine of our solidarity and
strongly reaffirm the commitment of France and
Germany to full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Yesterday’s incidents are the direct
consequence of Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March
2014, in violation of international law. In that regard, we
recall that we condemned Russia’s construction of the
Kerch Bridge, which contributes to depriving Ukraine
of full access to its maritime areas in the Sea of Azov.
Yesterday’s serious incidents also serve to
highlight the need for a lasting solution to the situation
throughout eastern Ukraine. France and Germany will
continue to mobilize as they have done for the past
four years to calm the situation in eastern Ukraine and
promote a long-term resolution of the crisis, through
the Normandy format.
Let us be clear: all parties, in particular Russia,
must respect the commitments they themselves
have made. The full implementation of the Minsk
agreements, to which both Russia and Ukraine have
committed themselves, remains the only way to find a
peaceful and lasting solution to this conflict, which has
been going on for almost five years.
France and Germany will continue to stand by the
side of the Ukrainian people scarred in recent years by
the Donbas conflict and the illegal annexation of Crimea.
The Council may rest assured that we will continue our
efforts in this direction, within the framework of the
Normandy format and in all appropriate forums.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me echo the delegation
of the United Kingdom by stressing that it is also our
understanding that the Russian delegation’s delivery of
a de facto full and substantial statement after its request
had been rejected did run against the practices and
procedures of the Security Council.
We have gathered in this Chamber today to
discuss an additional demonstration of disregard for
international law and an attempt to undermine efforts
aimed at achieving peace in Eastern Europe. Russia has
just added another dimension to the conflict in Ukraine.
During the previous Security Council briefing on
Ukraine (see S/PV.8386) we expressed our concern
about the development of military capabilities taking

S/PV. 8410

place in the Crimea and the Sea of Azov. For several
months Russia has delayed hundreds of commercial
vessels attempting to reach Ukrainian ports in the Sea
of Azov via the Kerch Strait for extended periods and
at great economic cost for Ukraine. Now Russia attacks
Ukrainian vessels, stating the need for protection of
“Russian territory”. Further militarization and an
increase of tensions brings more instability to a region
that has already suffered enough.
After the aggression against Georgia, the illegal
occupation of Crimea, the fuelling of the conflict
in Donbas, the building of the Kerch Bridge without
the consent of the authorities in Kyiv, and the farcical
elections in the separatist regions on 11 November,
Russia has now violated Ukraine’s navigation rights.
We strongly condemn Russia’s aggressive actions and
call on its authorities to respect international law. We
also call on both sides to exercise restraint in the current
situation, which may further jeopardize the stability of
European security.
This State-to-State conflict initiated and fuelled
by Russia has one aim: to destabilize Ukraine. We
therefore urge the United Nations system as a whole to
give proper attention to this active armed conflict. We
cannot turn a blind eye to this situation just because
one of the sides in the conflict is a permanent member
of the Security Council.
Russia’s military actions in Crimea and the Sea
of Azov should serve as a lesson learned as to what
this State is capable of in order to safeguard its critical
infrastructure in Europe. Persistent violations of
international law, including bilateral agreements, lead
directly to the imposition of forced solutions aimed at
controlling Russia’s interests concerning the existing
communication and energy infrastructure as well
as such infrastructure under construction and that
being planned.
Let me reiterate that Poland strongly supports the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
We do not recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea. We
underline the need for the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements, which is the only path to a lasting
solution to the conflict in and around Ukraine.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Sweden is deeply
concerned about the escalation in the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait. Blocking maritime traffic to
and from Ukrainian ports, using military force, is a

18-397695/14

S/PV.8410

Ukraine

26/11/2018

serious violation of international law. This violation
comes against the backdrop of the illegal annexation
of Crimea and Sevastopol in 2014 and the finalization
of the bridge across the Kerch Strait earlier this year,
both blatant violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

My country deplores this incident, which, like those
noted in recent months, continues to contribute to the
climate of mistrust between the Russian and Ukrainian
parties and to undermine the peace efforts made by the
international community to restore peace and stability
to the region.

We fully support the Ukrainian request for a
Council meeting in the light of the latest developments.
Any other country would have done the same and would
have expected the issue to be handled as the threat to
international peace and security that it constitutes.

My country would like to take the opportunity
provided by this meeting to urge the Russian and
Ukrainian parties to show restraint in order to avert
a military escalation in the region. It urges them to
refrain from any actions that could lead to a new and
larger-scale conflict.

Russia’s unwarranted and disproportionate checks
of ships passing through the Strait has been ongoing for
months already. We regret that Russia has ignored the
calls from Ukraine and the international community
to abide by international law and allow free passage
through the Kerch Strait and instead has opted to
escalate the situation further. In a situation that is
already tense, this behaviour is deeply irresponsible.
As a first step, the naval vessels and crew members
who have been detained should be immediately and
unconditionally released. This would be an important
step towards de- escalation.
We urge Russia to act in accordance with
international law. Let me underline that there can be
no doubt that Russia has international legal obligations
to refrain from blocking access to Ukrainian ports
in the Azov Sea and elsewhere, as well as to respect
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
principles and commitments. We call on Russia to
respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and its navigational rights.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this emergency
meeting of the Security Council given the serious nature
of the incidents that took place on Sunday 25 November
between the Russian naval forces and Ukrainian vessels
in the Kerch Strait.
We wish also to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
her briefing.
In a region already affected by a conflict that observers
say has killed approximately 10,000 people since it
started in 2014, this upsurge in tension could further
exacerbate the threat of a new military confrontation
with disastrous humanitarian consequences.
6/14

My delegation deplores the lack of progress in
the implementation of the Minsk agreements under
the Normandy format and urges the Russian and
Ukrainian parties to promote a peaceful settlement to
their dispute. In this regard, it expresses its support for
the observer mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and for the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination in their efforts to
de-escalate the conflict. Furthermore, my delegation
urges the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination
to play its role of supporting ОSСЕ observers and
monitoring the ceasefire agreements in order to ensure
the effective implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Côte
d’Ivoire’s support for all efforts under way to find a
negotiated political solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
My country urges all protagonists to respect their
commitments to ensuring the effective implementation
of the Minsk agreements and of resolution 2202 (2015),
which endorses them.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening today’s emergency meeting
on the latest developments in the Azov Sea.
Kazakhstan, as a member of the Council, is open to
dialogue and is ready to debate international security
issues in the context of transparent discussions in
order to prevent international conflicts. Taking this
into account, as well as the need to consider the matter
within the framework of the Security Council, our
delegation was ready to vote in favour of both requests,
that of Ukraine and that of Russia.
Kazakhstan considers both peoples — those of
Ukraine and those of Russia — as the inhabitants of
brotherly nations to our country that have shared a
common history. In this regard, we urge both parties
18-39769

26/11/2018

Ukraine

to refrain from any steps that could lead to a further
escalation of tensions in bilateral relations.
It is of special importance to our State that Ukraine
remain sovereign, stable and independent. Kazakhstan
is ready to assist both nations — the Russian Federation
and Ukraine — to overcome this crisis in their relations.
Kazakhstan adheres to a balanced approach
of resolving the Ukrainian crisis through peaceful
negotiations and a mediation process based on the
key principles and norms of international law and
the United Nations Charter. My country continues to
take part in multilateral consultations in seeking a
settlement of this issue. We are determined to work
closely with all members of the Council without political
expediency and in an open, objective, responsible and
constructive way.
It should be noted that in the past our country
contributed to the launching of the Normandy format
and to the eventual conclusion of the Minsk agreements.
Kazakhstan has also repeatedly expressed its readiness
to render all-round assistance in the process, supporting
a peaceful settlement in the south-eastern part of
Ukraine and fostering robust relations between Ukraine
and Russia.
In this vein, our delegation is concerned that the
negotiation process to resolve the Ukrainian conflict has
been suspended during the past months, as evidenced
by the lack of higher-level contacts in the Normandy
format. This suspension has the potential to spark new
and negative developments in the region.
In that respect, it is with regret that we learned of
the incident between the Russian and Ukrainian navy
vessels in the Kerch Strait that took place yesterday,
25 November. Kazakhstan urges both sides to act with
the utmost restraint so as to de-escalate the situation
between the two States. We consider this to be the
only viable existing mechanism to resolve the issue in
a peaceful way through refraining from any kind of
negative action.
An incident such as this could drastically raise the
chances of an unintended spark setting the region on
fire. Both Governments must urgently step in and try
to negotiate a deal to de-escalate the situation, with
possible assistance from the international community.
We believe that sustainable peace and the
full-fledged normalization of relations between
both countries can also be achieved through the

S/PV. 8410

establishment of confidence-building measures in the
security and economic areas. We should not allow any
further escalation of tensions, as they could lead to
active warfare in this new area.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
We express our concern about the events that took
place yesterday in the Sea of Azov. We reiterate that
the military option is in no way not a solution to any
controversy. In that regard, we call on the parties to
create appropriate conditions to avoid the escalation of
tensions, refrain from action that encourage violence,
comply with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and respect international law and
international maritime law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. In that regard, we call
on the parties to work for a peaceful solution through
dialogue, taking into account the package of measures
for implementing the Minsk agreements, in order to
achieve a balance of interests, without neglecting the
principles of preventive diplomacy and good offices
aimed at identifying a negotiated political solution.
We also stress that both the international community
and the Council must make every effort necessary to
maintain international peace and security, which in
the long term will be beneficial to the region, with the
parties themselves resolving their differences. Finally,
we call on the leaders of both sides to overcome the
divisions of the past, putting peace first for the benefit
of their peoples, and urge the international community
to heed the concerns of all parties, with a neutral and
equitable approach in pursuit of lasting stability.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
briefing given by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo.
Peru is deeply concerned by the recent incident
in the Kerch Strait and its potential repercussions
for the complex and unstable relations between the
Russian Federation and Ukraine, and for regional
stability. We regret the recent escalation and greater
tensions between the countries. In accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, Peru reiterates the need
to respect the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine. We call on the parties, both
of which are represented here, to act with restraint,
avoid further escalation and always act in pursuant

18-397697/14

S/PV.8410

Ukraine

of international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her
briefing on developments in the Sea of Azov.
The recent escalation of tensions in the Sea of Azov
is very worrying. We call on both sides to exercise
self-restraint and undertake all measures necessary to
diffuse military tensions in the Sea of Azov. We call
on them to abide by the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, and urge them to demonstrate the
necessary political will and to renew their commitment
to the full implementation of the Minsk agreements in
order to resolve the conflict and maintain security and
stability in the region.
We reiterate our commitment to respecting
Ukraine’s unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, and
to not interfere in its internal affairs. We hope that
the parties involved will fully implement resolution
2202 (2015), the Minsk agreements for peace, and
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June.
We also hope that both sides will seek to arrive at a
comprehensive and balanced solution to this issue
through dialogue, as stipulated by Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. We stress the need to
do so within the Normandy format and the Trilateral
Contact Group in order to achieve immediate progress
towards implementing the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I should like to begin by thank Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for her briefing on the latest developments in the
situation concerning the Kerch Strait.
On 30 October (see S/PV.8386) and on several
other occasions, Equatorial Guinea encouraged the
parties to respect the full implementation of the Minks
agreements and to refrain from actions that could
aggravate and destabilize the situation in the country
and in the region. That is why my delegation regrets
the recent events in the Sea of Azov with respect to the
situation in question, and notes with great concern the
escalation of the situation that led to the convening of
this meeting.
The situation in the Sea of Azov poses new threats
to stability in the region. That is why reducing tension
8/14

26/11/2018

so as to avoid an escalation of the situation is a top
priority at this time and requires the cooperation and
resolve of both parties. In that regard, we call on the
parties concerned to remain calm and refrain from
taking any action that could lead to a further escalation
of the situation. We also encourage them to resolve the
situation through political and diplomatic dialogue for
a peaceful and political solution to the crisis.
Given the complexity and fragility of the situation,
we believe that it is important to harmonize the
efforts of the parties. We therefore believe that only
the coordinated and harmonized efforts of the parties
involved will guarantee a fair and definitive solution
to the situation. In that regard, my delegation urges
the parties to find a political solution through dialogue
and negotiations, based on respect for international
law, the principles of international relations and the
maintenance of international regional peace, security
and stability. We emphasize the need for the parties to
respect the Charter of the United Nations and to resolve
their disputes in accordance with existing bilateral and
multilateral agreements.
In conclusion, we remind the parties once again that
a solution to the issue can be achieved only by peaceful
means, through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations.
In that regard, we urge the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint in order to defuse the situation, intensify their
efforts and commit themselves to avoiding actions that
could escalate tensions.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me first of all thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
We have followed the situation around the Sea of
Azov and we are concerned by the rapid escalation of
the situation in the area. It is vital that all efforts be
made to reduce tension. We support today’s call of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on the parties to exercise maximum restraint and refrain
from taking actions that would further undermine the
security and stability of the area. We also agree that
there is a need for the parties to address their differences
through political and diplomatic means.
On the issue of Ukraine, we once again reiterate
our support for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements for the peaceful settlement of the crisis. We
believe that it is absolutely imperative that the parties
remain fully committed to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements and strictly adhere to resolution
18-39769

26/11/2018

Ukraine

2202 (2015), which endorsed the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let me
start by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her update on the situation in and around the Sea
of Azov.
At the outset, I would like to support the procedural
point that was put forward by the United Kingdom
and Poland. In line with General Assembly resolution
68/262, adopted by an overwhelming majority on
27 March 2014, let me reiterate our full support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Less than a month ago (see S/PV.8386), we sat in
the Chamber to discuss the situation in Ukraine. It is
clear that the volatile security situation in that part of
the world needs to be addressed urgently. I will focus
on three issues today: first, the events of Sunday
25 November; secondly, the context in which those
events are taking place; and, thirdly, steps towards
de-escalation.
With regard to my first point, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply concerned about yesterday’s
developments in the Black Sea region. The blocking
of the Kerch Strait by the Russian Federation, denying
access to Ukrainian ports, constitutes a violation of
international law. That is not acceptable. As we stated
in the Council meeting of 30 October, the security
situation in that area has direct consequences for the
broader Black Sea region.
That brings me to my second point. Let us focus
on the root cause of the situation we are discussing
today — the illegal annexation of the Crimean
peninsula by the Russian Federation. That remains a
violation of international law and Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The annexation constitutes an
ongoing threat to international peace and security that
merits the full attention of the Council. Since 2014, the
security situation in the region has been worsening due
to the actions that the Russian Federation has taken. It
has militarized the Crimean peninsula, illegally built
a bridge over the Kerch Strait and imposed unilateral
and unwarranted limitations on maritime shipping in
the Sea of Azov.
Thirdly, any further escalation of tensions must
be prevented. We call on the Russian Federation to
halt all restrictions on the freedom of navigation that

S/PV. 8410

it has imposed both within and into the Sea of Azov,
and refrain from any further military confrontation
with Ukrainian vessels in the region. Such actions are
illegal and violate Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We furthermore reiterate the various calls
from the international community, including from the
European Union, on all parties involved to exercise
the utmost restraint in order to prevent any further
escalation of tensions. The stakes are high, and the
consequences could be grave.
As the Kingdom of the Netherlands said in its
statement on 30 October, it welcomes Ukraine’s decision
to seek arbitration under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. We urge the Russian Federation
and Ukraine to commit to that arbitration process and
seek a peaceful legal settlement to the dispute.
Let me end by reiterating that sustainable peace
and stability in the region will be possible only if and
when the Russian Federation returns to respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
First of all, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
China has noted the altercations between Russian
and Ukrainian naval ships in the waters near the Kerch
Strait. We are concerned over the tensions arising
therefrom. China calls for the relevant parties to exercise
restraint, and hopes that they will, in order to prevent
any further escalation of tension and properly resolve
the relevant issues through dialogue and concertation.
China has consistently maintained its objectivity and
impartiality with regard to the crisis in Ukraine. China
respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
countries, including Ukraine, and opposes interference
in Ukraine’s internal affairs by any external forces.
We are always of the view that military solutions will
get nowhere. The only way to resolve crises is through
dialogue and negotiations.
The international community must stay the course
with its diplomatic efforts to push for a political
settlement of the Ukrainian crisis. Discussions in the
Council should contribute to achieving a genuine easing
of tensions in the affected regions of Ukraine and play

18-397699/14

S/PV.8410

Ukraine

a constructive role in facilitating a political solution.
China believes that all the relevant parties should
earnestly implement the new Minsk agreements and
stay the course of political settlement through dialogue
and concertation in seeking a comprehensive solution
to the Ukrainian issue. That will enable Ukraine to
achieve peace, stability and development, enabling
all ethnic groups to live in peace within Ukraine, and
Ukraine to live in peace with all the countries of the
region. China is ready to continue playing its positive
role in the political settlement of the crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Before coming here,
I did what some of us normally do every morning. I
searched on the Internet to find out what happened on
this day in history. Here is what I found.
Exactly on this day, 26 November, in 1939, the
Soviet army orchestrated an incident by shelling the
village of Mainula, near the Soviet-Finnish border.
Then the Soviets claimed that the shelling had come
from the Finnish side and used that as a pretext for their
invasion of Finland on 30 November. That is how the
so-called Winter War started, which eventually led to
the expulsion of the Soviet Union from the League of
Nations. That is interesting, is it not? That is a story
about a failure to learn lessons.
(spoke in Russian)
Mr. Polyanskiy was the one to talk about who had
learned lessons and who had not.
(spoke in English)
We appreciate the convening of this briefing at the
request of Ukraine. I would like to sincerely thank the
members of the Security Council for the unwavering
support for my country that they have demonstrated
once again today. And, of course, I thank UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Rosemary
DiCarlo for her very useful update.
We are convinced that it is of the utmost importance
to discuss the recent developments near the Kerch Strait,
since they constitute a clear threat to international
peace and security. Before delving into the subject, I
would like first to express my dismay at the attempt
of the Russian Federation to manipulate the agenda of
the Council and to have a meeting convened under an
10/14

26/11/2018

agenda item with the deceiving title “Violation of the
borders of the Russian Federation”. In that regard, I
have to emphasize that, according to the international
law, Crimea and its respective territorial waters are
Ukrainian territory, temporarily occupied by the
Russian Federation. Therefore, there are no Russian
borders in the area where the incident happened. I
repeat — there are no Russian State borders around the
Crimean peninsula.
The Council has already heard the Russian
interpretation of the events, which, as usual, has been
concocted to mix reality with fiction, in the ultimate
goal of misinforming, misleading and confusing
the listener. Instead of real details about yesterday’s
incident, we heard epic stories about an apocalypse
in Ukraine. The Russian claim regarding a violation
of the Russian border by Ukrainian naval ships is an
outright lie that was invented just to cynically shift all
the responsibility onto the Ukrainian side, consciously
manipulating the facts and ignoring the evidence. In
order for all Council members to better understand the
situation, I would like to present the main facts of what
happened during the past three days.
First of all, in accordance with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and article 2 of the
treaty between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
on cooperation in the use of the Sea of Azov and the
Kerch Strait, the Ukrainian navy enjoys full freedom of
navigation in the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov and,
therefore, can pass through the Kerch Strait at any time.
On 23 November, a Ukrainian Navy boat group,
which included the small armoured boats Nikopol and
Berdyansk and the tugboat Yani Kapu, began a planned
transit from the Black Sea port of Odessa to the port of
Mariupol in the Sea of Azov. The route and procedure
of that passage were the same as in September, when the
two Ukrainian naval vessels Donetsk and Korets sailed
from Odessa to Mariupol. On 24 November, during
the naval movement, the commander of the Ukrainian
naval group received a notice from the Russian
authorities concerning the closure of navigation in the
Kerch Strait area. However, the international centre
for navigation control located in Spain did not confirm
that notification.
On 25 November, the Ukrainian commander
twice requested passage through Kerch Strait from the
Russian maritime control services. He did not receive
an answer. Later the Russian maritime control officer
18-39769

26/11/2018

S/PV. 8410

Ukraine

directed the Ukrainian navy boat group to the so-called
area of waiting. It was stated that Ukrainian vessels
would soon be informed on the Kerch Strait passage
procedure. And then all hell broke loose.
At approximately 8.30 or 9 a.m., a Russian coast
guard ship rammed the tugboat Yani Kapu and damaged
it. The video of that attack is available online. A
viewing will clearly show that the Ukrainian boat was
trying to avoid the collision, while the Russian ship was
deliberately carrying out the attack. I also have to warn
viewers that if they happen to understand the Russian
language, they will hear lots of profanities from the
Russian sailors in that short video clip.
After the ramming, the Russian vessels blocked the
other two Ukrainian vessels from rendering assistance
to the damaged vessel. All the while, the Russian
vessels were trying to provoke Ukrainian seamen to
open fire. At 1.22 p.m., two Russian Ka-52 Alligator
attack helicopters approached the Ukrainian cutters
at their anchorage spot at a height of 50 metres. They
openly demonstrated their missile armaments and their
laser-aiming device. After completing the dangerous
manoeuvres, the helicopters departed towards the
Crimean peninsula.
From 1.40 p.m. onwards, Russia physically blocked
the passage beneath the so-called Kerch Bridge with the
placement of first a tanker and then a cargo ship. After
7 p.m., due to the impossibility of passing through the
Strait, the Ukrainian navy ships headed back to exit the
Kerch Strait, turning away from the Strait and towards
the open sea. They were immediately followed by a
group of about 10 coast guard and Russian Black Sea
fleet vessels.
There are audio recordings of communications
among the Russian vessel commanders regarding
orders on how to proceed. Those recordings clearly
demonstrate that the Russian military vessels were
given orders to attack the Ukrainian vessels after the
latter started to withdraw from the area.
At approximately 8.30 p.m., the Russian side carried
out the shoot-to-kill order. I have all of those recordings
on my telephone, but I will not waste the Council’s time
now in playing them. Instead, I will limit myself to
quoting a couple of exchanges that were intercepted.
There is a conversation between the base in Kerch
and the Russian boat Izumrud:

“Hands up, hands up, everyone on board, hands up.
Throw down your arms. We will shoot to kill.”
And then, finally, on who ordered the shooting, there is
a communication from Izumrud.
“I cannot connect with Izumrud, there is commotion
in the air. They are shouting ‘the Ukrainians
are sinking’ and what is going on with them I
don’t understand.”
And then, the commander from Kerch asks, “Who gave
the order to shoot to kill?”
And the captain of Izumrud replies: “It was me.
According to your previous orders.”
The Ukrainian vessels Berdyansk and Nikopol
were damaged. After that, Ukrainian vessels were
forced to stop and were seized by the Russian Federal
Security Service (FSB) special forces. Six Ukrainian
seamen are wounded, three seriously so and,
according to information we have received, one is in
critical condition.
The video footage of ramming and shooting, as
well as relevant audio recordings, have already been
posted online and everybody can consult them to see
what happened and how it happened.
Throughout all those events, the Ukrainian
side acted strictly in line with international law and
the existing bilateral agreement with the Russian
Federation. Ukraine’s right to cross the KerchYenikale canal is guaranteed by paragraph 1 of article
2 of the 2003 treaty between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation on cooperation in the use of the Sea of
Azov and the Kerch Strait. The treaty clearly provides
for freedom of navigation for both civil and military
vessels of Ukraine and Russia in the Sea of Azov and
the Kerch Strait. This is the treaty in my hands, which
was signed by the current Russian Government.
(spoke in Russian)
Mr. Polyanskiy cannot deny that this agreement has
been signed by his side and needs to be upheld.
(spoke in English)
Secondly, the Russian Federation was duly
informed well in advance through traditional channels
of communication about the passing of the Ukrainian
navy’s group through the Kerch Strait.

18-3976911/14

S/PV.8410

Ukraine

Thirdly, the Ukrainian Navy group strictly
followed the orders of the traffic control service. As the
Council can see, there were no provocations whatsoever
from Ukraine’s part. Nevertheless, the Russian
Federation opted to purposefully block the passage
of the Ukrainian ships, thus violating the freedom
of navigation guaranteed by the Ukraine-Russia
cooperation agreement on the use of the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait.
Moreover, Russia committed an act of open military
aggression against Ukraine by targeting, firing on and
capturing three military vessels. I would like to remind
everyone that, pursuant to article 3 (d) of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX),
“an attack by the armed forces of a State on the
land, sea or air forces, or marine and air fleets of
another State”
qualifies as an act of aggression.
Russia’s recent belligerent acts constitute yet
another violation of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, as well as existing bilateral agreements.
This is a conscious provocation aimed at aggravating
the security situation in the region with a view to
Russia establishing full control over the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait. There is irrefutable evidence that
the recent aggressive actions by Russia were planned
and authorized by top Russian military leadership.
Ukraine’s restraint in its response clearly
demonstrates that we are committed to solving the
current situation by peaceful means and in full
compliance with international law and existing
bilateral obligations. Nevertheless, further escalation
of the situation by the Russian Federation should not
be ruled out. According to available intelligence, there
is a clear threat of invasion of Mariupol and the seizing
of Berdyansk. Further aggressive acts and provocations
by the FSB Border Guard Service and the Russian navy
remain a realistic possibility.
Due to those threats, yesterday the President
of Ukraine supported the initiative of the National
Security and Defence Council of Ukraine to propose
to the Parliament of Ukraine to declare martial law
for 60 days, but to cut it short to 30 days in order to
avoid unnecessary speculation. The imposed martial
law can be lifted at any time. It will have no negative
12/14

26/11/2018

effects on respect for human rights and the functioning
of democratic institutions. In response to the Russian
delegation’s scare stories about the alleged motives
of Ukraine’s President regarding the declaration of
martial law, I will simply quote the statement that the
President made just a couple of minutes ago, which is
available online:
“The martial law will last 30 days and will be over
in the middle of December. In Early December,
I will submit a draft decision of the Parliament
regarding the date of the presidential elections,
which, according to the Constitution, are to be held
on 31 March 2019.”
Ukraine is ready to settle the situation in through
political and diplomatic means. At the same time, we
are ready to use all available means in exercising our
right to self-defence, as provided for in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Kremlin’s criminal regime has once again
demonstrated that it will not end its aggressive policies
and is ready to commit any acts of aggression against
the Ukrainian State. The dramatic escalation of the
situation in the region demands a rapid response
from the international community. These events are
yet another testament to the relevance of the General
Assembly draft resolution prepared by Ukraine and a
group of like-minded States regarding the issue of the
militarization of Crimea, the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov.
Once again, we are grateful for today’s strong
statements in support of Ukraine, calling on the Russian
Federation to guarantee freedom of navigation in the
region and condemning Russia’s acts of aggression in
the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. Ukraine demands that
Russia immediately release the 23 captured Ukrainian
servicemen and all three Ukrainian ships. We also call
on the international community to implement a new
set of sanctions aimed at addressing the situation in
the region, including against Russia’s ports on the Sea
of Azov. The increased political pressure on Moscow
would help to de-escalate the security situation at sea
and lift the block on the free crossing of the KerchYenikale canal. If unopposed, the Kremlin regime will
continue to commit other aggressive acts, creating ever
more widespread conflict in the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
18-39769

26/11/2018

Ukraine

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Many interesting things have been said,
and I have decided to share our views on them after
all, although of course a lot of them are not worth
discussing and a lot are very predictable. First of all,
we once again feel we were absolutely justified in our
proposal to hold a meeting under a different agenda
item, since people seem to be talking about anything
they feel like — annexation, occupation, aggression. I
was astonished to learn that we have occupied and even
annexed the Sea of Azov. That is news to us. But as
far as the main theme is concerned, nobody really said
much. Except Ambassador Yelchenko, who did indeed
torture the facts. But I will return to that later.
The only question is why the Ukrainians, who had
been familiar with the regime for passage through the
Kerch Strait and using it without any problems, suddenly
carried out an act of clear provocation and risked the
lives of their own sailors. Nobody has tried to answer
that question or even mention it. It could therefore
be perceived by as giving Ukraine carte blanche to
continue such provocations and foment a situation that
could pose a threat to everyone in the region. And going
on what Mr. Yelchenko said, Ukraine got the message.
I would like to correct some errors on the part of
some of the speakers. Ms. DiCarlo somehow confused
Crimea and the Minsk agreements in a very odd way. I
hope that she has actually read the Minsk agreements.
She is no doubt well aware that there is not a word
in them about Crimea. She also urged respect for the
sovereignty of Ukraine, but only Ukraine. Surely,
though, the Russian Federation’s sovereignty should be
respected as well. At least we assume that is what she
believes. Mrs. Haley also assumed that Crimea is part of
the Minsk agreements, and I got the impression, at least
I thought I heard, that the Minsk agreements apparently
extend even to the Sea of Azov too. I am sorry to say
that such ignorance is shocking. We devoted most of
a previous meeting (see S/PV.8270), to an analysis of
the Minsk agreements by Mr. Nebenzia, our Permanent
Representative, who went through them from the first
to the last paragraph. And in spite of that we have to
listen to this egregious stuff.
With regard to the incident itself there are many
questions. An investigation is under way, of course, and
we will certainly share its conclusions. I do not want to
anticipate anything about what is still a hot topic, but I
can speak to two points that have not been mentioned
but that are clearly significant and relevant to analysis

S/PV. 8410

of the incident. First, on board one of the vessels were
two employees of Ukraine’s security services who
admitted that they were on a special assignment and
were supposed to act in exactly that way. We will tell
the Council about that too.
In another small but relatively important detail,
the Ukrainians violated our border in a place that
was Russian territory before 2014, if we decided to
talk about what is Crimea and what is not. But the
Ukrainians refused a pilot and made a treacherous
approach to the Kerch Strait from the south. That is an
act of gross provocation and it is hard even to imagine
any other way of putting it, and yet some of those here
have knowingly covered it up. It is also worth pointing
out that their actions, including in supporting Ukraine’s
version of what happened, are already exacerbating
the situation, including in eastern Ukraine. As our
colleagues from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have told us, the Ukrainian
military has been drawing up Buk S-300 surface-to-air
missile systems and Grad and Uragan multiple rocket
launchers at the line of contact. The disengagement of
forces in Stanytsia Luhanska is blocked and soldiers
have infiltrated disengagement areas in Zolote and
Petrovske. Units of the Ukrainian seventy-second
brigade have captured the village of Rozsadky near
Svitlodarsk. Those are real things that testify to the
fact that the Minsk agreements are being violated.
Everything else, and in any case a lot of what has been
said here today, has absolutely nothing to do with that,
and those facts have been completely ignored by the
speakers here today.
Although Crimea is not on the Security Council’s
agenda, as long as the subject has been brought up, I
would also like to say that whether anyone likes it or
not, the question of where Crimea belongs has long ago
been closed for both us and for Crimeans. No sanctions
or restrictions will change our decision. That issue
was closed after the Crimeans voted to reunite with
Russia in a free referendum based on a nation’s right to
self-determination. Many people ask if we knew then
what awaited us in the frenzied rush of the West to
launch its anti-Russian geopolitical “project Ukraine”
that I mentioned earlier this morning. Of course we
knew. We had no illusions. Does Russia regret what
has happened? Absolutely not. Furthermore, I want
to say that an overwhelming majority of Russians
are proud of it, since if we had not taken a stand to
protect the Crimeans, today they would be dying from

18-3976913/14

S/PV.8410

Ukraine

the Ukrainian army’s bullets and shells, just as the
Russian-speaking residents of Donbas are dying. They
are dying merely because they want to speak Russian,
teach their children in Russian and honour those who
liberated Ukraine from the fascists rather than those
who collaborated with them.
While I did not mention it in my previous
statement on the correct topic for this meeting, I
should also point out that Kyiv’s decisions have given
free rein to Ukraine’s radical nationalists. They have
been particularly active in the past few days. And in
particular, nobody has mentioned the fact that there
was another attack on the Russian Embassy in Kyiv
while the police did nothing. A diplomatic car was set
on fire last night. The radicals continue to threaten to
storm our diplomatic headquarters. As I understand
it, we should expect no response on this from anyone.
Does anyone think that is normal? We demand that
Ukraine provide full and unconditional immunity to
Russia’s embassies and general consulates in Ukraine,
in accordance with the norms of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, and that it hold those
responsible for the attacks accountable.
Since you represent China, Mr. President, I would
like to remind you of a well-known saying of Confucius
about the fact that it is very difficult to find a black cat
in a dark room, especially when it is not there. That is
exactly what the members here are doing, discussing an
imaginary act of aggression by Russia without talking
about the real reason for having this meeting today. But
the problem is right under their noses and can be solved
extremely easily, as I have already said. An order from
Washington could resolve it in the space of 10 minutes.
Unfortunately, judging by our Ukrainian colleague’s

14/14

26/11/2018

statement, I have to conclude that they have been
considerably cheered and intend to continue in their
chosen provocative spirit, and hence the fantasies we
have been hearing about our plans to seize Mariupol.
In conclusion, I want to issue a warning that Kyiv’s
policy of provoking a conflict with Russia conducted in
coordination with the United States and the European
Union is fraught with exceedingly serious consequences.
We will put a firm stop to any infringement on the
sovereignty and security of the Russian Federation,
including in the waters of the Sea of Azov and the Black
Sea. I hope that is clear to everyone.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine, who has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I will be very brief,
because I think I was clear enough in my previous
statement, which needs no further explanation.
I just want to say that since the spring of 2014,
we have heard a lot of epic Russian stories saying that
“Crimea is ours” and “They are not there”, meaning
Russians in Donbas. I think everyone, at least in this
Chamber, is completely fed up with all those stories.
My brief comment is specifically for the benefit of
Mr. Polyanskiy. The Kerch Strait can only be approached
from the south, because the Sea of Azov is located north
of the Black Sea. When he said that the Ukrainian ships
were brazenly moving northward in trying to enter the
Kerch Strait, I could not understand what he meant.
They were attacked by the Russian Navy while moving
from the Kerch-Yenikale canal southward.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18-39769
