S/PRST/2003/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4880th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 December 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Security Council
resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the launching of a review mechanism,
under the auspices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
presented on 5 November in Pristina and Belgrade, on the initiative of the
Contact Group (France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
with representatives from the European Union), giving new momentum to the
implementation of the ‘standards before status’ policy that was designed for
Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro), and endorsed by this Council in application
of its resolution 1244 (1999).
“The Security Council recalls the eight standards, namely: functioning
democratic institutions; rule of law; freedom of movement; returns and
reintegration; economy; property rights; dialogue with Belgrade; and the
Kosovo Protection Corps. The Council in this respect urges the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to participate fully and constructively in the
working groups within the framework of the direct dialogue with Belgrade on
practical issues of mutual interest, to demonstrate their commitment to the
process.
“The Security Council supports the ‘Standards for Kosovo’ presented on
10 December 2003. The Council awaits an implementation plan, to be finalized
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his continuing
consultation with the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, and other
relevant parties as appropriate, to be submitted to the Council. The plan should
serve as a basis for the assessment of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment’s progress in meeting the standards.
“The Security Council takes note that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, within his authority as set out in resolution 1244 (1999),
inter alia, in the context of the review mechanism, will continue to consult
closely with interested parties, in particular the Contact Group. The Council
reaffirms its intention to continue to consider the regular reports of the
Secretary-General, including an assessment from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, as to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government’s

03-65429 (E)

121203

*
0
3
6
5
4
2
9
*

S/PRST/2003/26

progress towards meeting the standards. The Council takes note that the
Contact Group intends to make a substantive contribution to the regular
reviews and to submit its assessments to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
“The Security Council supports the prospect of a comprehensive review
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government’s progress in meeting the
standards. The Council notes that, depending on progress made as assessed
during the periodical review, a first opportunity for such a comprehensive
review should occur around mid-2005. Reaffirming the ‘standards before
status’ policy, the Council stresses that further advancement towards a process
to determine future status of Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999) will depend on the positive outcome of this comprehensive review. The
Council reiterates the primacy of the regulations promulgated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and subsidiary instruments as the law
applicable in Kosovo.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Holkeri and calls on the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo and all concerned to cooperate
fully with him.”

2
